Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 1.12 VIOLATION OF CODE
Chapter 1.14 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
Chapter 1.16 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES

Chapter 1.04 DEFINITIONS
1.04.010 Definitions.
     “Building” means any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings.

     “City” means the city of Burlingame.

     “Days” shall mean calendar days. In the event the last day of the specified time period falls on a Saturday, Sunday or federal holiday observed by the city, then the last day of the specified time period shall be the next business day.

     “Nonresidential property” means any property within the city of Burlingame, except properties zoned R1 through R4.

     “Owner” means any person owning property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for city taxes, or the lessee, tenant or other person having control or possession of the property.

     “Person” includes any individual, firm, association, corporation, limited liability company, trust, or partnership. Masculine gender includes the feminine, feminine gender includes the masculine, and the singular number includes the plural.

     “State of partial construction” means, since commencement of construction, construction has been suspended or abandoned for an unreasonable period of time, and the appearance of the building substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or the condition of the building is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.

     “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, except fences, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.

     “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power. (Ord. 1913 § 1, (2015))

Chapter 1.12 VIOLATION OF CODE
1.12.010 Infraction penalty for violation of code.
     Except as provided in Section 1.12.015, any person who commits any act declared by any provision of this code to be unlawful, or who violates the provisions, or fails to comply with the mandatory requirements of any section or portion of this code, shall be punishable as for an infraction. Every such violation is punishable by:

     (1)   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation;

     (2)   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same code section within twelve (12) months;

     (3)   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same code section within twelve (12) months. (1941 Code § 101, Ord. 415, (1945); Ord. 1041 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1277 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1637 § 3, (2000))

 

1.12.015 Misdemeanor penalty for violation of code.
     The city attorney may determine that any violation of this code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. Every such violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both. (Ord. 1277 § 1, (1984))

 

1.12.020 Each day a separate offense.
     A person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every violation of the provisions of this code, or any section or part thereof, committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. This section shall prevail over any penalty provision contained in any code adopted by reference or any penalty otherwise set forth in this code. (1941 Code § 102, Ord. 1277 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1637 § 4, (2000))

 

1.12.030 Accessory to violations.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting or suffering the commission of any act made unlawful by any provisions of this code, or the violation of the provisions or the failure to comply with the mandatory requirements of any provision or part of this code. (Ord. 1277 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1637 § 5, (2000))

 

1.12.040 Violation of code is a public nuisance.
     Any building, property or structure erected, constructed, altered or maintained and/or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this code is unlawful and a public nuisance, and any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit as required by the terms of this code is prima facie evidence of the fact that a nuisance has been committed in connection with the use, erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of any building, property, structure erected, constructed, altered, maintained or used contrary to the provisions of this code. The city attorney shall commence necessary proceedings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 1277 § 1, (1984))

Chapter 1.14 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
1.14.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:

     (a)   “Enforcement officer” means any city employee or agent of the city designated with the authority to enforce any provision of this code.

     (b)   “Enforcement official” means the principal supervisor for any city department or division charged with responsibility for enforcement of any provision of this code. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.020 Applicability.
     In addition to all other civil remedies and as an alternative to any criminal remedies, the city may pursue an administrative citation or administrative compliance order pursuant to this chapter as authorized pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4. Use of the administrative citation and administrative compliance order shall be at the sole discretion of the enforcement officers and enforcement officials authorized to proceed under this chapter. Payment of an administrative penalty under this chapter shall not bar enforcement proceedings, including any alternative remedy, for any continuation or repeated occurrence of any code violation.

     (a)   Enforcement. Enforcement and collection of the penalties, costs and other charges pursuant to Sections 1.14.100 and 1.14.110 shall require the advice and consent of the city attorney. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.030 Amount of administrative penalties.
     The amounts of administrative penalties for code violations shall be not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than the maximum amount of the penalty or penalties for criminal violations as set forth in the municipal code. The schedule of administrative penalties shall be set by the city manager and shall specify the amount of any late payment charges and any increased penalties for repeat violations. Such schedule shall be publicly available in the office of the city clerk and posted and/or published in a manner consistent with other city-designated fines and penalties. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.040 Hearing officer.
     The city manager shall designate a hearing officer for administrative hearings who shall not be the citing enforcement officer. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and/or benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative penalties or the rulings upheld, revised or otherwise issued by the hearing officer. The hearing officer designated under this section may be an employee of the city or an outside contractor, as determined by the city manager in his or her discretion. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.050 Service of citations, orders and notices.
     All citations, orders and notices required by this chapter may be served either by personal delivery or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to a location reasonably calculated to give notice to the alleged violator, and shall be deemed effective on the date of personal delivery or when delivery is attempted. If the certified mail receipt is returned unsigned, then service may instead be effected by first class mail, postage prepaid, provided that the notice sent by regular mail is not returned by the postal service as undeliverable, and shall be deemed effective on the date three (3) days following deposit in the mail. Service may be effected alternately or additionally by posting a copy of the order at a conspicuous location on any real property that is the subject of the order. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.060 Hearing.
     (a)   Notice and Time of Hearing. Written notice of hearing shall be served on any person to whom the citation or compliance order was addressed and shall contain the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted. The hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date of the notice of hearing. The hearing officer may approve a continuance of the hearing to any date for good cause.

     (b)   Hearing Procedure. Hearings held pursuant to this section shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. However, at the hearing, the alleged violator shall have the opportunity to testify, present evidence, and to cross-examine witnesses concerning the administrative citation or compliance order. The alleged violator may appear personally or through an attorney. Prehearing discovery is not authorized. Subpoena of witnesses and documents shall be permitted as authorized by law. The hearing officer may conduct the hearing informally, both as to rules of procedure and admission of evidence, in any manner which will provide a fair hearing, and may continue the hearing to obtain additional evidence. The administrative citation or administrative compliance order and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer, shall constitute presumptive evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

     (c)   Failure to Appear. The failure of any alleged violator to appear at the hearing after proper notice or, in the alternative, to present written or demonstrative evidence shall constitute an admission of the violation by the alleged violator and an exhaustion of administrative remedies that may bar judicial review. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.070 Administrative order.
     (a)   Decision Process. After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written administrative order, including findings regarding the existence of each violation and the extent of compliance, the reasons for that decision and notice of the right to judicial review, within thirty (30) days following completion of the hearing. The alleged violator shall be served with a copy of the administrative order within ten (10) calendar days following its issuance. Service of the administrative order shall be in a form consistent with that described in Section 1.14.050. The administrative order shall be final upon service on the violator, subject only to judicial review as allowed by law.

     (b)   Penalty. If the hearing officer determines that the alleged violator committed the violation alleged by a preponderance of the evidence, the hearing officer shall establish an administrative penalty and a date the penalty and any administrative costs shall be due and payable. If the hearing officer finds that the administrative citation should not be sustained or that the amount of the administrative penalty should be reduced, the city shall refund any appropriate amounts as designated in the order paid pursuant to a previously imposed citation or penalty within thirty (30) days of the order.

     (c)   Administrative Costs. The hearing officer may assess administrative costs against the violator from the date on which compliance was ordered. These administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the matter before the hearing officer, including, but not limited to, costs of inspection, investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, and costs for all reinspections.

     (d)   Jurisdiction. After the administrative order becomes final, the hearing officer shall maintain continuing jurisdiction until full compliance is achieved and shall have the power to modify the administrative order, after providing the person subject to the administrative order with notice and an opportunity to be heard.

     (e)   Exception. The city attorney has independent jurisdiction to pursue alternate remedies for the same violations notwithstanding the pendency of administrative proceedings pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.080 Determination of administrative penalties.
     The hearing officer may impose administrative penalties in an amount not to exceed the maximum provided in the schedule of administrative penalties in effect on the date of the violation. In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the hearing officer may consider the duration of the violation, the frequency, recurrence and number of violations, related or unrelated, by the same violator, the seriousness of the violation, any good-faith compliance efforts, the economic impact of the violation on the community and such other factors as justice may require. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.090 Judicial review.
     Any person subject to a decision of the hearing officer may obtain judicial review of the decision in the superior court pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.100 Failure to pay administrative penalties and costs.
     (a)   Enforcement. Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and/or administrative costs specified in the administrative order may be enforced as a personal obligation of the violator, and/or if the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property, which shall remain in effect until all of the administrative penalties, interest and administrative costs are paid in full.

     (b)   Late Payment Charges. Late payment charges shall accrue and are payable as specified in the schedule of administrative penalties.

     (c)   Notification of Tax Collector. The director of finance shall notify the county tax collector of any administrative penalties and/or administrative costs imposed in connection with real property that have not been satisfied in full within ninety (90) days after the administrative order becomes final. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.110 Liens.
     (a)   Procedure. Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within ninety (90) days after the administrative order becomes final, this obligation may constitute a lien against any real property which was involved in the violation. Interest shall accrue on the principal amount remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law.

     (1)   Prior to recording any such lien, the director of finance shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating the amounts due and owing. The city clerk shall fix a time, date and place for hearing such report and any protests or objections thereto by the city council. The director of finance shall cause written notice to be served on each property owner whose interest is disclosed by the current county equalized assessment roll not less than ten (10) days prior to the time set for the hearing.

     (2)   The lien shall be recorded with the county recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 697.340 and may be extended as provided in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 683.110 through 683.220, as these sections may be amended.

     (b)   Public Hearing and Protests of Proposed Liens. Any person owning a legal or equitable interest in real property proposed to be subject to a lien pursuant to this section may file a written protest with the city clerk and/or may protest orally at the city council hearing. The grounds for protest or objection, and any evidence or testimony submitted in support or in opposition to the imposition of a lien, shall be confined to whether the amount of any administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed was satisfied in full within the time allowed by law and/or was successfully challenged by a timely appeal or writ of mandate. At the close of the hearing, the city council shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien based upon evidence produced at the hearing.

     (c)   Recording of Lien. Thirty (30) days following the adoption of a resolution by the city council imposing a lien, the director of finance shall file the same as a judgment lien in the office of the county recorder of San Mateo County. The lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of the city council.

     (d)   Satisfaction of Lien. Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and costs, the director of finance shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide any property owner or financial institution having a legal or equitable interest in the property with a notice of satisfaction so they may record this notice with the office of the county recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city’s lien. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.120 Administrative citation.
     (a)   Issuance. An enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for a city code violation. However, prior to the issuance of an administrative citation for a violation which pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or similar structural or zoning matters that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the enforcement officer shall provide a reasonable period to correct or otherwise remedy the violation of not less than ten (10) days.

     (b)   Contents of Administrative Citation. Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: the date of the violation; the address or description of the location of the violation; the section or sections of this code violated and a description of the acts or omissions constituting the violation; the amount of the penalty for the code violation; a description of the penalty payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the penalty shall be paid; a notice of right to a hearing, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested, and how to request a hearing; and the name of the citing enforcement officer.

     (c)   Request for Administrative Citation Hearing. Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest it before the hearing officer by requesting a hearing in writing and submitting the request and an advance deposit of the administrative penalty or a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served.

     (d)   Hardship Waiver. Any person who requests a hearing to contest an administrative citation may request in writing an advance deposit hardship waiver, including the reasons for the request. The director of finance may issue an advance deposit hardship waiver if he or she is satisfied that the person is unable to deposit the full amount of the penalty in advance of the hearing. The director shall issue a written determination of whether to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination shall be final, subject only to judicial review as provided by law. If the director determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the city within ten (10) days of the date of that decision in order to secure the hearing. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

 

1.14.130 Administrative compliance order.
     (a)   Issuance. An enforcement official may issue a written compliance order, providing a reasonable time for correction of not less than ten (10) days, to any person responsible for a municipal code violation.

     (b)   Contents of Administrative Compliance Order. A compliance order issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following information: the date and location of the violation; the section of this code violated and a description of the violation; the action required to correct the violation; the time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved; and the amount of penalties that will begin to accrue.

     (c)   Compliance and Failure to Comply. If the enforcement official determines that all violations have been corrected within the time specified in the compliance order or within any amended orders, the enforcement official shall so advise each party to whom the compliance order was addressed. If full compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the compliance order or within any amended orders, the enforcement official shall schedule a hearing before the hearing officer.

     (d)   Administrative Order by Hearing Officer. If the hearing officer determines that a violation occurred which was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the hearing officer shall issue an administrative order which imposes any or all of the following: an order to correct code violations, including a schedule for correction, if appropriate; administrative penalties; and administrative costs as provided in this chapter.

     (e)   Administrative Penalties. The hearing officer may impose administrative penalties for each day during which a violation occurs after compliance was ordered. Administrative penalties assessed by the hearing officer shall be due by the date specified in the administrative order. (Ord. 1892 § 1, (2013))

Chapter 1.16 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
1.16.010 Nuisance defined.
     A nuisance, within the meaning of this chapter, is defined as anything which is dangerous, injurious or a menace to health or safety, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use in the customary manner of any stream, or any public park, square, street or highway, or which by any provision of this code is specifically declared to be a nuisance; provided, however, nothing which is done or maintained under the express authority of law is a nuisance. (1941 Code § 105, Ord. 1637 § 6, (2000))

 

1.16.015 Nonresidential property nuisances.
     It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of any nonresidential property in the city to maintain or to allow to be maintained such property in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon for an unreasonable period of time and are visible from a public street or adjoining parcel, except as may be allowed by any other provision of law, including provisions of city ordinances:

     (a)   The accumulation of dirt, litter, or debris;

     (b)   Lumber, junk, trash, recyclables, salvage materials, building materials, landscaping materials or other similar materials, provided that short-term storage of materials in a secure and non-hazardous manner incident to an active building permit shall not constitute a nuisance under this provision;

     (c)   Attractive nuisances or hazards including abandoned, broken, or neglected equipment, machinery, tools, refrigerators and freezers, hazardous pools, ponds, and excavations;

     (d)   Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment, electronic equipment, and furnishings or abandoned shopping carts;

     (e)   Overgrown vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin and other nuisances dangerous to public health, safety, and welfare, or obstructing a necessary view of drivers on public streets or private driveways;

     (f)    Weeds, dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, fallen leaves and other vegetation constituting an unsightly appearance or dangerous to public health, safety and welfare;

     (g)   Vehicle parts or other articles of personal property which are abandoned or left in a state of partial construction or repair;

     (h)   Mobile homes, recreational vehicles, utility trailers, unmounted camper tops, boats, cars, trucks, or other vehicles that are parked or stored in violation of the zoning provisions or that appear inoperable;

     (i)    Graffiti on the exterior of any building, fence, wall, automobile, or other structure;

     (j)    Fences and walls which have become dilapidated or are in a state of disrepair;

     (k)   Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or left in a state of partial construction;

     (l)    Structures which are unpainted or where a substantial portion of the paint on the building exterior is chipping, peeling, cracked or mostly worn off;

     (m)  Improper maintenance of signs related to uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on the property;

     (n)   Construction equipment, materials or machinery of any type of description parked or stored so as to be visible from a public right-of-way or from adjoining properties except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property;

     (o)   Any property with pooled oil or other hazardous liquids accumulation, oil or hazardous liquids flowing into a public right-of-way, storm drain, or adjoining property, or excessive accumulation of grease or oil on paved surfaces, buildings, walls or fences;

     (p)   The leaving of any garbage can, recycling container or refuse container on any public right-of-way, except as permitted by Section 8.16.040 of this code;

     (q)   Property otherwise maintained in such a blighted condition, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes appreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or is materially detrimental to proximal properties and improvements. (Ord. 1913 § 2, (2015))

 

1.16.016 Declaration of public nuisance.
     Any property found to be maintained in violation of Section 1.16.015 is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by rehabilitation, removal, demolition, or repair, and shall be subject to the enforcement mechanisms available under Chapter 1.12 of this code and any other applicable code provisions or other laws. The election of enforcement mechanisms or remedies shall be at the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 1913 § 3, (2015))

 

1.16.020 Notice to abate nuisance.
     (a)   If the city manager determines that a nuisance exists upon private property, the manager may refer the matter to the city council for hearing and determination. Notice of the hearing before the city council will be given by first class mail to the owners of the real property at the last known address of the owners as those persons’ names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll. If the owners’ names and addresses cannot be determined, notice of the hearing will be posted on the property itself. Notice will be given at least ten (10) days before the scheduled date of the hearing.

     (b)   At the hearing, the council will receive written and oral testimony from all interested persons. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council may proceed to order abatement of the nuisance if the council determines a nuisance exists within certain time periods. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (1941 Code § 106, Ord. 1637 § 6, (2000))

 

1.16.030 Abatement by city.
     (a)   If the property owners fail to abate the nuisance as ordered by the city council, the manager may proceed to abate the nuisance with city forces or by contract forces. The manager will keep an account of the expenses incurred by the city in abating the nuisance and report these expenses to the city council.

     (b)   A copy of the report together with a notice of hearing on confirming the report and assessing the property for the expenses shall be mailed by first class mail to the owners of the real property at the last known address of the owners as those persons’ names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll. If the owners’ names and addresses cannot be determined, notice of the hearing will be posted on the property itself. Notice will be given at least ten (10) days before the scheduled date of the hearing on the expenses.

     (c)   At the hearing, the city council will consider the report and receive any written or oral testimony for any interested persons regarding the proposed assessment of the expenses. Following the hearing, the city council may make such modifications in the proposed assessment as the council may deem just and proper, and adopt a decision by resolution.

     (d)   The amount of the expenses, if any, of abating the nuisance adopted by the city council will constitute a special assessment against the applicable property, and after being approved by the council, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the approved assessment until paid.

     (e)   A certified copy of the resolution will be filed with the tax collector to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties, and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency. (1941 Code § 107, Ord. 1637 § 6, (2000))

 

1.16.035 Summary abatement.
     Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or a significant portion thereof as determined by the manager, the manager shall have the authority to summarily and without notice abate the same insofar as necessary to make the condition or use not an imminent or immediate danger. An account of the expenses incurred by the city with its own forces or by contract in conducting this abatement will be accounted for and reported to the council and be subject to the same notice, hearing, confirmation, and assessment as provided in Section 1.16.030 above. (Ord 1637 § 6, (2000))

 

1.16.040 Remedies not exclusive.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be held or construed to affect or prejudice any other remedy or penalty, civil or criminal, which may exist or be adopted or enacted for creating, causing, committing or maintaining a nuisance within the city. (1941 Code § 107, Ord. 1637 § 6, (2000))

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL
Chapter 2.12 OFFICE HOURS
Chapter 2.16 EMPLOYMENT HOURS
Chapter 2.19 GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION
Chapter 2.20 FILING DOCUMENTS
Chapter 2.24 MAILED BALLOT ELECTIONS
Chapter 2.25 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITS
Chapter 2.28 INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURES
Chapter 2.29 NOTICE INVITING BIDS ON PUBLIC PROJECTS
Chapter 2.32 POLICE TRAINING STANDARDS
Chapter 2.36 PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHER STANDARDS

Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL
2.04.010 Time of meetings.
     The regular meetings of the city council will be on the first and third Monday of each month at such hour as they shall determine and may adjourn from time to time as in their judgment may seem proper. However, when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the city council falls upon a day designated by law as a city holiday, the meeting will be held on a day later in the week as the council may designate. The council may cancel or reschedule a regular meeting by a vote of the council. (1941 Code § 301, Ord. 1303, (1985); Ord. 1539 §(1996); Ord. 1637 §(2000))

 

2.04.020 Place of meetings.
     The place of regular meetings of the city council shall be at the City Hall, unless the council designates otherwise or unless the City Hall is not usable for a public meeting, in which case the council may establish another meeting place in the city. (1941 Code § 302, Ord. 1637 § 8, (2000))

 

2.04.030 Salary and reimbursement.
     (a)   Salaries. Each member of the council shall receive as salary the sum of five hundred ninety dollars ($590.00) per month. It shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as the salaries paid to other officers and employees of the city.

     (b)   Reimbursement. The salaries prescribed in this section are exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. Actual and necessary expenses shall not include mileage for any activity within the county. (Ord. 836 §§ 1—6, (1965); Ord. 1097 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1253 § (1983); Ord. 1331 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1436 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1610 § 2, (1999))

Chapter 2.12 OFFICE HOURS
2.12.010 Official hours for municipal offices—Acceptance of bids.
     The office hours for the opening and closing of all municipal offices within the city for the purpose of this code shall be 8:00 a.m. for the opening and 5:00 p.m. for the closing, on all business days, and such offices shall be closed all day on city holidays, Saturdays and Sundays; provided, however, that in the matter of public bidding on any work to be done for the city, sealed proposals or bids may be designated for acceptance by the city up to 8:00 p.m. of the day when the proposals or bids are to be opened. (1941 Code § 801, Ord. 553, (1954); Ord. 1637 § 9, (2000))

Chapter 2.16 EMPLOYMENT HOURS
2.16.010 Hours of work generally—Schedule.
     All persons employed by the city of Burlingame in full-lime positions, except police officers and firefighters, and all those employed as miscellaneous employees in the administration and water departments, shall work and be on a five (5) day, forty (40) hour week.

     Heads of all departments affected shall be authorized and are ordered to arrange a schedule of hours for employees under them to conform herewith. (1941 Code § 805, Ord. 482; (1949; Ord. 554; (1954))

 

2.16.020 Hours of work in police and fire departments.
     (a)   Police. All persons employed by the city of Burlingame in full-time positions in the police department shall work forty (40) hours per week.

     (b)   Firefighters. All persons employed by the city of Burlingame in full-time positions in the fire department shall work such work weeks as may be established from time to time.

     (c)   Schedule. The chief of police and the chief of the fire department are authorized to arrange an effective schedule of working hours for the employees in their respective departments to comply with the foregoing.

     (d)   On Call. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the personnel of the police and fire departments shall be subject to call and must respond on any occasion when the chief of the department may deem it necessary for the protection of life, property or the safety of the citizens of Burlingame. (1941 Code § 805.1, (Ord. 529), (1952); Ord. 1049 § 4, (1975))

Chapter 2.19 GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION
2.19.005 Date of election.
     Pursuant to Elections Code Sections 1301 and 10403.5, the general municipal election in the city of Burlingame for the offices of city councilmember shall be the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of even-numbered years commencing in November 2022. (Ord. 1940 § 2, (2017))

 

2.19.010 City councilmembers—Election—Terms of office.
     (a)   The three (3) city councilmembers elected in November 2017 general municipal election shall service for a term of five (5) years, from the Tuesday succeeding their election and until their successors are elected and qualified in 2022.

     (b)   The two (2) city councilmembers elected in November 2019 general municipal election shall serve for a term of five (5) years, from the Tuesday succeeding their election and until their successors are elected and qualified in 2024.

     (c)   The terms of city councilmembers elected in November 2022, and in each subsequent general municipal election shall be, in accordance with state law, for a term of four (4) years, from the Tuesday succeeding their election and until their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 1940 § 2, (2017))

Chapter 2.20 FILING DOCUMENTS
2.20.010 Time for filing—Record.
     Any and all papers or documents that are required to be filed in any department of the city government shall be presented to the official or his or her lawfully authorized deputy in his or her particular office within the time specified in Section 2.12.010 of this code. Upon receipt of any paper or document, the official in whose department it is presented for filing shall note the time of filing of the paper or document as to the minute, hours, day, month and year as well as the name of the party at whose request said paper or document is filed; the paper or instrument shall also show the word “filed,” and be attended by the signature of the particular official. (1941 Code § 802)

 

2.20.020 Fee for filing nomination papers.
     A filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is established for processing of nomination papers for elective city offices pursuant to Elections Code Section 10228. (Ord. 1703 § 2, (2003))

Chapter 2.24 MAILED BALLOT ELECTIONS
2.24.010 Use of mailed ballots for elections.
     The city council may approve the use of mailed ballots for elections that are authorized to use mailed ballots, including, but not limited to, elections under Proposition 218 for fees, charges, and assessments. The city council may adopt procedures for a mailed ballot election. The city council approves of the use of Elections Code Section 9290 that allows one copy of official matter to be mailed to a postal address where two (2) or more registered voters have the same surname and same address. (Ord. 1834 § 2, (2008))

Chapter 2.25 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITS
2.25.010 Definitions.
     (a)   The following words have the following meanings when used in or in connection with the provisions of this chapter:

     (1)   “Candidate” means a candidate for an elective city office.

     (2)   “Controlled committee” means a controlled committee controlled directly or indirectly by a candidate for elective city office or that acts jointly with a candidate for elective city office or another controlled committee in connection with the making of expenditures.

     (3)   “Election period” means the following:

     (A)  Except as further limited by subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this subsection, for a candidate or a controlled committee in a general municipal election, “election period” means the period beginning on January 1st after the last general or special municipal election for the affected office seat and ending on December 31st following the next general municipal election for the particular office seat. This election period is normally four (4) years.

     (B)   For a candidate or a controlled committee in a special municipal election held to fill a vacancy in an elective city office, “election period” means the period beginning on the day the vacancy in office began and ending on the December 31st following the special municipal election; provided, however, that for a candidate at the special municipal election who established a controlled committee for the office or accepted contributions before the vacancy occurred, the election period means the period beginning on January 1st following the last general municipal election for the particular office seat affected by the vacancy and ending on the December 31st following the special municipal election.

     (C)   For a candidate or a controlled committee in a special municipal election held to recall an elected city officer, including the elected official who is the subject of the recall election, “election period” means the period beginning on the date that the notice of intention to circulate a recall petition is filed with the city clerk pursuant to the Elections Code and ending on the December 31st following the special municipal election; provided, however, that for any candidate at the special municipal election who established a controlled committee or accepted contributions for the office before the vacancy occurred, the election period means the period beginning on January 1st following the last general municipal election for the particular office affected by the vacancy and ending on the December 31st following the special municipal election.

     (D)  For a candidate who is recalled at a special municipal election or who is not elected at a general or special municipal election and for a controlled committee for such a candidate, “election period” begins again on the January 1st following the election at which the candidate was recalled or not elected and ends on the December 31st following the next general or special municipal election at which the person is a candidate again.

     (4)   “Individual” means a natural person.

     (5)   “Organization” means a partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, committee, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert.

     (b)   Except as more specifically defined in this section, all words and phrases in this chapter shall have the same meaning and be interpreted according to the definitions contained in the California Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended (Government Code Sections 81000 and following), and the definitions and interpretations established in the regulations, resolutions, and opinions of the Fair Political Practices Commission pursuant to the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended. (Ord. 1801 § 2, (2007))

 

2.25.020 Limits on contributions.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any individual to make contributions to any single candidate or to any single controlled committee totaling more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in an election period.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any organization to make contributions to any single candidate or to any single controlled committee totaling more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in an election period.

     (c)   It is unlawful for any candidate or controlled committee to accept contributions from any individual totaling more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in an election period.

     (d)   It is unlawful for any candidate or controlled committee to accept contributions from any organization totaling more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in an election period.

     (e)   The maximum amounts specified in this section shall be automatically adjusted by the finance director on March 1st of each even-numbered year to be the product obtained by multiplying the maximum amount specified in this section by a fraction, the numerator of which is the Index as defined in this subsection, published for the month of December immediately prior to that March 1st, and the denominator of which is the Index published for December, 2006.

     (1)   “Index” means the Consumer Price Index-All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), All Items, for San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA (1982-84=100) published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Should the Index no longer be published, the finance director shall select a comparable index that the finance director determines measures the increase and decrease in the cost of living in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose area.

     (2)   The finance director shall send the revised maximum amounts to the city clerk and the city council and make them available to the public. In no event shall the revised maximum amounts be less than the then-current maximum amounts.

     (3)   The revised amounts shall be applicable to total contributions allowed by this section for the entire election period as applicable to each candidate or controlled committee in which the March 1st adjustment occurs. (Ord. 1801 § 2, (2007))

 

2.25.030 Limitation on repayment of personal loans.
     Following the date of the election for which a candidate is seeking elective office, it is unlawful for the candidate to repay him or herself or for any controlled committee to repay the candidate from contributions to the candidate or the controlled committee for any loan amount incurred during that election’s election period by the candidate in excess of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00). (Ord. 1801 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 2.28 INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURES
2.28.010 Informal bid procedures.
      (a)  Public projects, as defined by the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, Sections 22000 et seq., of the Public Contract Code, of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Sections 22032 et seq., of that code.

     (b)   When authorized by the city manager, public projects, as defined by the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, Sections 22000 et seq., of the Public Contract Code, of more than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) but equal to or less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Sections 22032 et seq., of that code.

     (c)   Whenever an open purchase order for materials or supplies exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in a fiscal year, it shall be either informally or formally bid as if it were a public project under this section for subsequent fiscal years, until such time as the annual expenditure is less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). (1941 Code § 405, Ord. 501, (1950); Ord. 615, (1956); Ord. 1490 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1656 § 2, (2001))

 

2.28.020 Contractors list.
     A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of said code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. (1941 Code § 401.1, Ord. 613, (1956); Ord. 615, (1956); Ord. 1490 § 1, (1993))

 

2.28.030 Notice inviting informal bids.
     Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 2.26.020, and to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids; provided however:

     (a)   If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.

     (b)   If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. (Ord. 1490 § 1, (1993))

 

2.28.040 Award of contracts.
     The finance director and the director of public works are each authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1490 § 1, (1993))

Chapter 2.29 NOTICE INVITING BIDS ON PUBLIC PROJECTS
2.29.010 Posting notices.
     Notices inviting bids on public projects which are required by the provisions of Public Contracts Code section 20164 to be posted shall be posted at the following three (3) municipal buildings in the city: (1) the City Hall; (2) the main public library; and (3) the recreation center, and may be posted at such other public places within the city as the director of public works may designate. (Ord. 989 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1637 § 11, (2000))

Chapter 2.32 POLICE TRAINING STANDARDS
2.32.010 Declaration of intent.
     The council of the city of Burlingame declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 727 § 1, (1960))

 

2.32.020 Adherence to recruitment and training standards.
     Pursuant to Section 13522 of such Chapter 1, the city of Burlingame while receiving aid from the state of California pursuant to Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 727 § 2, (1960))

Chapter 2.36 PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHER STANDARDS
2.36.010 Declaration of intent.
     The city of Burlingame declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 1384 § 1, (1989))

 

2.36.020 Adherence to recruitment and training standards.
     Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the city of Burlingame will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). (Ord. 1384 § 2, (1989))

 

2.36.030 State commission’s right to inquire.
     Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the city of Burlingame’s public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 1384 § 3, (1989))

Title 3 OFFICERS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 3.04 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 3.05 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 3.08 CITY CLERK
Chapter 3.13 OFFICE OF FINANCE DIRECTOR/TREASURER
Chapter 3.17 DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION
Chapter 3.20 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 3.21 DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 3.22 TRAFFIC, SAFETY AND PARKING COMMISSION
Chapter 3.28 BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
Chapter 3.32 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Chapter 3.36 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 3.40 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 3.44 LIBRARY BOARD
Chapter 3.52 CIVIL SERVICE FOR EMPLOYEES
Chapter 3.56 COMPENSATION PLAN
Chapter 3.60 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY

Chapter 3.04 CITY MANAGER
3.04.010 Office established—Appointment.
     The office of city manager of the city of Burlingame is hereby created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications and ability, and shall hold office during the pleasure of the city council. No person elected to membership on the city council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed following the termination of the tenure for which he or she last was elected. (1941 Code § 420, Ord. 615, (1956))

 

3.04.020 Bond.
     The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the city manager as herein prescribed. (1941 Code § 421, Ord. 615, (1956))

 

3.04.030 Delegation, absence, or disability.
     (a)   The city manager may delegate the performance of duties of the manager specified in this code to others unless otherwise expressly provided by action of the council. However, the city manager will remain responsible to the city council for the proper performance of those duties.

     (b)   In case of absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate a duly qualified person to perform the duties of the city manager. (1941 Code § 422, Ord. 615, (1956); Ord. 1656 § 3, (2001))

 

3.04.040 Powers and duties.
     The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the power:

     (a)   To see that all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced.

     (b)   To control, order and give directions to all heads of departments, subordinate officers and employees of the city, except the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney; and to transfer employees from one department to another; and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his or her direction, provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to supersede the authority of the civil service commission in the matter of classification of city officers or employees.

     (c)   To exercise control over all departments of the city government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof.

     (d)   To attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the council, except when his or her removal is under consideration by the council.

     (e)   To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient.

     (f)    To keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city.

     (g)   To prepare and submit to the city council the annual budget.

     (h)   To purchase all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city and to enter into contracts on behalf of the city as provided herein and by any governing purchasing policy. The city manager shall exercise up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in contracting signature authority, consistent with the city’s budget as adopted or amended by the city council. No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the city council, except on report or approval of the city manager.

     (i)    To make investigations into the affairs of the city, and any department or division thereof, and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligations running to the city.

     (j)    To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed. The city manager shall be authorized to settle claims and litigation brought or asserted against the city, on the recommendation of the city attorney, in an amount up to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).

     (k)   To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council and not specifically delegated to a particular board or officers.

     (l)    To devote his or her entire time to the duties of his or her office and the interests of the city of Burlingame.

     (m)  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (1941 Code § 423, Ord. 615, (1956); Ord. 1890 § 1, (2013))

 

3.04.050 City council acts through manager.
     The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. (1941 Code § 424, Ord. 615, (1956))

 

3.04.060 Compensation.
     The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution, and he or she shall be paid at the same time and out of the same fund as other employees and officers of the city are paid. He or she shall also be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or when traveling on business pertaining to the city; provided that such reimbursement shall be made on an itemized claim and presented to the city council for approval and by it approved and allowed. (1941 Code § 425, Ord. 615, (1956))

 

3.04.070 Removal from office.
     The removal of the city manager shall be only on a four-fifths vote of the whole council. In case of his or her intended removal by the council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council’s intention to remove him or her and the reasons therefor, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of his or her removal.

     Within seven (7) days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice, he or she may by written notification to the city clerk, request a public hearing before the council. Thereafter the council shall fix a time for the public hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, and at which the city manager shall appear and be heard.

     After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him or her from duty, but his or her compensation shall continue until his or her removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to the aforesaid public hearing.

     In removing the city manager the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final, and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to publicly present to the city council his or her grounds of opposition to removal prior to its action. (1941 Code § 426, Ord. 615, (1956))

Chapter 3.05 CITY ATTORNEY
3.05.010 Legal department created.
     A legal department is created which shall be under the direction of the city attorney, who shall be responsible to the city council, and shall consist of the city attorney and such other employees as the city council may approve. (Ord. 1027 § 1, (1975))

 

3.05.020 City attorney.
     The city attorney shall be selected and appointed by the city council on the basis of the appointee’s qualifications, with special reference to the appointee’s actual experience in the field of municipal law and in respect to the duties of the office as hereinafter set forth. The city attorney shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney may be suspended or removed by a four-fifths vote of the city council.

     The position of city attorney shall be a full-time position and the appointee shall not be entitled to engage in private practice, nor shall the city attorney be entitled to make court appearances except on behalf of the city. To become and remain eligible for this position, the appointee shall be an attorney duly admitted and qualified to practice in the Supreme Court of the State of California, and shall have been an active member in good standing of the State Bar of California for at least five (5) years prior to appointment. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the city council from retaining special counsel to represent the city in certain legal matters, nor to prevent the council from retaining the services of a qualified attorney-at-law on a full or part-time basis to act as city attorney, de facto or de jure, upon the discharge, resignation or disability of any city attorney appointed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1027 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1637 § 12, (2000))

 

3.05.030 Compensation and expenses.
     The city attorney shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall, from time to time, determine, and said compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. (Ord. 1027 § 1, (1975))

 

3.05.040 Powers and duties.
     In addition to the powers and duties set forth in the Government Code of the state of California, the city attorney shall:

     (a)   Represent and advise the city council and all city officers upon all matters of law pertaining to the city and to their office;

     (b)   Frame all ordinances and resolutions required by the city council;

     (c)   Represent and appear for the city, its authorized agents, officers and employees, in any and all actions and proceedings in which the city, or its agents, officers or employees, in or by reason of their official capacity only, is concerned or is a party thereto. The city council shall have control of all legal proceedings, however, and shall direct and control the prosecution and defense of all actions and proceedings to which the city is a party or in which it is interested, and may employ special counsel, if it feels the interests of the city require same, to assist the city attorney, or to prosecute or defend in any such action or proceeding. The city attorney shall be authorized to enter into settlements of claims or litigation brought or asserted against the city in an amount up to fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) acting alone and in an amount up to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) with the city manager’s concurrence. Such settlements shall be reported to the city council on a fiscal year basis;

     (d)   Attend all meetings of the city council and planning commission;

     (e)   Render legal opinions or advice, in writing, whenever requested to do so by the council or any of the city boards, commissions or city officers;

     (f)    Approve the form and execution of all bonds, contracts and other instruments to which the city is a party;

     (g)   Specify the minimum requirements of insurance policies and bonds required to be filed with the city, and no such policy or bond shall be deemed to satisfy legal requirements of the city unless in conformity with such specifications or otherwise approved by the city attorney;

     (h)   Devote such time to the duties of the office, and attend such conferences, meetings, and proceedings as the council may specify from time to time, and as shall be determined by the work requirements of the legal department;

     (i)    Keep on file in the city attorney’s office all written communications, opinions, briefs, and papers used in the normal course of legal activities of the legal department. The city attorney shall deliver all books, records, papers, documents, and property of every description, belonging to the city, to the attorney’s successor in office;

     (j)    Act as director of the legal department, subject to the general administrative direction of the city council. The city attorney shall have the authority to retain expert outside counsel to advise the city when, in his or her opinion, such assistance of counsel is necessary to the provision of legal services to the city. (Ord. 1027 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1637 § 13, (2000); Ord. 1890 § 1, (2013))

 

3.05.050 Other personnel.
     The appointment and removal of assistants, clerical and stenographic personnel as are authorized to be employed in the legal department shall be governed by the provisions of the civil service system of the city. (Ord. 1027 § 1, (1975))

Chapter 3.08 CITY CLERK
3.08.010 Office of the city clerk.
     Pursuant to Government Code Sections 36501 and 36508 through 36510, there is an office of city clerk in the city of Burlingame. (Ord. 1884 § 1, (2013))

 

3.08.020 Appointment of the city clerk.
     Pursuant to Government Code Section 34856, the city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager. (Ord. 1884 § 1, (2013))

 

3.08.030 Compensation.
     The city clerk shall receive the same benefits as other members of the department head unrepresented group. (Ord. 1884 § 1, (2013))

 

3.08.040 Duties
     The city clerk shall be clerk of the council and keep an accurate record of all ordinances, resolutions and motions, shall have custody of the official seal and all official records committed to his or her care, shall make affidavits and administer oaths without charge in matters affecting the business of the city, shall conduct elections and shall perform the duties of a city clerk as provided by the general law of the state.

     The city clerk shall also maintain regular, full-time office hours, provide documents to the public, provide administrative support for appointments to city boards and commissions, maintain city’s document retention system, maintain city agreements, resolutions, bonds and real property documents, maintain and update city’s municipal code, receive and open bids for city projects and contracts, publish notices and ordinances and such other related duties as may be assigned by the city manager. (Ord. 1884 § 1, (2013))

Chapter 3.13 OFFICE OF FINANCE DIRECTOR/TREASURER
3.13.010 Office established.
     The office of finance director/treasurer of the city of Burlingame is created and established. The finance director/treasurer shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 940 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1489 § 2, (1993))

 

3.13.030 Duties of finance director/treasurer.
     The finance director/treasurer, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, shall promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interests of the city, and shall have the following powers and perform the following duties:

     (a)   Administer the financial affairs of the city, under the direction of the city manager.

     (b)   Be the accounting officer of the city, maintain a general accounting system and records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city, and prepare and present to the city manager and city council all financial statements and reports required by the city council or the city manager.

     (c)   Be responsible for the preparation of all vouchers for payment, and the preparation of the register of demands, along with the preparation and handling of the city payroll.

     (d)   Before payment, audit and approve all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the city, and, with the advice of the city attorney when necessary, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of all claims, demands or charges.

     (e)   Receive from the various officers and department heads of the city the annual budget requests, and in conjunction with the city manager, compile the annual budget for submission to the city council.

     (f)    Enforce the licensing and business tax provisions of the city ordinances.

     (g)   Be the ex officio tax collector and except for the collection of ad valorem property taxes and assessments for municipal improvements, and as provided for in Chapter 4.05 and elsewhere in this code, collect all taxes levied by the city and deposit them as required by law.

     (h)   Perform all other duties as required by other city ordinances, resolutions and state laws governing fiscal administration.

     (i)    Serve in any appointed office or position within the city government as appointed by the city manager, and hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the city manager and without further compensation except as expressly provided by the city manager at the time of such appointment or thereafter.

     (j)    Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as are necessarily incident to the above duties and powers, or as may be assigned or delegated to the finance director/treasurer from time to time by the city manager. (Ord. 940 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1489 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1637 § 14, (2000))

 

3.13.040 Delegation.
     Pursuant to Sections 53607, 53608, 53621, and 53684 of the Government Code, the authority to invest and reinvest money of the city, to sell or exchange securities so purchased, and to deposit such securities for safekeeping is delegated to the finance director/treasurer. This delegation includes investments made pursuant to section 53609 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1489 § 2; (1993); Ord. 1637 § 14, (2000))

 

3.13.050 Investments.
     The finance director/treasurer is authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under Sections 53601, 53635, and 53684 of the Government Code, as they now read or may hereafter be amended, from money in the finance director/treasurer’s custody which is not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as the finance director/treasurer may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. The finance director/treasurer shall make a monthly report of all such investments to the city council. (Ord. 1489 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1637 § 15, (2000))

 

3.13.060 Redemptions.
     From time to time the city treasurer shall redeem the securities in which city money has been invested pursuant to Section 3.13.050 so that the proceeds may be applied to the purposes for which the original purchase money was designated or placed in the city treasury. (Ord. 1489 § 2, (1993))

 

3.13.070 City bonds.
     Bonds issued by the city and purchased pursuant to Section 3.13.050 may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise; provided, however, that the bonds may be held uncanceled and while so held may be resold. (Ord. 1489 § 2, (1993))

 

3.13.080 Deposits.
     The finance director/treasurer is authorized to deposit for safekeeping with a trust company or a state or national bank or with the Federal Bank of San Francisco or any branch thereof or with any Federal Reserve Bank, or with any state or national bank located in any city designated as a reserve city by the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System, the securities in which the city money has been invested pursuant to Section 3.13.050; provided, however, that the finance director/treasurer shall take from such trust company or bank a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such trust company or bank until they are withdrawn therefrom by the finance director/treasurer. (Ord. 1489 § 2, (1993))

Chapter 3.17 DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION
3.17.010 Duties.
     The director of parks and recreation shall be responsible for the development and maintenance of parks and landscaped areas, the trimming and care of city trees, and the operation of a comprehensive municipal recreation program. The director shall:

     (a)   Administer, operate and maintain existing park and recreation areas and facilities and plan for the acquisition, development and operation of proposed facilities;

     (b)   Administer and operate the city street tree program and the city urban reforestation and tree protection program;

     (c)   Plan, promote, organize and supervise a comprehensive municipal recreation program and administer the same in the interest of the entire community;

     (d)   Supervise recreation areas and facilities throughout the city that are required to meet the community’s recreation and community services needs; conduct activities, events and programs that employ the leisure time of the citizens in a wholesome and constructive manner;

     (e)   Prepare the annual department budget for review by the city manager and assigned city commissions and for approval by the city council. The director shall administer the annual budget as directed by the city manager and finance director;

     (f)    Assign department employees to provide staff services to the parks and recreation commission, beautification commission, and senior commission so as to aid and advise them in the performance of their duties; provide staff services to any other commissions, boards or committees as assigned by the city council or city manager.

     (g)   Perform such other duties and functions as may be from time to time fixed and prescribed by the city manager. (Ord. 882 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1546 § 1, (1996))

 

3.17.020 Other code references.
     All references in this code to either park director or recreation director shall be understood to refer to the parks and recreation director or designee until changed by further amendment to the code. (Ord. 1546 § 1, (1996))

Chapter 3.20 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
3.20.010 Powers and duties.
     (a)   The director of public works shall attend to and carry out all duties appertaining to general municipal engineering involving the city, and shall attend to all special assessment proceedings and carry on in all work generally performed by a municipal engineer for the city.

     (b)   The director shall also be the supervisor and director of all divisions of public works in the city, specified as follows:

     (1)   The director shall have supervision and direction of all work relating to grading, paving, cleaning, lighting and repairing of streets and sidewalks; the building and repairing of streets and sidewalks; the building and repairing of sewer and storm drains; the disposal of sewage, garbage and rubbish. The director shall also act as the superintendent of streets of the city.

     (2)   The director shall have supervision and control of all work in connection with and relating to the water division of the city.

     (3)   The director shall be the custodian of all city maps, plans, profiles, field notes and other city records appertaining to the director’s office with the indices thereof, and shall turn them over to the director’s successor who shall give a duplicate receipt therefor, one of which shall be filed with the city clerk.

     (c)   The director of public works may designate qualified persons to exercise duties described above, and these authorized persons may sign or approve plans, maps, surveys, and specifications as directed by the director and as allowed by state law.

     (d)   All work done or made by the director of public works in connection with the duties of the office of director of public works, including maps, plans and memoranda, shall be the property of the city. (1941 Code § 402, Ord. 398, (1943); Ord. 499, (1950); Ord. 1181 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1618 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1806 § 2A, (2007))

Chapter 3.21 DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
3.21.010 Department established.
     The community development department is created and established. (Ord. 947 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1806 § 2, (2007))

 

3.21.020 Office established.
     The office of director of community development is created and established. (Ord. 947 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1806 § 2, (2007))

 

3.21.030 Appointment and removal.
     The director of community development shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the city manager. (Ord. 947 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1806 § 2, (2007))

 

3.21.040 Powers and duties.
     The director of community development shall be head of the community development department, consisting of planning and building divisions, and shall be responsible for all phases of planning and zoning. The director of community development shall administer Title 25 (Zoning) of this code and shall:

     (a)   Enforce the provisions of Title 25 (Zoning) of this code;

     (b)   Establish, with the approval of the city council and the city manager, and administer rules for the conduct of the planning division;

     (c)   Maintain records of documents and proceedings under Title 25;

     (d)   Perform necessary research and planning studies and prepare reports for the planning commission and the city council;

     (e)   Provide and maintain a continuing program of education and public information on planning and zoning matters;

     (f)    Conduct such inspections of buildings, structures and use of land as are necessary to determine compliance with the terms of Title 25;

     (g)   Receive, review and transmit to the planning commission all applications for variances, conditional use permits, special permits, amendments, environmental determinations and other matters on which the commission is authorized to act under the provisions of this code;

     (h)   Review all applications for building permits and business licenses to determine whether a proposed building or structure, or use, or business is in compliance with Title 25.

     (i)    Initiate review of the provisions of Title 25 and report to the planning commission proposed amendments, supplements, changes or repeal of the whole or any portion of Title 25;

     (j)    Guide and coordinate the physical development and redevelopment of the city consistent with approved policies and the adopted general plan; seek to conserve the values of property throughout the city and to protect the character and stability of residential, commercial and manufacturing areas, and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas and to improve the quality of life for all people in the city;

     (k)   Maintain the general plan as an active policy guide by the preparation of additional elements and periodically review and report on possible changes or amendments to the general plan;

     (l)    Assist in preparing a capital improvement program to implement city council policies and the general plan;

     (m)  Perform other professional services necessary to carry out the provisions of the State Planning and Zoning Law as the same may be amended from time to time; and

     (n)   Have overall management responsibility for the conduct and operations of the building division. (Ord. 947 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1603 § 8, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 3.22 TRAFFIC, SAFETY AND PARKING COMMISSION
3.22.010 Organization—Terms of members—Compensation.
     There shall be a commission of traffic, safety and parking in the city consisting of five (5) members, appointed by the council. Their term of office shall be for a period of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. At the time of their application for the commission and throughout their terms as commissioners, they shall be registered, qualified electors of the city. The members shall serve without compensation, but all necessary expenses incurred by them while acting in their official capacities shall be paid by appropriate council action. (Ord. 1030 § 2, (1975); Ord. 1593 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1647 § 2, (2001))

 

3.22.020 Removal of appointed members—Filling vacancies.
     Any member of the commission may be removed from office, for cause, prior to the expiration of that member’s term, by the affirmative vote of not less than three-fifths of all of the members of the city council. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the approval of the council, and shall be for the unexpired portion of the term of office vacated. (Ord. 1030 § 2, (1975); Ord. 1637 § 16, (2000))

 

3.22.030 Meetings—Officers.
     The commission shall hold regular meetings at least once a month when there is business to conduct and a quorum present and may hold such other meetings as may be necessary or expedient. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting the business of the commission. The commission shall elect a chair and secretary, both of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. (Ord. 1030 § 2, (1975); Ord. 1637 § 17, (2000))

 

3.22.040 Record of proceedings kept by secretary—Filing.
     The secretary of the commission shall keep a record of all proceedings, resolutions, findings, determinations and transactions of the commission, which records shall be a public record, and a copy of which record shall be filed with the city clerk as clerk of the city council. (Ord. 1030 § 2, (1975))

 

3.22.050 Powers and duties.
     The commission shall make recommendations to the city council and advise the council in matters pertaining to traffic, safety and the parking of motor vehicles generally, and in particular as to:

     (a)   The parking of motor vehicles on public streets and on public parking lots and areas;

     (b)   The establishment of metered zones and the maintenance of free or metered parking spaces;

     (c)   The rates per hour per space to be paid for the metered parking spaces;

     (d)   The rental of off-street parking spaces;

     (e)   The permissible time for parking in any parking space;

     (f)    The design and improvement of, including lighting of, or traffic flow on, any public streets or parking lot;

     (g)   The posting of signs giving notice of parking regulations;

     (h)   The landscaping of any parking lot; and

     (i)    The purchase and installation of parking meters. (Ord. 1030 § 2, (1975); Ord. 1637 § 18, (2000))

Chapter 3.28 BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
3.28.010 Organization—Terms of members—Compensation.
     There shall be a beautification commission in the city consisting of five (5) members, appointed by the council; their terms of office shall be for a period of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. At the time of their application for the commission and throughout their terms as commissioners, they shall be registered, qualified electors of the city. The members shall serve without compensation, but all necessary expenses shall be paid by appropriate council action. (Ord. 884 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1593 § 3, (1998); Ord. 1866 § 2, (2011))

 

3.28.020 Removal of member from office—Filling vacancies.
     The city council may remove any appointed member of the beautification commission from office prior to the expiration of that member’s term of office, with or without cause by an affirmative vote of not less than three-fifths of all the members of the city council. Vacancies on the commission, except as to ex officio members, shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the city council. (Ord. 884 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1637 § 19, (2000))

 

3.28.030 Meetings—Officers.
     The commission shall hold regular meetings at least once each month when there is business to conduct and a quorum present, and may hold such additional meetings as it may deem necessary or expedient. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting the business of the commission. The commission shall, as soon as practicable, after the time of the annual appointment of a member to the commission, elect a chair, vice chair, and a secretary thereof, who shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. (Ord. 884 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1637 § 20, (2000))

 

3.28.040 Record of proceedings kept by secretary—Filing.
     The secretary of the commission shall keep a record of all proceedings, resolutions, findings, determinations and transactions of the commission, which records shall be a public record, and a copy of which record shall be filed with the city clerk as clerk of the city council. (Ord. 884 § 1, (1968))

 

3.28.050 Powers and duties.
     Subject to the approval of the city council, the beautification commission, shall:

     (a)   Act in an advisory capacity to the city council, the city manager, and the director of parks and recreation in all matters of city trees and protected private trees and to cooperate with other governmental and civic groups in the advancement of sound reforestation and tree protection planning and programs;

     (b)   Recommend, develop, sponsor, and implement programs and activities to promote community awareness and participation in city beautification;

     (c)   Recommend a master street tree plan for adoption by the city council;

     (d)   Recommend an “Official Street Tree List” to the city council for adoption, designating specific types of trees which can be planted on any street, based on pertinent local street and tree factors;

     (e)   Recommend specific types of street trees for any new subdivision;

     (f)    Recommend a survey to be made from time to time to determine those street trees which are to be retained and those which should be removed to conform to the street tree planning and maintenance program, having regard for both the immediate and long-term needs of the city;

     (g)   Recommend or comment on plans and programs for the planting, maintenance and removal of all street trees in the city;

     (h)   Recommend or comment on plans and programs for the uniform planting, care and maintenance of street trees and of shrubs, grass plots and other ornamental or beautifying plantings upon the streets and highways;

     (i)    Recommend or comment on plans and programs for the development and beautification of the public parks, parkways and buildings belonging to, or leased by, the city;

     (j)    Consider the annual budget of the parks and recreation department during the process of its preparation and make recommendations thereto to the city council and city manager and, in the case of capital improvement, also to the planning commission;

 

     (k)   As part of each commission meeting, provide the opportunity for citizens to address the commission; and

     (l)    Perform such other duties as may be delegated to it by the city council from time to time. (Ord. 884 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1637 § 21, (2000))

Chapter 3.32 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
3.32.010 Organization—Terms—Compensation.
     There shall be a parks and recreation commission in the city consisting of seven (7) members, appointed by the council; their terms of office shall be for a period of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. At the time of their application for the commission and throughout their terms as commissioners, they shall be registered, qualified electors of the city. In addition to the seven (7) voting members, the city council will appoint two (2) non-voting members to the commission to represent the interests of youth in the community. The members shall serve without compensation, but all necessary expenses shall be paid by appropriate council action. (Ord. 883 § 2, (1968); Ord. 1593 § 4, (1998); Ord. 1637 § 22, (2000); Ord. 1655 § 3, (2001); Ord. 1722 § 2, (2003))

 

3.32.020 Removal of member from office—Filling vacancies.
     The city council may remove any appointed member of the commission from office prior to the expiration of that member’s term of office, with or without cause by an affirmative vote of not less than three-fifths of all the members of the city council. Vacancies on the commission, except as to ex officio members, shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the city council. (Ord. 883 § 2, (1968); Ord. 1637 § 22, (2000))

 

3.32.030 Meetings—Officers.
     The commission shall hold regular meetings at least once each month when there is business to conduct and a quorum present, in the recreation center or such other place in the city as the commission may designate, and may hold such additional meetings as it may deem necessary or expedient. A majority of the voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting the business of the commission. The commission shall, as soon as practicable, after the time of the annual appointment of a member to the commission, elect a chair, vice-chair, and a secretary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. (Ord. 883 § 2, (1968); Ord. 1637 § 22, (2000); Ord. 1655 § 4, (2001))

 

3.32.040 Record of proceedings kept by secretary—Filing.
     The secretary of the commission shall keep a record of all proceedings, resolutions, findings, determinations and transactions of the commission, which records shall be a public record, and a copy of which record shall be filed with the city clerk as clerk of the city council. (Ord. 883 § 2, (1968))

 

3.32.050 Powers and duties.
     Subject to the approval of the city council, the parks and recreation commission shall:

     (a)   Act in an advisory capacity to the city council, the city manager, the director of parks and recreation, in all matters of public parks and recreation, and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and with civic groups in the advancement of sound recreation planning and programming;

     (b)   Recommend policies on recreation and park service for approval of the city council;

     (c)   Advise the director of parks and recreation on problems of development of recreation areas, facilities, programs and improved recreation services;

     (d)   Recommend the adoption of standards on areas, facilities, programs and financial support;

     (e)   Make or cause to be made, periodic inventories of parks and recreation services that exist or may be needed;

     (f)    Aid in coordinating the parks and recreation service with the programs of other governmental agencies and of voluntary organizations;

     (g)   Review the effectiveness of the parks and recreation programs with the director of parks and recreation;

     (h)   Interpret the policies of the city and the functions of the parks and recreation department to the public;

     (i)    Make studies and recommend rules and regulations for adoption by the city council for the use and enjoyment of all public parks and recreational facilities, and particularly of specific recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, play fields, recreational centers, swimming pools, ball diamonds, basketball courts, golf facilities, boating areas and such other recreational areas and facilities as may require regulation from time to time;

 

     (j)    Review the annual budget of the parks and recreation department before presentation to the city manager and make recommendations thereto to the city council and the city manager and, in the case of capital improvements, also to the planning commission.

     (k)   Consider the issues and needs of the senior population of the city in recommending programs, policies, and facilities. (Ord. 883 § 2, (1968); Ord. 1049 § 5, (1975); Ord. 1637 § 22, (2000); Ord. 1655 § 5, (2001))

Chapter 3.36 EMERGENCY SERVICES
3.36.010 Purposes.
     The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971))

 

3.36.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971))

 

3.36.030 Disaster council membership.
     The city of Burlingame disaster council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

     (a)   The city council; the chair shall be the mayor or in the mayor’s absence, the vice mayor. If the mayor and vice mayor are both absent, the chair shall be the member of the city council most senior in years of continuous service;

     (b)   The city manager who shall serve as vice chair and director of emergency services;

     (c)   The assistant director of emergency services, who under the supervision of the director, shall develop emergency service plans, and organize the emergency service and disaster program of this city and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the director;

     (d)   Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;

     (e)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord 930 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1507 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1637 § 26, (2000))

 

3.36.040 Disaster council powers and duties.
     It shall be the duty of the city disaster council and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon the call of the chair or, in the chair’s absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chair. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1637 § 27, (2000))

 

3.36.050 Director and assistant director of emergency services.
     (a)   There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

     (b)   There is hereby created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director.

     (c)   In the event that the director or assistant director of emergency services is not available to perform the director’s duties, the police chief or director of public works, or the senior officer present from the fire, police, or public works department, shall assume the duties until relieved by an officer of higher precedence under the order of succession for director. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1507 § 2, (1994); Ord. 1637 § 28, (2000))

 

3.36.060 Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of the emergency services.
     (a)   The director is hereby empowered to:

 

     (1)   Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

     (2)   Request the governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when in the opinion of the director, the local available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

     (3)   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

     (4)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

     (5)   Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

     (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the governor or the director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the director is hereby empowered:

     (A)  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life an property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

     (B)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

     (C)   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

     (D)  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and

     (E)   To execute all of the director’s ordinary powers as city manager conferred by this code or by resolution or emergency plan adopted pursuant to this code, and all powers conferred upon the director by any law, by any agreement approved pursuant to this code, and by any other lawful authority.

     (b)   The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform the director’s duties during an emergency. This order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

     (c)   The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1637 §§ 29, 30, (2000))

 

3.36.070 Emergency organization.
     All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 3.36.060(a)(6)(C) of this chapter be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city of Burlingame. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971))

 

3.36.080 Emergency plan.
     The Burlingame disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the Burlingame emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971))

 

3.36.090 Expenditures.
     Any expenditures made pursuant to this chapter in connection with emergency activities including mutual aid activities shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1637 § 31, (2000))

 

3.36.095 Punishment of violations.
     It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months, or both, for any person, during an emergency proclaimed pursuant to this chapter, to:

     (a)   Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon any member of the emergency organization by virtue of this chapter;

     (b)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property or inhabitants of this city or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

     (c)   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification by the State Office of Emergency Services. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1637 § 32, (2000))

 

3.36.099 Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
     Ordinance No. 792, adopted February 3, 1964, is hereby repealed, provided that it is the intent of the city council in enacting this chapter that it shall be considered a revision and continuation of the ordinance repealed by the ordinance codified in this chapter and the status of volunteers shall not be affected by such repeal; nor shall civil defense and disaster mutual aid plans and agreements, rules and regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to such repealed ordinance be affected by such repeal until amended, modified or superseded as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 930 § 1, (1971))

Chapter 3.40 PLANNING COMMISSION
3.40.010 Organization—Terms of members—Compensation.
     There is a planning commission of the city, consisting of seven (7) members appointed by the council. They shall hold office for a term of four (4) years, or until their respective successors have been appointed and qualified. At the time of their application for the commission and throughout their terms as commissioners, they shall be registered, qualified electors of the city. The members shall serve without compensation, but all necessary expenses incurred by them while acting in their official capacities shall be paid by appropriate council action. (Ord. 522, (1952); Ord. 1437 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1593 § 6, (1998); Ord. 1636 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1721 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1947 § 1, (2017))

 

3.40.020 Removal of appointive member—Filling vacancies.
     The city council may remove, for cause, any appointive member of the commission from office, prior to the expiration of that member’s term, by the affirmative vote of not less than four-fifths of all of the members of the city council. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor subject to confirmation of the city council, and shall be for the unexpired portion of the term of office vacated. (1941 Code § 615.1; Ord. 522, (1952); Ord. 1637 § 33, (2000))

 

3.40.030 Meetings—Officers and employees—Record of proceedings.
     The commission shall hold regular meetings at least once a month when there is business to conduct and a quorum present, and may hold such other meetings as may be necessary or expedient. A majority of the voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting the business of the commission. Unless otherwise required by state law or this code, the commission may take action by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority, and never less than three (3) affirmative votes, of the members present. The commission shall elect a chair and secretary from among the appointed members for a term of one year, and in the event of a vacancy of either office, may elect a successor. The commission may appoint such other officers for the purpose of carrying on its business and functions as it may determine.

     The commission shall adopt rules to be approved by the city council for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of all proceedings, resolutions, findings and transactions of the commission for public inspection, and shall file a copy thereof with the city clerk for the city council.

     The commission may, with the approval of the city council, contract for and employ planning consultants and other specialists for such services as it may require. (1941 Code § 615.2; Ord. 522, (1952): Ord. 1049 § 6, (1975); Ord. 1578 § 1, (1997); Ord. 1637 § 34, (2000))

 

3.40.040 Powers and duties.
     The planning commission shall have such powers, duties, authority and procedures as provided by the laws of the state of California and the provisions of this code. (1941 Code § 615.3; Ord. 522, (1952))

Chapter 3.44 LIBRARY BOARD
3.44.010 Public library established.
     Pursuant to the provisions of an act entitled “An act to provide for the establishment and maintenance of public libraries within municipalities,” approved March 23, 1901 (Statutes 1901, page 557), and the acts amendatory thereof, a public library is established in and for the city. (1941 Code § 630)

 

3.44.020 Management of public library.
     The public library shall be managed by a board of library trustees, consisting of five (5) members, to be appointed and to act in the manner provided by the laws of the state of California. (1941 Code § 631)

Chapter 3.52 CIVIL SERVICE FOR EMPLOYEES
3.52.010 Classified and unclassified services—Generally.
     The civil service of the city shall be divided into the unclassified and the classified service.

     (a)   Unclassified Service. The unclassified service shall include the following officers and positions:

     (1)   All elective officers;

     (2)   City manager and one private secretary to the city manager;

     (3)   Positions on appointive boards, commissions or committees;

     (4)   The head of each department and one private secretary to the head of a department, where applicable;

     (5)   Assistant department heads;

     (6)   Chief fire inspector;

     (7)   Chief building inspector;

     (8)   City engineer;

     (9)   Park superintendent

     (10) Recreation superintendent

     (11) Part-time or volunteer firemen and other fire department employees paid on an hourly or per diem basis;

     (12) Special police officers and other police department employees paid on an hourly or per diem basis;

     (13) Casual or seasonal employees in any office or department of the city. For the purpose of this chapter, casual or seasonal employees shall have synonymous meaning and shall be treated alike. Such casual or seasonal employment shall not continue for a period longer than six (6) months, and no person shall be eligible to serve as a casual or seasonal employee for more than an aggregate period of six (6) months in any one fiscal year;

     (14) Part-time employees in any office or department of the city. A “part-time employee” is an employee appointed to a position which requires service of four (4) hours a day or less;

     (15) Hourly or per diem employees in any office or department of the city. An hourly or per diem employee shall be any person paid on an hourly or per diem basis, employed in any position, but such service or employment shall in no case exceed nor continue for a longer period than six (6) months in any one fiscal year;

     (16) Emergency employees in any office or department of the city. For the purposes of this chapter, an “emergency employee” is any person appointed to a position or employment, the necessity for which has been created by reason of riot, insurrection or other extraordinary emergency. No position shall be created, or employment made, hereunder until the existence of a state of emergency has been proclaimed pursuant to chapter 3.36. All such positions and employments shall be for the duration of the emergency and shall terminate immediately thereafter.

     (b)   Classified Service. The classified service shall comprise all positions not specifically included by this section in the unclassified service.

     (c)   Status on Effective Date of Ordinance Codified Herein. Any person holding a position or employment included in the classified service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, has served continuously in such position, or in some other position included in the classified service, for a period of twelve (12) months immediately prior to such effective date, shall automatically continue his or her regular status in the classified service in the position held on such effective date, and shall continue thereafter to be subject in all respects to the provisions of the civil service system provided for in this code until his or her office or position becomes vacant.

     (d)   Removal of Unclassified Officers and Employees. Any unclassified officer or employee of the city except the city manager and attorney may be suspended or removed from office or employment by the officer by whom appointed. Written notice of layoff, suspension or removal served personally on an officer or employee, or written notice left at or mailed to his or her usual place of residence, shall be sufficient to effect any such layoff, suspension or removal, unless the person so notified within five (5) days after such notice demands a written statement of the reasons therefor and the right to be heard publicly before the officer by whom such notice was given. Upon such demand the officer making the layoff, suspension or removal shall deliver to the person notified thereof a written statement of the reasons therefor and shall fix a time and place for the public hearing. Following the public hearing, the officer ordering the layoff, suspension or removal shall by a decision in writing, make such disposition of the case as, in his or her opinion, the good of the service may require, and such decision shall be final. A copy of the statement of reasons for any layoff, suspension or removal, a copy of the written reply thereto by the officer or employee involved, and a copy of the final decision of the officer by whom the layoff, suspension or removal was made shall be filed as public records in the office of the city clerk. (1941 Code § 501; Ord. 370 (1941; Ord. 968 § 1, (1972); Ord. 983 §§ 1, 2, (1973); Ord. 1027 § 2, (1975); Ord. 1049 § 7, (1975); Ord. 1102 §§ 1, 2, (1977); Ord. 1138) § 1, (1978); Ord. 1181 § 2, (1980); Ord. 1546 § 3, (1996); Ord. 1637 § 37, (2000))

 

3.52.020 Employees blanketed into classified service.
     Any person holding a position or employment in the classified service on April 16, 1936, or at the effective date of any subsequently enacted ordinance placing positions or employments under the classified service, who shall have served in such position for a period of at least one year continuously immediately prior to such effective date, shall become a classified service employee without preliminary or working tests, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provision of this chapter. Any other persons holding positions or employment in the classified service shall be regarded as holding such positions or employments as probationers who are serving out probationary periods before their appointments become complete. (1941 Code § 502)

 

3.52.030 Rules and regulations.
     The city council shall formulate and adopt rules and regulations for the administration of the civil service system under the city manager. Any subsequent amendments to said rules and regulations may be adopted by the council after review and recommendation by the city manager. All rules and regulations adopted shall be considered with the provisions of this chapter. Such rules shall provide for the following matters in addition to such other matters as may be necessary and proper in carrying out the intent and purposes of this chapter:

     (a)   The classification of all persons in the classified service;

     (b)   The selection, employment, advancement, suspension, demotion, discharge and retirement of all persons in the classified service;

     (c)   The formulating of minimum standards and qualifications for each of the positions in the classified service. (1941 Code § 503; Ord. 1221 § 2, (1982); Ord. 1841 § 4, (2009))

 

3.52.060 Appointments—Temporary appointments.
     All appointments to positions or employments in the classified service shall be made by the city manager from the applications on file in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted under the authority of this code. Temporary appointments may be made by the city manager of persons who do not possess the minimum standards or qualifications for office or whose applications have not been filed or who have not been certified on an eligible list as the result of an examination, or in the event those who are eligible are not immediately available. Such temporary appointments shall not continue for a longer period than three (3) months, and no person shall be eligible to serve as a temporary appointee in any one or more positions for more than an aggregate period of three (3) months in any one fiscal year. In the giving of an examination for any positions in the classified service no credit shall be allowed for service rendered under a temporary appointment.

     During the exigency of war or a state of emergency, or an existing shortage of manpower, and in the absence of eligible persons on a regularly established list, the city manager may make limited-tenure appointments, through informal noncompetitive tests. Such appointments shall in no event continue more than six (6) months beyond the termination of the exigency, and employees serving under such employment shall acquire no right or privilege to permanent civil service status by reason of such service, or no credit shall be given for service under any temporary appointment. (1941 Code § 506; Ord. 448, (1947); Ord. 502, (1951); Ord. 676, (1958); Ord. 1221 § 4, 1982))

 

3.52.070 Discipline—Removal and suspension.
     The city council in whom is vested disciplinary or removal power shall be allowed full freedom in its action on such matters, it being the intent and spirit of this chapter to provide a fair and just approach to municipal employment for every inhabitant of the city in order that city employees may be selected on a basis of merit, but, in no sense, to handicap or curtail any responsible administrative officer in securing efficient service. All persons holding positions in the classified service shall be subject to suspension without pay for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days, and also to demotion or removal from office or employment for misconduct, incompetency, inefficiency or failure to perform duties, or to observe the rules and regulations of the department, office or board, but subject to the right of appeal of the aggrieved party to the city council in the manner set forth in the rules and regulations. (1941 Code § 507)

 

3.52.080 Abolishment of positions.
     Whenever, in the judgment of the city council, it becomes necessary in the interest of economy or because the necessity for the position involved no longer exists, the city council may abolish any position or employment in the classified service as provided by the statutes of the state of California, and discharge the employee holding such position or employment. Should such position or employment or any position involving all or any of the same duties be reinstated or created within two (2) years, the employee discharged shall be eligible to be appointed thereto in preference to any other qualified persons on the eligible list for such position. If the employee whose position is abolished was appointed from an eligible list, he or she shall be returned to his or her original position on the eligible list from which he or she was appointed. (1941 Code § 508)

 

3.52.100 Soliciting political contributions prohibited.
     No officer, agent, clerk or employee of the city shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving, any assessment, subscription, contribution or political service, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any political purpose whatever, from anyone on the eligible lists or holding any position under the provisions of this chapter. (1941 Code § 510)

Chapter 3.56 COMPENSATION PLAN
3.56.020 Promotion to higher class.
     Any employee in the classified service promoted from one position to one of a higher class, and at the time of such promotion is receiving compensation equal to or greater than the minimum compensation provided for such higher classified service, shall be entitled to receive such compensation in the higher classification next above the rate of compensation he or she or she had theretofore received, and such increase shall be effective upon the date of promotion. (1941 Code § 822, Ord. 436, (1946))

 

3.56.030 Time of effect of seniority increment.
     Except as herein provided, seniority increment on the basis of years of service as fixed in the schedule of compensations adopted by the city council shall be effective beginning on the date following the anniversary of permanent appointment in the classification to which the position of the employee is allocated, and if such anniversary date is between the first and the fifteenth of the month, such increment will take effect at the beginning of the current month, and if the anniversary is after the fifteenth of the month, such increment will take effect on the first day of the month following. (1941 Code § 824, Ord. 402, (1943))

 

3.56.050 Payment of compensation restricted to duly qualified persons actually performing required services.
     The treasurer shall not pay, nor shall the city clerk issue a warrant for the payment of any salary or compensation to any person holding a position in the classified or unclassified service unless such person has been duly elected, appointed or employed by the city and is performing the service required in his or her classification. (1941 Code § 828, Ord. 402, (1943))

Chapter 3.60 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
3.60.010 Findings.
     It is found, determined and declared that there is need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city of Burlingame in accordance with the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 1091 § 1, (1976))

 

3.60.020 City council is redevelopment agency.
     Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, the city council hereby declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city of Burlingame. (Ord. 1091 § 3, (1976))

 

3.60.030 Authority to transact business.
     Said redevelopment agency is activated pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be known as the redevelopment agency of the city of Burlingame. Said redevelopment agency is authorized to transact business and to exercise its powers under the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 1091 § 2, (1976))

Title 4 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 4.05 ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION BY COUNTY
Chapter 4.08 UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 4.09 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 4.10 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Chapter 4.12 SPECIAL FUND FOR CAPITAL OUTLAYS
Chapter 4.14 SPECIAL INSURANCE FUND
Chapter 4.15 CLAIMS PROCEDURES
Chapter 4.16 WATER FUNDS
Chapter 4.20 SPECIAL GASOLINE TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 4.24 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 4.30 STORM DRAINAGE FEE

Chapter 4.05 ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION BY COUNTY
4.05.010 Definitions.
     The following words and expressions when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:

     “City,” as used in this chapter, means the city of Burlingame, a municipal corporation situated in the county of San Mateo, state of California.

     “County,” as used in this chapter, means the county of San Mateo, a political subdivision of the state of California. (1941 Code § 951.1, Ord. 758, (1962))

 

4.05.020 Transfer of assessment and tax collection duties to county.
     The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the assessor and the tax collector of the city, are hereby transferred to the assessor and the tax collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after June 18, 1962, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1963. (1941 Code § 951.2, Ord. 758, 1962))

 

4.05.030 City offices abolished—Transfer of duties other than assessment and tax collection.
     The offices of city assessor and city tax collector are abolished as of the first day of July, 1963. Thereafter all duties to be performed by the city assessor other than the assessing of property in the city are transferred to and are to be performed by the city clerk and all duties performed by the city tax collector other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on property that become a lien after June 18, 1962 and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1963 are transferred to and are to be performed by the city treasurer. (1941 Code § 951.3, Ord. 758 (1962))

Chapter 4.08 UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
4.08.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.” (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.020 Rate.
     The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be ninety-five hundredths of one percent. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.030 Operative date.
     This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.040 Purpose.
     The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

     (a)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     (b)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     (c)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

     (d)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.050 Contract with state.
     Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.060 Sales tax.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 4.08.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.070 Place of sale.
     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.080 Use tax.
     An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 4.08.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
     In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.110 Permit not required.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
     (a)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

     (b)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

     (c)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax, the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

     (d)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1262 § 1, (1983))

 

4.08.130 Exclusions and exemptions.
     (a)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

     (b)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this ordinance.

     (c)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

     (d)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

     (e)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

     (f)    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1262 § 2, (1983))

 

4.08.140 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
     (a)   Section 4.08.120 shall be operative January 1, 1984.

     (b)   Section 4.08.130 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the legislature of the state of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1262 §§ 3, 4, (1983))

 

4.08.150 Amendments.
     All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.160 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

 

4.08.170 Penalties.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 996 § 1, (1973))

Chapter 4.09 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
4.09.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the city of Burlingame.” (Ord. 847 § 1, August 15, 1966).

 

4.09.020 Definitions.
     (a)   “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. “Hotel” does not mean any of the following: any hospital, sanitarium, medical clinic, convalescent home, rest home, home for aged people, foster home or other similar facility operated for the care or treatment of human beings; any asylum, jail, prison, orphanage or other facility in which human beings are detained and housed under legal restraint; any housing owned or controlled by any educational institution and used exclusively to house students, faculty or other employees, and any fraternity or sorority house or similar facility occupied exclusively by students and employees of such educational institution, and officially recognized or approved by it; any housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes by any organization having qualifications, for exemption from property taxes under the laws of California; any housing owned by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for governmental purposes; any camp as defined in the labor code or other housing furnished by an employer exclusively for employees.

     (b)   “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

     (c)   “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent of any type or character is an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

     (d)   Person. Except as used in the definition for transient below, “person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     (e)   “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. The value of complimentary meals or other similar services or inducements shall not be deducted. In the event of dispute the tax administrator shall determine the proper rent.

     (f)    “Tax administrator” means the city finance director/treasurer or the director/treasurer’s designated representative.

     (g)   “Transient” means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy of a specific room by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing providing for a longer period of occupancy of the room. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966); Ord. 1135 § 1, (1978); Ord. 1348 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1359 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1443 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1705 § 2, (2003))

 

4.09.025 Tax rate.
     For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve (12) percent of the rent charged by the operator. (Ord No. 1668, (2001); Ord. 1840 § 1, (2009))

 

4.09.030 Tax imposed.
     The tax imposed by this chapter constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966); Ord. 924 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1104 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1132 § 1, (1978); Ord. 1439 § 1, (1991); Ord. No. 1672 § 2, (2001))

 

4.09.040 Exemptions.
     No tax shall be imposed upon:

     (a)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the city to impose this tax; provided, employees of the state or federal government are exempt only if room charges are paid directly by their employing agency. Copies of official travel orders are generally required. (See 46 Cal. Ops. Atty. Gen. 16).

     (b)   Any properly credentialed officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966); Ord. 1215 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1348 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1443 § 2, (1991); Ord. 1705 § 3, (2003)

 

4.09.050 Operators duties.
     Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966))

 

4.09.060 Registration.
     (a)   No more than five (5) days after commencing business or after a change in operator, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from the administrator a transient occupancy registration certificate that will be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the hotel premises. This certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

     (1)   The name of the operator;

     (2)   The name and address of the hotel; and

     (3)   The date upon which the certificate was issued;

     (b)   This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. The certificate does not constitute a permit.

     (c)   No more than five (5) days after changing the name of a hotel registered under this section, the hotel operator shall notify the tax administrator of the new name in writing and obtain from the administrator an amended transient occupancy registration certificate specifying the new hotel name. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1348 § 3, (1987); Ord. 1443 § 3, (1991); Ord. 1705 § 4, (2003))

 

4.09.070 Reporting and remitting.
     (a)   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of each month, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by the administrator, of the total rents charged and the amount of tax calculated for transient occupancies for the preceding month. Unless a separate bank account is permitted and established as hereinafter set forth, the full amount of the tax calculated shall be remitted to the tax administrator together with the return. If any exemptions or bad debts are included on the return, copies of back-up information including room folios shall be included with the return. The signed, original return together with the remittance shall be delivered in person to the tax administrator or postmarked no later than the last day of the month in which it is due. Returns and remittances mailed pursuant to this subsection shall be sent by certified mail. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting and/or remitting periods for any operator and may require additional information in any return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.

     (b)   Any operator collecting less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in transient occupancy taxes per quarter shall deposit such taxes in a separate bank account in trust for the benefit of the city, until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator.

     (c)   All other operators shall post a bond or irrevocable letter of credit guaranteeing payment of taxes, equal to one quarter’s tax as determined by the tax administrator. Any such bond shall provide for no more than ten (10) days notice of cancellation to city.

     (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (c) above, the tax administrator may require an operator to establish a separate bank account in trust for the city for deposit of transient occupancy taxes, until payment is made to the city, when the tax administrator determines that an operator may not be capable of properly complying with the collection or remittance requirements of this chapter.

     (e)   The city may also appoint or obtain an agent or receiver to collect the taxes due at the hotel itself. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966); Ord. 1348 § 4, (1987); Ord. 1443 § 4, (1991); Ord. 1498 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1705 § 5, (2003))

 

4.09.080 Penalties and interest.
     (a)   Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

     (b)   Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of fifteen (15) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the five (5) percent penalty first imposed. An additional penalty of five (5) percent shall be paid for each fifteen (15) days thereafter which the remittance is delinquent.

     (c)   Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.

     (d)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

     (e)   Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by this chapter. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966); Ord. 1135 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1443 § 5, (1991))

 

4.09.090 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator.
     (a)   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter or if the tax administrator reasonably believes that a hotel operator has not accurately and fully made any such report or remittance, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as the administrator may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base the administrator’s estimate of the tax due.

     (b)   The tax administrator may review any return filed pursuant to this chapter and may request or inspect any documents or accounts as provided for in this chapter to determine what the correct tax due is. The tax administrator, and any person designated as an agent by the tax administrator, may, at any time during normal business hours, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, inspect and audit the accounts, books, papers, and documents of any operator that holds any tax certificate of the city under this chapter or that has filed a return with the city under this chapter. Any person shall produce under the seal of the city the person’s authority to make such an audit or inspection.

     (c)   No person conducting an inspection or review pursuant to this section may reveal the information obtained from such an inspection or audit to anyone not charged with the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this title.

     (d)   As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as the administrator is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has neglected, failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the administrator shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. The administrator may include in said assessment costs of any necessary audits or investigations. These costs will include any additional visits or expenses incurred because an operator failed to provide records as required by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address.

     (e)   The operator to be assessed by the administrator’s determination may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why the amount specified should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the operator of the determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties now due. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 4.09.100. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966); Ord. 1443 § 6, (1991); Ord. 1705 § 6, (2003))

 

4.09.100 Appeal.
     Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966))

 

4.09.110 Records.
     It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. Such records shall be maintained at the operator’s premises or shall be available for delivery to the tax administrator within one week after request. Such records shall be so maintained for at least six (6) months after a change of operator. The records shall include at least the following:

     (a)   Daily summaries of room occupancies;

     (b)   A record of each occupancy charge for which an exemption is claimed, including the name of the individual occupying the room, dates of occupancy and reasons for exemption;

     (c)   List of bad debts claimed for exemption, including names and addresses of debtor, amount of room rent unpaid, and all room folios documenting the applicable occupancies;

     (d)   Bank statements for the separate account required in Section 4.09.070. (Ord. 847 § 1, 1966); Ord. 1135 § 3, (1978); Ord. 1443 § 7, (1991); Ord. 1705 § 6, (2003))

 

4.09.120 Refunds.
     (a)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city council within the time period set forth in Chapter 4.15. Accrual of the cause of action shall be the date upon which payment of the tax was actually made or the date the tax was due, whichever was earlier.

     (b)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

     (c)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

     (d)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966); Ord. 1443 § 8, (1991); Ord. 1657 § 2,(2001))

 

4.09.130 Collection of tax.
     (a)   Actions to Collect. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collectible by any operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. The amount of the tax collected by the operator shall be held to be a special fund in trust for the city and shall be deemed to be public monies upon collection. This trust obligation shall apply whether the taxes collected are held in a separate account or not. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.

     (b)   Recording Certificate—Lien. If any amount required to be paid to the city under the ordinance codified in this chapter is not paid when due, the administrator may within three (3) years after the amount is due file for record in the office of the San Mateo county recorder a certificate specifying the amount of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the operator liable for the same and the fact that the tax administrator has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be paid. From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be paid together with penalties and interest constitutes a lien upon a real property in the county owned by the operator or acquired by him or her afterwards and before the lien expires. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten (10) years from the time of filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged.

     (c)   Priority and Lien of Tax. The amounts required to be paid by any operator under this chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases:

     (1)   Whenever the person is insolvent;

     (2)   Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his or her assets;

     (3)   Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors, administrators or heirs is insufficient to pay all the debts due from the deceased; or

     (4)   Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or absent person required to pay any amount under this chapter levied upon by process of law. This chapter does not give the city a preference over any recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a lien.

     (d)   Warrant for Collection of Tax. At any time within three (3) years after any operator is delinquent in the payment of any amount herein required to be paid off within years after the last recording of a certificate of lien under subsection (b) of this section, the tax administrator may issue a warrant for the enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter. The warrant shall be directed to any sheriff, marshal or constable and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner and with the same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax administrator may pay or advance to the sheriff, marshal or constable, the same fees, commissions and expenses for his or her services as are provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of execution.

     (e)   Seizure and Sale. At any time within three (3) years after any operator is delinquent in the payment of any amount, the tax administrator may forthwith collect the amount in the following manner: the tax administrator shall seize any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect occupancy taxes due shall be only of property of the operator not exempt from execution under the provisions of the code of civil procedure.

     (f)    Successor’s Liability—Withholding by Purchaser. If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his or her business or quits the business, his or her successor assignee shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax administrator showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due.

     (g)   Liability of Purchaser—Release. If the purchaser of a hotel fails to withhold funds from the purchase price as required, he or she shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within sixty (60) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or within sixty (60) days from the date the former owner’s records are made available for audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event, not later than ninety (90) days after receiving the request, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his or her address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax administrator to mail the notice shall release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of the successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells his or her business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later.

     (h)   Sale of a hotel, dismissal of the operator or other termination of his or her rights to operate the facility shall not relieve him or her from liability for taxes due or owing under this chapter. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1359 § 2, (1988); Ord. 1705 § 8, (2003))

 

4.09.140 Violations—Misdemeanor.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 847 § 1, (1966))

Chapter 4.10 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
4.10.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Burlingame Essential Services Measure.” The city of Burlingame hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.020 Operative date.
     “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth herein. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.030 Purpose.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

     (a)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Sections 7285.9, 7293, and 7294 of Part 1. 7 of Division 2 which authorize the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

     (b)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1. 6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

     (c)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

     (d)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1. 6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.040 Contract with state.
     Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.050 Transactions tax rate.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.060 Place of sale.
     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.070 Use tax rate.
     An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-quarter of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1. 6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
     In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

     (a)   Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

     (1)   The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California;

     (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

     (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

     (A)  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

     (B)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

     (4)   In Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

     (b)   The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.100 Permit not required.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
     (a)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

     (b)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

     (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

     (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection (b)(2), delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

     (A)  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3. 5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

     (B)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

     (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     (5)   For the purposes of subsection (b)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

     (c)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

     (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

     (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

     (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     (5)   For the purposes of subsection (c)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

     (6)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

     (7)   “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 commencing with Section 4000 of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3. 5 commencing with Section 9840 of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

     (d)   Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1. 6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.120 Amendments.
     All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1. 6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.140 Citizens’ oversight and annual audit.
     (a)   There shall be a committee consisting of no fewer than three persons appointed by the city council to review and report on the receipt of revenue and expenditure of funds from the tax authorized by this chapter (“revenues and expenditures”). Members of the committee shall be residents of the city or representatives of businesses located in the city.

     (b)   Beginning with the fiscal year that ends June 30, 2018, the city’s independent auditors shall, as part of their annual audit of the city’s financial statements, review the collection and expenditure of revenue from the tax authorized by this chapter. The auditors’ review shall be a public document. The committee shall annually review the auditors’ findings and report in writing to the city council regarding the accuracy of the auditors’ findings regarding the revenues and expenditures. The committee’s statement shall be transmitted to the city council for consideration at a public meeting.

     (c)   By January 31, 2018, the city council shall adopt a resolution establishing the composition of the committee and defining the scope of its responsibilities consistent with this section. Provisions defining the scope of committee responsibilities and reporting requirements shall address bond oversight, in the event that a decision is made at a later time to sell bonds that are in part backed by the revenues referenced in this section. The city council shall appoint the initial members of the committee no later than March 1, 2018. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.150 Amendments by city council.
     The following amendments to this chapter must be approved by the voters of the city: increasing the tax rate or revising the methodology for calculating the tax such that a tax increase would result or imposing the tax on transactions and uses not previously subject to the tax (unless such amendment occurs automatically by operation of Section 4.10.120). The city council may otherwise amend this chapter without submitting the amendment to the voters for approval. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

 

4.10.160 Termination.
     The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall be ongoing, unless terminated earlier by a unanimous vote of the city council. (Ord. 1944 § 2, (2017))

Chapter 4.12 SPECIAL FUND FOR CAPITAL OUTLAYS
4.12.010 Fund established—Tax levy.
     There is established a special fund for capital outlays, to be created by the levy and collection of taxes and assessments which the city council may levy, and which taxes and assessments shall be levied and collected in the same manner and at the same time as other taxes. In making such levy, the city council shall not exceed the limitation to impose taxes prescribed by the general laws of the state of California without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the city. (1941 Code § 950, Ord. 405, (1944))

 

4.12.020 Transfers to fund—Disbursements.
     The city council may transfer to such capital outlay fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand at the end of any fiscal year. No money shall be disbursed from such fund except for the making of any capital outlays; provided, however, the city council may submit a proposition to the electors of the city, to obtain the consent of such electors to the use of the moneys in such fund, or any portion thereof, for some other specific purpose. Such proposition may be submitted at any election, and shall require a two-thirds vote of all voters voting at such election to authorize the expenditure of the moneys in such fund, or any portion thereof, for such other purpose. (1941 Code § 950, Ord. 405, (1944))

 

4.12.030 Interpretation of “capital outlays.”
     “Capital outlays” shall not be construed to include the construction, acquisition, extension of or addition to utilities other than utilities for the furnishing of a water supply. (1941 Code § 950, Ord. 405, (1944))

Chapter 4.14 SPECIAL INSURANCE FUND
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1093, 1098 and 1161.

 

4.14.010 Special insurance fund.
     The special insurance fund is established and shall be maintained for the deposit of all new moneys budgeted for payment of workers’ compensation insurance premiums and claims, liability insurance premiums and claims, and all other insurance premiums and claims. It shall also be the depository for moneys recovered from third parties for reimbursement of losses and other similar recovery of funds. Payments therefrom shall also be made for other expenditures related to said programs.

     The fund shall be established and amounts accumulated therein so as to maintain sufficient reserves for known and anticipated future losses consistent with accepted accounting practices. The amount and sufficiency of reserves shall be reviewed annually. All earnings from investments of the fund and all state mandated benefit costs recovered shall accrue to the fund. (Ord. 1322 § 1; (1986))

Chapter 4.15 CLAIMS PROCEDURES
4.15.010 Claims for money or damages.
     (a)   Claims against the city, its officers or employees for money or damages which are exempted by Government Code Section 905 from Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code of the State of California, and which are not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly related thereto, shall be governed by this section. A claim relating to such a cause of action shall be presented not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of action. Such claims shall be presented and processed as provided by Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code insofar as the provisions are not in conflict with this section.

     (b)   No suit for money or damages may be brought or maintained against the city, its officers or employees until a written claim therefor has been presented to the city council and has been acted upon or has been deemed to have been rejected by the city in accordance with this section. The time within which the city will act on the claim presented will conform to the time requirements set forth in Section 912.4 of the Government Code. All claims shall be verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910.

     (c)   Pursuant to Chapter 5 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code, written agreements entered into by or in behalf of the city may provide all claims arising out of or related to the agreement must be presented not later than six (6) months after the accrual of the cause of action, and such claims shall be governed by the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1225 § 1, (1982); Ord. 1657 § 3, (2001); Ord. 1793 § 3, (2006); Ord. 1809 § 3 (2007))

Chapter 4.16 WATER FUNDS
4.16.010 Deposit of funds in water fund.
     All moneys or credits due the city from the municipal water system shall be deposited with the city treasurer. The treasurer shall credit to the water fund the moneys so received. (1941 Code § 624, Ord. 590, (1955); Ord. 689, (1959))

Chapter 4.20 SPECIAL GASOLINE TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
4.20.010 Created.
     There is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. (1941 Code § 1745)

 

4.20.020 Source of funds.
     All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of, streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into said fund. (1941 Code § 1746)

 

4.20.030 Expenditures.
     All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division I of the Streets and Highways Code. (1941 Code § 1747)

Chapter 4.24 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
4.24.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the city of Burlingame.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 872 § 1, (1967))

 

4.24.020 Property tax imposed.
     There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city of Burlingame shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.27.5) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 872 § 2, (1967))

 

4.24.030 Property tax—Payment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 4.24.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 872 § 3, (1967))

 

4.24.040 Nonapplicability—Instrument to secure a debt.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 872 § 4, (1967))

 

4.24.050 United States or its instrumentalities.
     Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 872 § 5, (1967); Ord. 909 § 1, (1970))

 

4.24.060 Plan of reorganization or adjustment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

     (a)   Confined under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

     (b)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

     (c)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

     (d)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

     Subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 872 § 6, (1967))

 

4.24.070 Securities and exchange commission.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code 1954; but only if:

     (1)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

     (2)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

     (3)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 872 § 7, (1967))

 

4.24.080 Transfer of interest in partnership.
     (a)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

     (1)   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

     (2)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

     (b)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

     (c)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (b), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 872 § 8, (1967))

 

4.24.090 Administration.
     The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 872 § 9, (1967))

 

4.24.100 Claims for refund.
     Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. 872 § 10, (1967))

 

4.24.110 Operative date.
     This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county of San Mateo, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California, or upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter whichever is the later. (Ord. 872 § 11, (1967))

 

4.24.120 Copies filed.
     Upon its adoption the city clerk shall file two (2) copies of this chapter with the county recorder of San Mateo County. (Ord. 872 § 12, (1967))

Chapter 4.30 STORM DRAINAGE FEE
4.30.010 Establishment of storm drainage fee.
     There is established a storm drainage fee for all parcels of real property in the city that drain into the city storm drainage system, including pipes, inlets, outlets, and natural drainage courses. No fee shall be imposed unless and until the voter approval required by Constitution Article XIII D, Section 6 (Proposition 218) has been obtained. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.020 Computing the fee.
     (a)   An annual storm drainage fee is levied upon each parcel of property that drains into the city’s storm drain system. The rate per square foot of impervious area shall be determined by resolution of the city council upon consideration of a report of the city engineer but in no event shall the rate exceed that authorized by required voter approval.

     (b)   The amount of the storm drainage fee for each individual parcel shall be computed as follows: parcel square footage shall be multiplied by the percentage of impervious area on the parcel. The resulting number shall be multiplied by the per square foot impervious area rate in order to calculate the dollar fee for the fiscal year. Said rate shall not exceed the maximum rate established by the voters, i.e., 4.192 cents per square foot of impervious area. When the impervious area of a parcel is increased or decreased, the annual fee for the parcel shall be adjusted for the fiscal year next succeeding the change in impervious area.

     (c)   The term impervious area shall have the following meaning: the non-natural state or surface of a parcel, viewed and measured in plan, which acts as a barrier that prevents the majority of storm water from infiltrating into the ground below, including as examples but not limited to concrete, asphalt pavement or concrete paver walkways, patios or driveways; playing surfaces such as tennis courts or basketball courts; pools and pool decks; roof tops; tool sheds; carports; and/or patio covers.

     (d)   The fee for each condominium shall be based on the individual condominium’s percentage of ownership interest as shown on the assessor’s roll; and if not shown are deemed to be equal ownership percentages, unless proof is submitted otherwise.

     (e)   Vacant, unimproved parcels are still in their natural states and do not contribute any additional runoff to burden the city’s storm drain system. Therefore, the storm drain user fee is not applicable to these parcels. When a vacant parcel that is not subject to this chapter adds impervious area, it shall be required to pay a storm drainage fee based on its impervious area.

     (f)    Streets and highways, channels, and canals are exempt from the storm drainage fee as part of the storm system. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.030 Setting the fee.
     (a)   Commencing with fiscal year 2010-2011, the city council, following a public hearing, shall determine the storm drainage fee. In no event shall the square footage rate for impervious area be increased beyond that rate approved by a majority vote of the property owners subject to the storm drainage fee without further approval by a majority vote of the property owners subject to the storm drainage fee; provided, however, that, without approval by a majority vote of the property owners subject to the storm drainage fee, the maximum per square foot rate for impervious area, commencing fiscal year 2010-2011, may be increased by an amount equal to the change in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers for the area including San Mateo County (the “CPI”), including all items as published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics as of March 1st of each year, not to exceed a maximum increase of two (2) percent per year.

     (b)   The storm drainage fee shall not be deemed to be increased in the event the actual fee upon a parcel in any given year is higher due to an increase in the amount of the impervious area of the subject parcel.

     (c)   In any year in which the city council does not change the rate per square foot of impervious area, the previously adopted fee shall continue in full force and effect for the next fiscal year. Property owners whose storm drainage is increased/decreased as a result a change in impervious area have appeal rights under Section 4.30.050.

 

     (d)   The city council shall not be required to enact an inflation increase in each year but may accumulate the inflationary increases and enact the cumulative amount. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.040 The fee in fiscal year 2009-2010.
     Subject to the appeal rights set forth below, the fee for fiscal year 2009-2010 shall be that parcel fee specified in the notice of protest hearing sent to the property owner. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.050 Appeals by property owners.
     (a)   If a property owner disagrees with the calculation of his or her storm drainage fee, the property owner may appeal the calculation within twenty (20) calendar days after the property owner receives notice that the fee will be increased/decreased:

     (1)   The property owner must provide written documentation explaining the reason why the storm drain fee is not correct. This documentation must include:

     (A)  The name, telephone number, mailing address, and email address, if available, of the property owner;

     (B)   The Assessor’s Parcel Number (APN) of the property in question;

     (C)   To-scale drawings of the property in question and the impervious areas located on it with accompanying calculations. The to-scale drawings shall include the square footage and labels for each impervious area (i.e., house, garage, driveway, patio, tool shed, carport, etc.).

     (b)   If additional documentation is required or insufficient documentation was submitted, the public works department will notify the property owner.

     (c)   Once the public works department has determined that sufficient documentation has been submitted, it will analyze the appeal. The property owner will be notified in writing within three (3) weeks after sufficient documentation has been submitted whether or not the fee will be changed.

     (1)   Any new fee will be documented in the city’s fee database.

     (2)   The property owner can appeal the decision of public works to the city council if the amount remaining in dispute after the public works decision exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00) annually. The appeal must be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten (10) calendar days from the date of mailing of the public works department decision. The city clerk shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and shall give notice in writing to the appellant. The city council’s determination on the appeal shall be final.

     (d)   If an appeal is granted by public works department or the city council that does not permit inclusion for the following fiscal year’s property tax roll submittal, a reimbursement will be provided to the property owner by the city.

     (e)   Any action brought against the city pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. Compliance with these provisions shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

     (f)    The city council may establish appeal fees.

     (g)   To appeal the fee for fiscal year 2009-2010 a property owner must file an appeal not later than twenty (20) days after the city council certifies the election results. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.060 Collection of the fee.
     Commencing with fiscal year 2009-2010, the storm drainage fee shall be collected on the San Mateo County tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes of the city; provided, however, in any year the city council may, by resolution, provide for an alternative procedure for collection of the storm drainage fee. For any fiscal year in which the storm drainage fee is authorized but not collected on the tax roll, the city may collect all or a portion of the fee for such year on the tax roll in the following fiscal year or years. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.070 Deposit in the special storm drainage fund.
     Upon receipt of moneys representing storm drainage fees, the city finance director shall deposit the moneys in the city treasury to the storm drainage fund and the moneys shall be subject to annual independent audit and funds shall only be expended for storm drainage improvements approved by the city council and for the operation and maintenance of those improvements. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

•

4.30.080 Various actions.
     Without a vote of the property owners, in any year the city council may do any and all of the following: (a) discontinue the storm drainage fee; (b) reduce the maximum square footage rate for impervious area; or (c) increase the rate per square foot up to or below the maximum voter-authorized square footage rate for impervious area if it has been previously set below such rate. In no event shall the city council increase the rate in excess of the maximum square footage rate approved by a majority vote of the property owners subject to the storm drainage fee for impervious area without approval by a majority vote of the property owners subject to the storm drainage fee. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.090 Expiration of fee.
The storm drainage fee established by this chapter shall remain in effect until 2038. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.100 Citizens oversight committee.
     The city council shall appoint a citizens committee to assure that the fees are used for storm drain purposes. The committee shall also review and then provide advisory input to the public works director in the preparation of the budget expenditures, and any amendments thereto, from the storm drainage fund, including project priorities. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

 

4.30.110 Severability.
     Should any provision or clause of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance be held invalid or unconstitutional that invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect other provisions or applications thereof which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are declared severable. By adopting this ordinance the city council declares that it would have adopted this ordinance without that provision or provisions. (Ord. 1836 § 2, (2009))

Title 5 (RESERVED)

Title 6 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 6.04 GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.08 LICENSE TAXES
Chapter 6.10 MINIMUM WAGE
Chapter 6.16 ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Chapter 6.20 CLOSING-OUT SALES
Chapter 6.22 MERCHANDISE SALES FROM RESIDENCES
Chapter 6.24 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Chapter 6.30 VALET PARKING
Chapter 6.36 TAXICABS
Chapter 6.38 FORTUNETELLING AND PSYCHIC SERVICES
Chapter 6.39 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 6.40 SPA AND BATHING ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 6.41 MODEL STUDIOS, ESCORT BUREAU, AND INTRODUCTORY SERVICES
Chapter 6.42 TANNING FACILITIES
Chapter 6.43 BINGO
Chapter 6.44 PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS
Chapter 6.50 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDED BY STATE FRANCHISE HOLDERS
Chapter 6.52 BROADWAY AREA IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
Chapter 6.54 BURLINGAME AVENUE AREA BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT

Chapter 6.04 GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
6.04.010 Purpose of licenses.
     It is hereby declared that the provisions of this title of the ordinance code of the city of Burlingame are for the purpose of revenue and not regulation. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this title, words and phrases used herein shall be held to mean the following:

     (a)   “Business” includes professions, trades and occupations of all and every kind of calling, whether or not carried on for profit.

     (b)   “City” means the city of Burlingame.

     (c)   “Collector” or “license collector” means the finance director, or the finance director’s duly authorized representative.

     (d)   “Contractor” means any person who undertakes to, or offers to undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does him or herself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, parking facility, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith. The term contractor includes subcontractor and specialty contractor.

     (e)   “Employee” means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member or owner, any member of owner’s family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor, broker, salesperson and any and all other persons employed or working in said business.

     (f)    “Fixed place of business” means the premises occupied in the city of Burlingame for the particular purpose of conducting a business thereat.

     (g)   “Newly established business” means a business in existence and operation within the city for less than three (3) months.

     (h)   “Peddler” means any person not having a regularly established place of business, who travels or goes from house to house, or from place to place, and who sells and makes immediate delivery, or offers for sale and immediate delivery, any services, goods, wares or merchandise in his or her possession.

     (i)    “Person” includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city of Burlingame, other than as an employee.

     (j)    “Solicitor” means any person who travels or goes from house to house, or from place to place, or in or along the streets, taking orders for or endeavoring to take orders, for the sale, exchange or delivery of any services, goods, wares or merchandise not in his or her immediate possession.

     (k)   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1671 § 7, (2001))

 

6.04.030 Evidence of doing business.
     When any person shall, by the use of signs, circulars, cards, stationery, telephone books or newspapers, advertise, hold out or represent that he or she is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he or she is in business in the city, or when any person makes a sale, takes an order, renders a commercial service or performs any other similar act within the city, and such person fails to deny by sworn statement given to the collector that he or she is not conducting a business in the city after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he or she is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.040 License required.
     There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this title license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. No person shall transact and carry on any business, trade or profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license or without first having paid to the city the license tax provided herein, and to do so without complying with all such regulations shall constitute a separate violation of this code for each and every day that such business is so carried on.

     The issuance of a license under this title shall not entitle the licensee to engage in any business which for any reason is in violation of any law or ordinance and shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless he or she has complied with all the requirements under the other ordinances of the city and all other applicable laws, nor shall it entitle the licensee to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in such license in the event that such business or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is a violation of any law. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.050 Contents of license.
     All licenses shall be prepared and issued by the license collector upon payment of the sum to be paid therefor, and each license so issued shall state upon the face thereof the following:

     (a)   The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

     (b)   The kind or kinds of business licensed thereby;

     (c)   The location of such business;

     (d)   The date of the expiration of such license;

     (e)   Such other information as the license collector may require. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.060 License tax—How payable.
     All license taxes due hereunder shall be paid in advance, in lawful money of the United States, at the office of the license collector. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.070 Terms of licenses—Delinquency.
     (a)   Except as otherwise provided, all license taxes due hereunder shall be due and payable on the first day of July.

     (b)   If a license tax that is due and payable under subsection (a) above has not been received before August 1, the license collector shall add to each license remaining unpaid a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the delinquent license tax.

     (c)   Any business that fails to remit any tax imposed pursuant to Sections 6.08.085 or 6.08.150 within the time required for payment of such a tax shall pay the following penalties:

     (1)   A penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount due; and

     (2)   If the delinquent tax amount plus the penalty is not remitted on or before a period of fifteen (15) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, an additional penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the five (5) percent penalty first imposed. An additional penalty of five (5) percent shall be paid for each fifteen (15) days thereafter which the remittance is delinquent.

     (3)   If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under Section 6.08.085 is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection.

     (4)   In addition to the penalties imposed, any business that fails to remit any tax imposed by Section 6.08.085 shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

 

     (d)   The license collector may include in the delinquency assessment, costs of any necessary audits or investigations necessitated by an incorrect or incomplete return of a license tax under this chapter.

     (e)   Every penalty and assessment imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by this chapter. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1500 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1671 § 2, (2001))

 

6.04.080 Proration.
     No proration of any license due hereunder shall be made for any portion of the period for which a license is payable, except in the case of a first annual license the tax may be prorated as follows:

     (a)   If the application is made during the quarter beginning July 1st, one hundred (100) percent of such fee shall be paid;

     (b)   If the application is made during the quarter beginning October 1st, seventy-five (75) percent of such fee shall be paid;

     (c)   If the application is made during the quarter beginning January 1st, fifty (50) percent of such fee shall be paid; and

     (d)   If the application is made during the quarter beginning April 1st, twenty-five (25) percent of such fee shall be paid.

     The date of commencement of business shall be deemed the date of application whenever an application is filed after the commencement of business. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.090 Duration of license.
     (a)   No license shall be issued for a period of more than twelve (12) months. No license shall be issued for any period extending beyond the thirtieth day of June following the issuance.

     (b)   While the license collector is empowered to mail renewal notices to businesses regarding the annual business license, the failure of the license collector to mail such a notice or the failure of the business to receive such a notice shall not excuse any failure to pay the business license tax due at the time and pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.04.070 nor to excuse any penalties or interest that may be assessed because of late or incomplete payment. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1671 § 3, (2001))

 

6.04.100 Limitations.
     No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received for any license tax other than provided for in this title, and no license shall be sold or issued for any period of time other than provided for in this title; provided, that this section shall not refer to such penalties as are herein provided for. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.110 Branch establishments.
     Separate licenses must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or location were a separate business, and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this title shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.120 Duplicate licenses.
     Duplicate licenses may be issued by the license collector to replace any license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing such affidavit paying to the license collector the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1752 § 2, (2005))

 

6.04.130 Transfer of place of business.
     No license issued pursuant to this title shall be transferred to another person. When a licensee transfers his or her business from one location to another within the city, the license previously issued may be amended to authorize the conduct of the business at the new location. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992))

 

6.04.140 License to be conspicuously posted.
     All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:

     (a)   Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

     (b)   Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his or her person or in his or her vehicle at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.150 Refunds.
     No refunds will be made on any amount paid as a license tax except in case of an error on the part of the city in the determination of the amount of the license tax, in the case of a miscalculation by the business of the license tax due, in the event of double payment for a license, or in case of an illegally collected license tax. Claims for such refunds must be made pursuant to and within the time requirements of Chapter 4.15. Accrual of the cause of action shall be the date of payment for the license or the date the license payment was due, whichever is earlier. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1657 § 4, (2001); Ord. 1671 § 4, (2001))

 

6.04.160 Application for issuance of license.
     Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this title shall make application for the same to license collector. Such application shall be a written statement upon a form provided by such department and shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury, or sworn to by the applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths. The application shall set forth such information as may be necessary properly to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by applicant. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.170 Application for first license.
     Every person making application for a license shall pay to the license collector the license tax for the business in which he or she is engaged and a nonrefundable application fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1752 § 3, (2005))

 

6.04.180 Applications not conclusive.
     No applications shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.200 Determination of license tax in certain cases.
     (a)   If any person fails to apply for a business license, or, after demand therefor has been made by the license collector, he or she fails to file a corrected application within fifteen (15) days after notification to so do, the license collector shall determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as the collector may be able to obtain.

     (b)   The license collector will determine which classification of business under this title applies to each business in light of the information available to the collector. When more than one classification might apply to a business, the license collector will apply that classification that best represents the overall conduct of the business. Classification by the business itself is not binding on the collector. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1664 § 1, (2001))

 

6.04.210 Appeals.
     (a)   When the license collector determines that a license tax is due that is more than the tax paid by the business, the license collector will give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the business at its last known place of address. The assessed business may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the license collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the business for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the license collector shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If application for a hearing is made, the license collector shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice by mail to the business of the time and place for the hearing. At the hearing, the business may appear and offer evidence what the specified tax, interest and penalties should be. After hearing, the license collector will determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the business of the decision. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in subsection (b) below.

     (b)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the license collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license, or the amount of a license tax, may appeal to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the manager within fifteen (15) days of the collector’s decision. If no appeal is filed within the fifteen (15) day period, the decision of the license collector is final. The city manager shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and give notice in writing to the appellant of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at the address appearing on the person’s last license or application. The person who filed the appeal may appear and offer evidence regarding the matter. Following the hearing, the city manager may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the license collector. The decision of the city manager shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. The city manager’s decision is the final administrative determination. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1671 § 6, (2001))

 

6.04.220 Additional power of license collector.
     In addition to all other power conferred upon him or her, the license collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days in such case to waive any penalty which would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the council, to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.225 Document production and inspection and entry.
     (a)   The license collector may review any application or return filed pursuant to this chapter and may request or inspect any documents or accounts as provided for in this title to determine what the correct tax due is. The license collector, and any person designated as an agent by the license collector, may, at any time during normal business hours, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title, inspect the accounts, books, papers, and documents of any business that holds any permit or tax certificate of the city under this title or that has filed a permit application or business tax return with the city under this title. Any person shall produce under the seal of the city the person’s authority to make such an inspection.

     (b)   It shall be the duty of each business that receives a license or permit under this title to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as the business may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city. Such records shall be maintained at the business’ premises or shall be available for delivery to the license collector within one week after request. Such records shall be so maintained for at least six (6) months after a change of owner. The license collector may, upon five (5) days’ written notice, require any business that holds a permit or business license under this title or that has filed a permit application or business tax return with the city to produce any accounts, books, papers, or documents at any location in the city that the license collector may designate in writing, for the purpose of enforcing this title.

     (c)   No person conducting an inspection or review pursuant to this section may reveal the information obtained from such an inspection or review to anyone not charged with the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this title.

     (d)   The license collector, any designated officer or agent of the license collector, and any police officer is entitled to enter free of charge at any time any place of business for which a tax, license, or permit under this title is required, and to demand the exhibition of the business license or permit for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business. (Ord. 1671, § 5, (2001))

 

6.04.230 License of new business—Approval.
     Upon the issuance of an initial license to conduct a business at a place, building or premises located in the city, or when a license is transferred to a new place of business in the city, the license collector shall transfer a copy of the application to the building inspector, the fire chief, planner and health inspector of the city. It shall be the duty of said officials to report to the license collector whether or not the place, building or premises, including any incidental warehouse or distribution plants, can be used for the purpose stated in the application. If it is reported that the carrying on of such business will violate any law or ordinance or jeopardize or constitute a menace to the public health or safety, it shall be the duty of the license collector to revoke the issuance or the transfer of the license. License fees shall not be refunded upon such revocation. (Ord. 1125 § 1, (1978), Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992))

 

6.04.240 Exemptions.
     (a)   Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations.

     (1)   The license provisions of this code shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage or carry on any business, or require the payment of any license fee from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on solely for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person, if such business is exempt from the payment of bank and corporation taxes by Sections 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, nor shall any license be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition, lecture or scientific, historical, religious or moral services whenever the receipts of such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church, school or to any religious or benevolent purpose within the city; nor shall any license be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such association or organization was formed and from which a profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt any institution or organization from complying with the provisions of any of the ordinances of the city requiring such institution or organization to obtain a permit from the city to conduct, manage or carry on such business.

     (2)   The license provisions of this code shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage or carry on any business in the city that consists solely of selling foodstuffs, live plants, art work, or handicrafts at an event or market in the city that is operated by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association. However, nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt any such person from complying with the provisions of any of the ordinances of the city requiring such a person to obtain a permit from the city to conduct, manage or carry on such a business.

     (b)   Interstate Commerce. Nothing in this title shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting or carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California from payment of such licenses as are herein prescribed. Such person shall file a verified statement with the license collector setting forth all of the facts showing that he or she is entitled to such exemption. The statement shall contain the name and location of the person for which the orders are to be solicited or secured, the name and address of the nearest local or state manager, the kind of goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered, the place from where the same are to be shipped or forwarded, the method of solicitation or taking orders, the location of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state of California, the method of delivery, the name and address of the applicant, and any other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption.

     (c)   Veterans. Any veteran, as defined by Section 16001 and Section 16001.5 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, shall be exempt from the payment of license fees for peddling or soliciting upon presentation of proof of such exemption satisfactory to the license collector.

     (d)   Minors, Sixteen Years and Younger. Every natural person of the age of sixteen (16) years or under, whose annual gross receipts from any and all businesses are four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) or less, shall be exempt from payment of any license tax under the provisions of this title.

     (e)   Senior Citizens. Every natural person of the age of sixty-five (65) years or over, whose annual gross receipts from any and all business are four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) or less, shall be exempt from payment of any license tax under the provisions of this title.

     (f)    Nothing in this title shall be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax by any person to conduct or officiate any recreation program or activity provided or sponsored by the city.

     (g)   Nothing in this title shall be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax by any person engaged in the business of providing goods or services to a nonprofit organization that provides activities to the youth of Burlingame, or who conducts or officiates any recreation program or activity provided or sponsored by a legal, nonprofit organization that provides services to the youth of Burlingame; provided however, that any and all persons providing goods or services to other organizations that are not explicitly exempted by this chapter are still required to obtain a business license and pay the annual tax. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1815 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1818 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1853 § 2, (2010))

 

6.04.250 Exclusions.
     Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this title, the terms hereof shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any of the following persons:

     (a)   Any public utility which makes payments to the city of Burlingame under a franchise or similar agreement;

     (b)   Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 16, Subdivision 1(a) of the State Constitution;

     (c)   Insurance companies and associations to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 14 4/5 of the State Constitution;

     (d)   Any person whom the city is not authorized to license under any law or constitution of the United States or the state of California.

     The license collector may require the filing of a verified statement from any person claiming to be exempted or excluded by the provisions of Section 6.04.240 or 6.04.250, which statement shall set forth all facts upon which the exclusion is claimed. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.260 Substitute for other revenue acts.
     Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this title shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such other ordinance. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

6.04.270 Effect on past actions and obligations previously accrued.
     Neither the adoption of this title, nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city of Burlingame, shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.280 Revocation of licenses—Hearing—Subsequent application for license.
     Any license issued under the terms of this code may be suspended or revoked by the city council whenever it shall appear that the licensee has failed to pay the charges imposed by this title, that the business, calling, profession or trade of the person to whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any law of the United States, the state of California, or any ordinance on the city, or that the person conducting the business, trade, profession or calling is of an unfit character to conduct the same, or the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the public, or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license was issued.

     Except as provided in Section 6.04.230, a license issued under this title shall not be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been had by the city council. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee at least three (3) days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at the business address appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the city council the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may be thereafter heard, and, upon due consideration and deliberation by the city council, the complaint may be dismissed, or, if the city council concludes that charges have been sustained and substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license of the permittee, and the action of the city council shall be final and conclusive and no appeal therefrom shall be had.

     If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof nor any person acting for him or her directly or indirectly shall be entitled to another license to carry on the same or any similar business within the city unless the application for such license shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992))

 

6.04.290 License tax a debt.
     The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this title shall be deemed a debt to the city of Burlingame, and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license tax and penalties imposed on such business. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.300 Both criminal and civil action authorized for failure to pay license tax.
     The conviction of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this title; all remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.310 Effect of mistake.
     In no case shall any mistake made by the city in stating the amount of a license tax prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a business subject to a license tax under this title. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

 

6.04.320 Evidence of liability.
     In any action brought under or arising out of any of the provisions of this title, or of any ordinance imposing a license tax, the fact that a party thereto represented him or herself as engaged in any business or calling for the transaction of which a license is required, or that such party exhibited a sign indicating such business or calling, shall be presumptive evidence of the liability of such party to pay for a license for such business. (Ord. 1125 § 2, (1978))

Chapter 6.08 LICENSE TAXES
6.08.010 General.
     For every person engaged in carrying on or maintaining any profession, trade, occupation, calling or business, the license tax shall be as set forth in the following sections. (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978))

 

6.08.020 License taxes.
     The following persons shall pay an annual license tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00).

     (a)   Every person conducting or carrying on the business consisting of selling any goods, wares and merchandise or commodities, or services, or conducting or carrying on any profession, trade, occupation, calling or business not otherwise specifically taxed by this chapter.

     (b)   Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who engages in business within the city, including contractors.

     (c)   Every person conducting a home occupation as defined by Section 25.08.350 of this code.

     (d)   Every person conducting or carrying on the business of selling Christmas trees, except where such business is conducted in connection with another regularly established place of business for which a license has been issued. (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1669 § 1, (2001))

 

6.08.040 Subcontractors.
     Every person conducting or carrying on the business of contractor shall furnish the collector the names and addresses of all subcontractors doing work on each such construction or work and the premises on which it is located. (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978))

 

6.08.060 Theaters.
     Every person conducting or operating an indoor or outdoor theater for showing moving pictures, or for the presentation of plays, musicals, operas, operettas, revues or similar presentations of entertainment and amusement, having a seating capacity of not more than one thousand (1,000) persons, shall pay an annual license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and every person conducting or operating such a theater having a seating capacity in excess of one thousand (1,000) persons shall pay an annual license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1663 § 2, (2001))

 

6.08.080 Amusement devices.
     In addition to an annual business license, every business having upon its premises amusement machines or devices including any machine, instrument or apparatus for the purpose of producing, reproducing or playing any musical tone or tones or combination of tones requiring a coin, token or other substitute therefor to be deposited therein, shall pay an annual license tax of ten dollars ($10.00) for each machine. (Ord. 1125 § 3,, (1978); Ord. 1223 § 1, (1982); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1663 § 4, (2001))

 

6.08.085 Operators of commercial parking facilities.
     (a)   Commercial Parking Facility Defined. “Commercial parking facility” means any privately owned or operated facility that provides, for any form of consideration, parking or storage for motor vehicles, motorcycles, trailers, bicycles, or other similar means of conveyance for passengers or property. “Commercial parking facility” does not include a parking facility that is:

     (1)   Not the predominant use of the parcel on which the parking facility is located; or

     (2)   Leased or owned by a business and operated exclusively to park or store vehicles that are owned or leased by that same business; or

     (3)   Leased or owned by a business and operated exclusively to park or store vehicles that are part of that same business’ inventory for purposes of sale, lease, or resale.

     (b)   Operator Defined. “Operator” means any person who, as owner, lessee, employee, agent, or otherwise, operates, maintains, manages, keeps, permits, or allows to be operated, maintained, managed, or keep any commercial parking facility in or upon any premises owned, leased, managed, operated, or controlled by such person within the city.

 

     (c)   The operator of a commercial parking facility in the city shall pay an annual license tax of five (5) percent of the gross receipts received from the operation of the commercial parking facility without deduction therefrom.

     (d)   Each operator of a facility shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the license collector, make a return to the license collector, on forms provided by the collector of the total tax. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax shall be remitted to the license collector. The license collector may establish shorter reporting periods for any operator if the collector deems it necessary in order to insure timely collection of the tax; and the collector may also require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. (Ord. 1670, § 1, (2001))

 

6.08.110 Motor vehicles sales.
     Every person conducting or operating the business of selling new, or used motor vehicles, shall pay an annual license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1663 § 5, (2001))

 

6.08.140 Peddlers and solicitors.
     (a)   Every person who conducts the business of peddling or soliciting under a license obtained pursuant to Chapter 6.24 of this code shall pay an annual license fee of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) payable in advance; provided, however, that any person maintaining a regular route of established deliveries of food products shall pay an annual license fee as provided in Section 6.08.020 above.

     (b)   As used herein the term “established delivery” means a delivery of articles of food over a definite route of travel, serving regular customers and which route has been established for at least one year.

     (c)   The license fee require by this section is imposed on and payable by the business and not on or by each individual employee of the business that is engaged in peddling or soliciting. (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1663 § 6, (2001); Ord. 1776 § 3, (2006))

 

6.08.150 Closing-out sales.
     The license fee for closing-out sales under a license obtained pursuant to Chapter 6.20 of this code shall be as established in the following schedule:

     If the applicant has been operating the business to be closed out under a valid city business license for:

     (a)   A period of six (6) months or less prior to the date the application is filed: $100.00.

     (b)   More than six (6) months: $50.00.

     (c)   More than two (2) years: $10.00. (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1663 § 7, (2001))

 

6.08.170 Curb, street and sidewalk sign painters.
     For traveling from house to house or place to place for the purpose of painting house or address numbers upon private real property or an adjacent street curb; or for placing or maintaining any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design or other marking to identify the premises of any such property upon any street, sidewalk or curb, the license tax shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per person in addition to any solicitor’s licenses which may be required. (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1663 § 8, (2001))

 

6.08.180 Rental car agencies.
     Every person conducting or operating the business of renting autos, trucks, or other vehicles for periods of thirty (30) days or less, not in conjunction with an auto or truck sales agency or automobile service business situated in the city, shall pay an annual license tax of three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 1125 § 3, (1978); Ord. 1459 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1663 § 9, (2001))

Chapter 6.10 MINIMUM WAGE
6.10.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

     (a)   “Calendar week” means a period of seven (7) consecutive days starting on Sunday.

     (b)   “City” means the city of Burlingame.

     (c)   “Employee” means any person who qualifies as an employee entitled to payment of a minimum wage from any employer under the California Minimum Wage law, as provided under Section 1197 of the California Labor Code and wage orders published by the State of California Industrial Welfare Commission. Employees shall include learners, as defined by the California Industrial Welfare Commission.

     (d)   “Employer” means any person (including a natural person, corporation, non-profit corporation, general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company, business trust, estate, trust, association, joint venture, agency, instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity, whether domestic or foreign), who directly or indirectly (including through the services of a temporary services or staffing agency or similar entity) employs or exercises control over the wages, hours or working conditions of any employee.

     (f)    “Minimum wage” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.10.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 1982 § 2, (2020))

 

6.10.020 Minimum wage.
     (a)   Employers shall pay employees no less than the minimum wage for each hour worked within the geographic boundaries of the city.

     (b)   The minimum wage paid shall be as follows: Beginning January 1, 2021, the minimum wage shall be an hourly rate of fifteen dollars ($15.00).

     (c)   Beginning on January 1, 2022, and each January thereafter, the minimum wage shall increase by an amount equal to the prior year’s increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose as determined by the United States Department of Labor. The change shall be calculated by using the August to August change in the CPI to calculate the annual increase, if any. A decrease in the CPI shall not result in a decrease in the minimum wage.

     (d)   An employee who is a learner, as defined by California Industrial Welfare Commission Order No. 4-2001, shall be paid no less than eighty-five (85) percent of the applicable minimum wage for the first one hundred sixty (160) hours of employment. Thereafter, the employee shall be paid the applicable minimum wage rate.

     (e)   An employer may not deduct an amount from wages due an employee on account of any tip or gratuity, or credit the amount or any part thereof, of a tip or gratuity, against, or as a part of, the wages due the employee from the employer.

     (f)    Exemptions: (1) first degree relatives (defined as the parents, siblings, or children) of a natural person who is an employer under this chapter or who is the sole owner or in sole control of an employer are exempt from the minimum wage required by this chapter, although all other relevant labor and employment laws continue to apply; and (2) persons who act as independent contractors or who otherwise provide services without attaining the status of an employee are exempt from the minimum wage required by this chapter. (Ord. 1982 § 2, (2020))

 

6.10.030 Notice and posting.
     (a)   By October 1 of each year, the city shall publish and make available to employers a bulletin announcing the adjusted minimum wage rate, to take effect January 1 of the following year. In conjunction with this bulletin, the city shall, by November 1 of each year, publish and make available to employers, in English and other languages as provided in any implementing regulations, a notice suitable for posting by employers in the workplace informing employees of the current minimum wage rate and of their rights under this chapter.

     (b)   Each employer shall give written notification to each current employee, and to each new employee at time of hire, of his/her/their rights under this chapter. The notification shall be in English and other languages as provided in any implementing regulations, and shall also be posted prominently in areas at the work site where it will be seen by all employees. Every employer shall also provide each employee, at the time of hire, with the employer’s name, address, and telephone number in writing. Failure to post such notice shall constitute a violation of this municipal code. The city is authorized to prepare sample notices and employers’ use of such notices shall constitute compliance with this subsection. (Ord. 1982 § 2, (2020))

 

6.10.040 Implementation.
     The city may promulgate regulations for the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. Any regulation promulgated by the city shall have the force and effect of law and may be relied on by employers, employees and other parties to determine their rights and responsibilities under this chapter. Any regulations may establish procedures for ensuring fair, efficient and cost-effective implementation of this chapter, including supplementary procedures for informing employees of their rights under this chapter, for monitoring employer compliance with this chapter, and for providing administrative hearings or determining whether an employer has violated the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1982 § 2, (2020))

 

6.10.050 Enforcement.
     (a)   Enforcement by the City. The city may take any enforcement action set forth in Title 1 of this municipal code to address violations of this chapter. Alternatively, the city may elect to contract for enforcement services with a third party. If the city elects to enter into such a contract, the city shall provide public, written procedures for such enforcement and any such enforcement shall be consistent with the due process rights established by Title 1 of this code and relevant law.

     (b)   Private Rights of Action. An employee claiming harm from a violation of this chapter may bring an action against the employer in court to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall be entitled to all remedies available to correct any violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, back pay, reinstatement, injunctive relief, or civil penalties as provided herein. An employee who is a prevailing party in an action to enforce this chapter is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney fees, witness fees, and costs.

     (c)   Remedies.

     (1)   The remedies for violation of this chapter include, but are not limited to:

     (A)  Reinstatement, the payment of back wages unlawfully withheld, and payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to each employee whose rights under this chapter were violated for each day or portion thereof that the violation occurred or continued, and fines imposed pursuant to other provisions of this code or state law.

     (B)   Interest on all due and unpaid wages at the rate of interest specified in subdivision (b) of Section 3289 of the California Civil Code, which shall accrue from the date that the wages were due and payable as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Section 200) of Division 2 of the California Labor Code, to the date the wages are paid in full.

     (C)   Reimbursement of the city’s administrative costs of enforcement and reasonable attorney fees.

     (D)  The city may require the employer to pay an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the city for each employee or person whose rights, under this chapter, were violated for each day or portion thereof that the violation occurred or continued, and fines imposed pursuant to other provisions of this code or state law, where there has been a previous violation of this chapter.

     (2)   The remedies, penalties and procedures provided under this chapter are cumulative and are not intended to be exclusive of any other available remedies, penalties and procedures established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this chapter. Actions taken pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other action, administrative or judicial, that may be brought to abate a violation or to seek compensation for damages suffered.

     (d)   Retaliation Barred.

     (1)   An employer shall not discharge, reduce the compensation or otherwise retaliate against any employee for making a complaint to the city, participating in any of the city’s proceedings, using any civil remedies to enforce his or her rights, or otherwise asserting his or her rights under this chapter. Within one hundred twenty (120) days of an employer being notified of such activity, it shall be unlawful for the employer to discharge any employee who engaged in such activity unless the employer has clear and convincing evidence of just cause for such discharge.

     (2)   No employer may fund increases in compensation required by this chapter, nor otherwise respond to the requirements of this chapter, by reducing the wage rate paid to any employee, nor by increasing charges to them for parking, meals, uniforms or other items, nor by reducing the citation or other non-wage benefits of any such employee, except to the extent such prohibition would be pre-empted by the Federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act.

     (e)   Retention of Records. Each employer shall maintain for at least three (3) years for each employee, a record of his or her name, hours worked and pay rate. Each employer shall provide each employee a copy of the records relating to such employee upon the employee’s reasonable request. (Ord. 1982 § 2, (2020))

 

 

6.10.060 Reserved.
(Ord. 1982 § 2, (2020); Ord. 1984 § 1, (2020))

 

6.10.070 No pre-emption of higher standards.
     The purpose of this chapter is to ensure minimum labor standards. This chapter does not pre-empt or prevent the establishment of superior employment standards (including higher wages) or the expansion of coverage by ordinance, resolution, contract, or any other action of the city. This chapter shall not be construed to limit a discharged employee’s right to bring a common law cause of action for wrongful termination. (Ord. 1982 § 2, (2020))

 

6.10.080 Federal or state funding.
     This chapter shall not be applied to the extent it will cause the loss of any federal or state funding of city activities. (Ord. 1982 § 2, (2020))

Chapter 6.16 ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
6.16.010 Purpose.
     This chapter is intended to regulate businesses that offer entertainment in order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. Over the years, the city has had a variety of businesses that offered entertainment at different locations in the city, and each location had a number of issues involving security, patron safety, and interaction with nearby businesses, homes, and public activity. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any entertainment activity. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.020 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:

     (a)   “ABC” means the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

     (b)   “Amusement arcade” means any business or establishment which has five (5) or more amusement devices on its premises for the purpose of being played, operated or used by the patrons of the arcade on a prepaid basis or for money or tokens deposited in the amusement machine played, operated, or used. “Amusement arcade” also means any premises where twenty-five (25) percent or more of the public floor area is devoted to amusement devices, whether or not amusement devices constitute a primary use or an accessory use of the premises.

     (c)   “Amusement device” means any device, game, or contrivance, including, but not limited to pinball machines, video games, computer games, and electronic games, for which a charge or payment is received for the privilege of playing, using, or operating the same and which, as the result of such use, operation, or playing does not entitle the person using, operating, or playing such device, game, or contrivance to receive the same return in market value in the form of tangible merchandise each time such device, game, or contrivance is used, operated, or played.

     (d)   “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city or the chief’s authorized representative.

     (e)   “Entertainment” means any show, play, skit, musical revue, karaoke, dance production, concert, opera, or the production or provision of sights or sounds or visual or auditory sensations, which are designed to or may divert, entertain, or otherwise appeal to members of the public who are admitted to a place of entertainment, and which is produced by any means, including radio, phonograph, tape recorder, piano, orchestra or band, or any other musical instrument, television, slide or movie projector, spotlights, or interruptible or flashing light devices.

     (f)    “Entertainment business” means any amusement arcade or any place of business wherein entertainment is offered or given to the public, whether or not a fee is charged for admission thereto, except businesses where only incidental entertainment is offered or given and theaters.

     (g)   “Incidental entertainment” means the use of radio, television, or music recording devices or juke boxes in any establishment when used for background only. In addition, this term includes non-amplified live performance by a performer (or performers). This term does not include the use of the devices mentioned above by a disc jockey, or in conjunction with karaoke, or in connection with dancing by patrons.

     (h)   “Primary entertainment” means entertainment provided at an entertainment business where the predominant reason for patronage is to observe or participate in the entertainment offered at the business, and admission to the establishment is charged either separately, or as part of a cover charge, or minimum food or beverage purchase requirement.

     (i)    “Security guard” means a uniformed person licensed under the California Department of Consumer Affairs licensing and training requirements.

     (j)    “Secondary entertainment” means entertainment provided at an entertainment business where the observation or participation in the entertainment offered is not the predominant reason for patronage, and no admission to the establishment is charged either separately, or in the form of a cover charge, or minimum food or beverage purchase requirement.

     (k)   “Theater” means an establishment that is primarily devoted to film or theatrical performances and means a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage upon which theatrical, movies, or live performances are presented, and where such performances are not incidental to promoting the sale of food, drink or other merchandise; and for which a city business license for a theater is in full force and effect. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.030 Permit required.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of an entertainment business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the city as required by this chapter.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person who owns, leases, or is in otherwise lawful possession of property to permit or allow another person to arrange for and provide entertainment on such property, unless the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession of the property first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a single event entertainment permit as herein required. This provision shall apply to premises that are used on an occasional basis for entertainment events conducted either:

     (1)   By persons who are not the property owners and who have not conducted such an event at the property in the previous six (6) months; or

     (2)   By the property owners and who have not conducted such an event at the property in the previous six (6) months. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 2005)

 

6.16.040 Exceptions.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to entertainment that is:

     (a)   Entertainment sponsored by the city, the county of San Mateo, the various public boards of education, or by any other political subdivision of the state; or

     (b)   Entertainment sponsored by any nonprofit public benefit organization, whose primary objective is the sponsoring and control of youth activities and child welfare. If the event is a dance, the following requirements must be met:

     (1)   No person eighteen (18) years of age or older may be admitted as a guest, unless such person is a bona fide student at, or member of, the sponsoring agency or organization;

     (2)   No alcoholic beverages are served, consumed, or permitted on the premises;

     (3)   Chaperones from the sponsoring agency are present on the premises at the rate of two (2) adults, who are at least twenty-five (25) years of age or older, for every one hundred (100) guests, and

     (4)   The event must finish by 12:00 a.m. and the premises and the adjoining parking lots must be promptly vacated by all the guests; or

     (c)   Entertainment lawfully conducted under permit at any city park, building, or recreational facility; or

     (d)   Entertainment lawfully conducted entirely upon property owned or controlled by a governmental entity; or

     (e)   Incidental entertainment only; or

     (f)    Entertainment provided for members and their guests at a private club having an established membership when admission is not open to the public. For purposes of this section, private club means corporations or associations operated solely for objects of national, social, fraternal, patriotic, political, or athletic nature, in which membership is by application and regular dues are charged, and the advantages of which club belong to members, and the operation of which is not primarily for monetary gain; or

     (g)   Entertainment provided for invited guests at a private event such as a wedding reception, banquet, or celebration, where there is no admission charge and the general public is neither invited nor admitted; or

     (h)   Street performers, such as musicians, singers, or mimes; or

 

     (i)    Entertainment conducted or sponsored by any religious organization, bona fide club, organization, society, or association that is exempt from taxation pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), when all proceeds, if any, arising from such entertainment are used exclusively for the benevolent purposes of such religious organization, club, society, or association; or

     (j)    Performances by the students at educational institutions as defined by the Education Code where such performances are part of an educational or instructional curriculum or program;

     (k)   Theaters; or

     (l)    Dance lessons, theatrical and performing arts lessons, and student recitals; or

     (m)  Book readings, book signings, poetry recitations, and any other similar entertainment consisting of the spoken word, including plays; or

     (n)   The normal and customary fitness services provided by an athletic club or fitness center; or

     (o)   Entertainment provided as at a conference or convention as part of the convention’s or conference’s overall program and to which the general public is neither invited nor admitted; or

     (p)   An adult oriented business that is offering entertainment solely in conformance with a current city adult oriented business permit;

     (q)   A remote broadcast by a television or radio station that consists of the spoken word; if music is a part of the broadcast, the music shall either be non-amplified at the remote location or shall last no longer than a total of five (5) minutes during any fifteen (15) minute period. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.050 Application requirements.
     (a)   Any person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an entertainment business in the city shall file an application with the chief of police upon a form provided by the city and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be refundable.

     (b)   All applications shall include the following information:

     (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age.

     (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited.

 

     (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the officer for service of process.

     (c)   If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an authorized officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application.

     (d)   If the applicant intends to operate the entertainment business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall provide the fictitious name of the entertainment business.

     (e)   The application shall contain a description of the type of entertainment business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the entertainment business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the entertainment business site.

     (f)    The application shall include the address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed; this address will also be used for contact and notices during the life of the permit unless the permittee provides written notice to the police department that the address has been changed.

     (g)   The application shall include a sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the entertainment business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one foot.

     (h)   The application shall include a description of the lighting to be provided inside the entertainment business; a sketch or site plan depicting the lighting and security measures to be provided at all entrances and exits to the business; and a sketch of the site plan of any private parking areas that will serve the entertainment business and the lighting and security measures to be provided at those areas.

     (i)    A brief description of the entertainment to be offered and the hours during which the entertainment may be offered.

     (j)    The application shall describe the type of security and crowd management to be provided for the entertainment business. This description shall specifically describe procedures for admitting and re-admitting patrons, checking identification, enforcing dress codes, and removal of unruly patrons from the premises. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

 

 

6.16.060 Investigation and action on application.
     (a)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the chief of police shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an entertainment permit.

     (b)   The applicant is responsible for making an appointment with the chief of police to discuss the security program for the entertainment business, and no application shall be approved until such a meeting has been held.

     (b)   Within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of the completed application, the chief of police shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

     (1)   The chief of police shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

     (2)   If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

     (3)   If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an entertainment permit together with the standard conditions of operation and any special conditions developed in consultation with the applicant to address specific site concerns.

     (4)   The decision of the chief of police shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

     (c)   The chief of police shall grant the application and issue the entertainment permit upon findings that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter and the application is not subject to denial pursuant to Section 6.16.070 of this chapter.

     (d)   If the chief of police neither grants nor denies the application within fifteen (15) business days after it is stamped as received, the applicant may begin operating the entertainment business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter. If the applicant begins operating the entertainment business because the chief of police has not granted or denied the application within fifteen (15) business days, the chief of police may issue the permit after the fifteen (15) day period has elapsed, and the permit shall be subject to suspension or revocation under the provisions of Section 6.16.120. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.070 Permit denial.
     The chief of police shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

     (a)   The building, structure, equipment, or location to used by the entertainment business does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the city, county of San Mateo, and the state, or with the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter. However, approval of the permit by the chief of police shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the city, the county, or the state of any such laws or a determination that the building, structure, equipment, or location complies with such laws.

     (b)   The applicant, or an employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder, or manager of the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an entertainment permit or the application process.

     (c)   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.

     (d)   The required application fee has not been paid.

     (e)   Within the last five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filling of the application, the applicant, or an employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder, or manager of the applicant has either had an entertainment permit issued by the city or any other jurisdiction revoked, or has engaged in conduct that would provide grounds for revocation of such a permit under Section 6.16.120 of this chapter.

     (f)    The applicant has failed to provide a complete application. If an application is denied on this basis, the chief of police shall state the information that is needed to make the application complete.

     (g)   The applicant has failed to make an appointment to meet with the chief of police within five (5) business days of filing the application. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.080 Permits nontransferable.
     (a)   A permittee shall not operate an entertainment business under the authority of an entertainment permit at any place other than the address of the entertainment business stated in the application for the permit.

     (b)   A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an entertainment business or transfer an entertainment permit to another person.

     (c)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.090 Single event entertainment permit applications.
     (a)   Every person who owns, leases, or is otherwise in lawful possession of property and who proposes to permit or allow another person to arrange for and provide entertainment on such property in the city shall file an application for an entertainment permit under the provisions of Section 6.16.050 (unless such person has already obtained an entertainment permit) and in addition, shall file an application with the chief of police for a single event entertainment permit. The applicant for a single event entertainment permit shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be refundable.

     (b)   The single event entertainment permit application shall include the following information:

     (1)   If the person who will arrange and provide entertainment is an individual, the applicant shall state their legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age.

     (2)   If the person who will arrange and provide entertainment is a partnership, the applicant shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

     (3)   If the person who will arrange and provide entertainment is a corporation, the applicant shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

     (4)   The application shall contain a description of the type of entertainment for which the permit is requested, the proposed address where the entertainment will be provided, including the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the property, and the date and the hours during which the entertainment will be conducted.

     (5)   The application shall include a description of the lighting to be provided inside the entertainment venue; a sketch or site plan depicting the lighting and security measures to be provided at all entrances and exits to the venue; and a sketch of the site plan of any private parking areas that will serve the entertainment venue and the lighting and security measures to be provided at those areas.

     (6)   The application shall describe the type of security and crowd management to be provided for the entertainment venue. This description shall specifically describe procedures for admitting and re-admitting patrons, checking identification, enforcing dress codes, and removal of unruly patrons from the premises.

     (7)   The application shall include the address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed; this address will also be used for contact and notices during the life of the permit unless the permittee provides written notice to the police department that the address has been changed.

     (8)   The application shall disclose whether the person who will arrange and provide entertainment has in the past been issued an entertainment permit by the city, or by any other jurisdiction, and if so, shall disclose the issuing agency, the dates during which the permit was valid. In addition, the applicant shall disclose whether the person who will arrange and provide entertainment has ever had an entertainment permit, or similar authorization revoked or voluntarily surrendered because of the violation of permit conditions.

     (c)   The applicant is responsible for scheduling a meeting with the chief of police within five (5) business days of filing the application to discuss security arrangements. No permit shall be issued unless such a meeting has occurred.

     (d)   The entertainment authorized by a single event entertainment permit shall be limited to the type and location of entertainment specified in the permit application. The permittee shall not permit or allow entertainment not described in the permit application to be provided. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.100 Investigation and action on single event permit applications.
     (a)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the chief of police shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued a single event entertainment permit.

     (b)   Within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of the completed application, the chief of police shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

     (1)   The chief of police shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

     (2)   If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

     (3)   If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an entertainment permit together with the standard conditions of operation and any special conditions developed in consultation with the applicant to address specific site concerns.

     (4)   If the application is granted or denied, the decision and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the Unites States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

     (c)   The chief of police shall grant the application and issue the single event entertainment permit upon findings that the applicant has obtained an entertainment permit and met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 6.16.110 of this chapter. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the entertainment business premises on the date of the single event.

     (d)   If the chief of police grants the application or if the chief of police neither grants nor denies the application within fifteen (15) business days after it is stamped as received, the applicant may conduct the single event for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.110 Single event entertainment permit denial.
     The chief of police shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

     (a)   The applicant has not obtained an entertainment permit.

     (b)   The building, structure, equipment, or location proposed for the single event does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the city, the county of San Mateo, and the state, or with the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter.

     (c)   The applicant, or the person arranging and providing the entertainment, or an employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder, or manager of the applicant or the person arranging and providing the entertainment have knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a single event entertainment permit.

     (d)   An applicant, or the person arranging and providing the entertainment, is under eighteen (18) years of age.

     (e)   The required application fee has not been paid.

     (f)    Within the last five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, the applicant, or the person arranging and providing the entertainment, or an employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder, or manager of the applicant or the person arranging and providing the entertainment have either had an entertainment permit issued by the city or any other jurisdiction revoked, or have engaged in conduct that would provide grounds for revocation of such a permit under Section 6.16.120.

     (g)   The applicant has failed to provide a complete application. If an application is denied on this basis, the chief of police shall state the information that is needed to make the application complete. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.115 Reviews.
     (a)   Upon initial issuance of an entertainment business permit, the permit shall be subject to review by the chief of police after six (6) months from date of issuance.

     (b)   Each entertainment permit shall be subject to annual review in June or July by the chief of police.

     (c)   During a review, the chief of police may request a permittee to meet with the chief to discuss any problems or concerns. A permittee shall attend such a meeting as directed, and failure to attend shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.120 Suspension or revocation of entertainment permits and single event entertainment permits.
     An entertainment permit or a single event entertainment permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

     (a)   On determining that grounds for permit revocation may exist and that a suspension or revocation should be considered at that time, the chief of police shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support of the consideration. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the address of the permittee as last provided by the permittee in connection with the entertainment permit, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with following procedures, as may be supplemented by procedures established by the chief of police:

     (1)   All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The chief of police’s decision may be appealed in accordance with Section 6.16.140.

     (b)   A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of its permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an entertainment business:

     (1)   The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city.

     (2)   The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an entertainment business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the entertainment business, or in the case of a single event entertainment permit, the permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager has knowingly allowed or permitted and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following at the single entertainment event:

     (A)  Any conduct prohibited by this chapter; or

     (B)   Any violation of any condition of the entertainment permit.

     (3)   Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate city official.

     (4)   Failure to comply with all applicable state and local law in the operation of the entertainment business.

     (c)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the chief of police finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violations, the chief of police shall impose one of the following:

     (1)   A warning;

     (2)   Imposition of conditions to correct the violations that occurred;

     (3)   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six (6) months, which may include imposition of additional conditions upon re-opening to correct the violations that occurred; or

     (4)   Revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1793 § 4, (2006))

 

6.16.130 Emergency suspension of permit.
     The chief of police may suspend an entertainment permit pending a hearing on the suspension or revocation of the permit if the chief of police finds that there is an impending and significant threat to the public health or safety arising out of the use of the entertainment permit. No emergency suspension shall remain in effect for more than fifteen (15) days, unless the permittee agrees to a longer term. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.140 Appeals and judicial review.
     An applicant who wishes to appeal the decision of the chief of police regarding an application or an action to suspend or revoke a permit may do so under the following hearing procedures:

     (a)   An appeal of the chief of police’s decision on a permit application or from the chief of police’s decision after a permit revocation or suspension hearing, may be made by filing a written request for appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date the decision was mailed. If no appeal is filed within this time period, then the decision of the chief of police shall become final, and the applicant shall be deemed to have waived all rights to appeal or other review. All requests for appeal shall include a statement of the basis for the appeal and the errors claimed to have occurred.

     (b)   The city manager or the manager’s designee shall schedule a hearing on the appeal for not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days from the date of mailing notice to the applicant of the time and place of the appeal hearing. The notice of hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the applicant within five (5) days of filing a timely notice of appeal.

     (c)   The city manager or the manager’s designee shall review the written record and allow testimony to be given. The city manager or designee shall also allow oral argument. After all verbal testimony has been reviewed, the city manager or designee shall render a written decision within ten (10) working days from the date the matter is submitted for decision. The action of the city manager or designee shall be final and conclusive, subject only to applicable court review.

     (d)   If the chief of police’s decision is affirmed on appeal, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 or 1094.8 (if that section is applicable). The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review, if sought by the permittee. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.150 Performance standards for entertainment businesses.
     The following performance standards shall apply to all entertainment businesses except amusement arcades, and shall be deemed conditions of all entertainment permits. Failure to comply with each such requirement, unless expressly provided otherwise in the specific entertainment permit, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter:

     (a)   Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed, and provided in accordance with the fire and building regulations and standards of the city. A manager shall be on the premises at all times during which entertainment is being offered.

     (b)   The premises within which the entertainment business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside the premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building and comply with all applicable city noise regulations. The establishment shall measure the current twenty-four (24) hour ambient noise levels (L10) at the exterior of the property along the public right-of-way using a methodology approved by the director of community development before opening for business. Upon request by the city, the establishment shall conduct noise measurements to determine whether the noise from the establishment is exceeding the five (5) dBA standard for increases in noise from the baseline as provided in the Burlingame General Plan, and shall report the measurements to the city, and the establishment shall ensure that the five (5) dBA standard is not exceeded.

     (c)   No entertainment shall be permitted between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.

     (d)   The business premises offering entertainment shall be suitably lighted with minimum lighting of six (6)-candle power at floor level, except during performances on stages. This light intensity shall be measured at no more than thirty (30) inches from the floor.

     (e)   All patrons shall be out of the building by 2:00 a.m. Specific times for last call for any alcohol service may be determined by the chief of police based on the number of entertainment businesses within one thousand (1,000) feet, with the objective of staggering the closing times to reduce potential traffic problems and conflicts and make police patrol and security more efficient.

     (f)    Security personnel shall be visible at the primary entrance beginning no later than thirty (30) minutes before closing of the entertainment business and shall remain until patrons are dispersed. Security shall not permit crowds or patrons to loiter in the front of or in the immediate vicinity of the entertainment business after closing. If a cover charge is charged to enter the establishment, the establishment shall ensure that patrons in line to enter do not obstruct either the public sidewalk or the public street.

     (g)   The permittee shall remove all litter from the front of the entertainment site and public sidewalks adjacent to and within fifty (50) feet of the front of the entertainment site immediately upon every closing.

     (h)   Private Rooms. No entertainment shall be offered, permitted, or allowed to take place within a private room the interior of which is not fully visible by a person standing in at least one place within ten (10) feet of the primary entrance to the premises in which the entertainment is offered, unless all of the following conditions are met:

     (1)   Visibility into the private room is provided through the installation in the wall separating the room from a corridor accessible to patrons or the main room of the premises of a twelve (12) square foot window measuring four (4) feet in width by three (3) feet in height, the lower edge of which shall be installed at a point four (4) feet above the floor.

     (2)   The window required by subsection (h)(1) above shall remain completely clear and unobstructed at all times.

     (3)   The dimensions of the windows required by subsection (h)(1) above are the minimum required, but may be larger.

     (4)   The private room shall be lit to at least the illumination that allows a person on the outside of the room to observe the activity of those in the room at all times the room is occupied.

     (5)   Doors providing access to private rooms shall not be equipped with locks of any kind.

     (6)   No private room shall be configured so that the installation of the windows required by subsection (h)(l) above will not provide substantially complete visibility into the private room to a person standing outside the room.

     (i)    Security.

     (1)   For occupancy levels below one hundred (100) persons, the permittee shall provide at least two (2) persons to monitor occupancy and admittance and exterior, interior and parking areas associated with the use at all times that any entertainment is being offered. At least one person will be a front door person responsible for monitoring occupancy and admittance and maintaining a count of persons admitted. At least one other person will monitor exterior areas and will float throughout the interior area to provide a safe environment. When occupancy exceeds one hundred (100) persons, the permittee shall provide security guards to adequately control the environment at a ratio of at least one guard per additional fifty (50) people (or any fraction thereof). The permittee is responsible for providing a safe environment. These security requirements are minimum mandatory requirements. The permittee shall provide security based on all the circumstances surrounding the entertainment provided and patrons expected.

     (2)   Permittee shall designate a front door security presence when open for entertainment. Front door security shall check identification to verify age requirements. Permittee shall educate these persons in admission policy and maximum occupancy limit. Further, permittee shall provide these persons with a means to monitor occupancy, screen for weapons, bottles, drugs, and intoxication, and direct security to prohibit further entry when maximum occupancy is reached. When maximum occupancy exists, permittee shall advise the remaining people in line that the establishment has reached its maximum number of occupants and that there will not be any further admittance.

     (3)   Permittee is responsible for maintaining an outdoor security presence when a crowd is waiting to gain access to the building. Permittee shall post at least one dedicated security guard, in addition one security guard or management employee checking identifications at the door, who will be responsible for providing an organized method of maintaining a line that will not block public sidewalks, driveways, or surrounding business doorways. Permittee shall have the designated outside line security maintain an orderly single file line. Stanchions, ending just prior to the neighboring business, may be used to control the line with the approval of the chief of police. Once the line reaches maximum occupancy, the designated security shall advise all remaining patrons that the line is full. He or she must advise remaining patrons that they are to exit the area in an orderly fashion.

     (4)   Security personnel shall be readily identifiable to customers and law enforcement as either private security or management personnel through use of distinctive clothing or uniforms and identification. Security guards shall wear distinctive uniforms and be readily identifiable as private security personnel to customers and law enforcement.

     (j)    Any violations of the law or threatened violations shall be immediately reported to the police department and full cooperation shall be given by employees and management of the business.

     (k)   No variance from the permitted entertainment shall occur without obtaining an amendment to the permit.

     (l)    No part of the business shall be subleased without notification to the police department.

     (m)  Any fight, ejection of customer, thefts from customers, or any other criminal act occurring at the establishment shall be reported to the police department as soon as any establishment employee or security guard is aware of such an incident.

     (n)   Any request by anyone in the establishment for an employee to contact the police department shall be honored immediately, without question.

     (o)   Labor Code Section 6404.5 regulating smoking shall be enforced at all times.

     (p)   Advertising for the entertainment shall conform to the requirements of this code.

     (q)   No patrons will be admitted to the establishment after 1:00 a.m.

     (r)    For establishments located in either the Burlingame Avenue or the Broadway Commercial District as defined in Title 25 of this code, beverages will only be served in plasticware after 10 p.m. on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday nights and New Year’s Eve, the Wednesday night before Thanksgiving Day, Saint Patrick’s Day, Halloween, and the Fourth of July. In addition, the establishment shall be responsible for applying this condition to other times and events during the year such as grand opening celebrations, anniversaries, and other nights or days in which the establishment has attracted extraordinarily large numbers of or unusually rowdy persons or other special considerations indicate that application of this condition makes good business and practice sense. The exceptions to this are closed, private parties and beverages served in stemware.

     (s)    Permittee shall ensure that all business employees fully cooperate with the police department when asked to provide witness statements, contact information, and requests to return telephone calls as soon as possible.

     (t)    Permittee shall not permit any person in an intoxicated condition to enter or remain in the establishment.

     (u)   The permittee shall meet with the chief of police to discuss the conduct of the establishment upon reasonable request. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1806 § 3, (2007))

 

6.16.160 Performance standards for entertainment businesses where alcoholic beverages are served.
     The following additional requirements shall apply to any entertainment business where alcoholic beverages are served anywhere on site, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter:

     (a)   All alcohol beverage laws shall be strictly enforced. The permittee shall comply with all conditions and restrictions imposed upon the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) license and all applicable ABC regulations.

     (b)   No minors are to be allowed on the premises during hours when there is no food service, unless they are there on lawful business, and no minors shall be al-lowed in the business after 10:00 p.m. when entertainment is being offered. If an ABC Type 47 on-sale general eating place permit has been issued to the permittee, persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall not be allowed in areas where meals are not served.

     (c)   A sign indicating there is an age restriction of twenty-one (21) years and older shall be posted at all entrances to bar areas. This sign shall be readily visible to patrons.

     (d)   The permittee shall participate with ABC programs for refresher bartender and waitress training on no less than an annual basis. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.170 Performance standards for amusement arcades.
     The following requirements shall apply to entertainment businesses providing amusement arcade entertainment; and shall be deemed conditions of the entertainment permit, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

     (a)   All amusement devices within the premises shall be visible to and supervised by an identifiable adult attendant who shall be present at all times when any amusement device is being operated. Such attendant shall be provided with a jacket, vest, or other clothing that clearly identifies such person as an employee of the arcade.

     (b)   The supervision of the patrons on the premises shall be adequate to insure that there is no conduct that unreasonably interferes with the use of surrounding properties.

     (c)   No one under eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to play the amusement devices between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. during the academic year of any public school district with a school in the city; holidays, Saturdays, and Sundays are excluded. No one under eighteen (18) years of age may loiter inside or outside the premises or play amusement devices between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

     (d)   Each arcade maintaining sixteen (16) amusement devices or more shall provide a minimum of one uniformed private security person in addition to the adult attendant from 3:00 p.m. until after closing time during weekdays and at all times during the hours of operation on weekends and holidays. The identity of the security person or persons shall be provided to the chief of police on forms provided by the police department. If there are an unusual amount of police service calls to an amusement arcade with sixteen (16) or more amusement devices, the chief of police may require that the security person required by this subsection be replaced by a security guard.

     (e)   Outside security lighting shall be provided under the direction of and subject to the approval of the police department.

     (f)    Public restroom facilities shall be provided.

     (g)   A minimum of ten (10) foot-candle illumination generally distributed must be contained in all parts of the premises at all times when the arcade is open and when the public is permitted to enter or remain therein.

     (h)   No amusement device shall be situated in such a way that its use will violate any applicable fire regulation or hinder the reasonable egress from and ingress to the premises of the public. A fully dimensioned floor plan indicating the location of each machine and the aisle width for ingress shall be clearly labeled.

     (i)    The business entrance shall be unlocked during all times that the premises is open for use of arcade games.

     (j)    Video surveillance cameras shall be installed in the arcade areas to continually record patron activities to tape or disk during the establishment’s hours of operation. Recorded tapes and disks shall be maintained for a period of at least ninety-six (96) hours after recording. The recorded tapes and disks shall be made available to police personnel upon written request.

     (k)   No alcoholic beverages are allowed in areas operated as amusement arcades.

     (l)    If a token change machine or coin change machine is installed, it shall be protected by an alarm system.

     (m)  The applicant shall restrict access into and out of the facility through the front door(s) only. The rear door shall be equipped with an audible alarm that will sound whenever the door is opened. The door shall be sign posted to indicate the alarm condition.

     (n)   Any pay telephone installed inside the premises or any pay telephone immediately adjacent to the front of the business shall be restricted from receiving incoming calls.

     (o)   No gambling shall be permitted in areas operated as amusement arcades.

     (p)   The permittee shall maintain and keep its amusement devices in good working order and condition. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.190 Display of permit.
     Every entertainment business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such entertainment business in a conspicuous place so that the permit may be readily seen by all persons entering the entertainment business. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.200 Inspections.
     An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, community development department, or other city departments to inspect the premises of an entertainment business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to entertainment businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an entertainment business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1806 § 4, (2007))

 

6.16.210 Compliance with other laws.
     The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other provisions of this code or county or state laws applicable to the entertainment activity or the business within which the activity is conducted. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.220 Interpretation of chapter.
     If ambiguity arises concerning the content or application of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to establish all pertinent facts and to interpret its provisions. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.230 Public nuisance.
     Any entertainment business operated, conducted, or maintained in violation of the requirements of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and in addition to any other remedy provided by this law may be abated through the initiation of a civil enforcement action brought by the city attorney. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

 

6.16.240 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 1767 § 2, (2005))

Chapter 6.20 CLOSING-OUT SALES
6.20.010 License required—Application.
     Except as herein provided it shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, represent or hold out that any sale of goods, wares or merchandise as an insurance, bankruptcy, liquidation, mortgage, insolvent’s, assignee’s, executor’s, administrator’s, receiver’s, removal, closing-out sale or quitting business sale, under the guise of discontinuing business, the sale of any goods from the stock of a bankrupt, trustee or insurance company, or to conduct such sale unless and until a license therefor shall have been received from the license collector.

     To obtain such license, applicant must file a written application therefor and pay a filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The application shall set forth:

     (1)   Location of proposed sale;

     (2)   The reason for the proposed sale;

     (3)   A full, true and correct inventory or statement setting forth the amount and description of the goods or personal property to be sold at such sale;

     (4)   The dates upon and during which the proposed sale is to be conducted;

     (5)   The application shall also be accompanied by the required license fee as established in Section 6.08.150 of this code. (This subsection has been editorially added to reflect the amendments created by Ord. 1125). (1941 Code § 1045, Ord. 538, (1953))

 

6.20.020 Scope of license.
     The license issued for the respective fees set forth in Section 6.08.150 shall authorize the conducting of the respective sales therein licensed upon the dates mentioned in the application; providing, however, that all sales made under such license must be within the period of thirty (30) consecutive days, and the license collector shall not issue any renewal of any such license for a longer period than thirty (30) days upon payment of the license fee as herein provided.

     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or property belonging to any governmental agency or pursuant to the authority of any process of any court, or a bona fide sale of the assets of any estate of a deceased or the sale by the owner of any property upon which his or her home or business is located, or where any goods are being sold by any charitable, fraternal or church organization under the name of “rummage sale.” (1941 Code § 1045, Ord. 538, (1953))

 

6.20.030 Suspension and revocation of license.
     Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be instantly suspended if any goods, merchandise or property other than that described in the statement and inventory furnished in connection with the issuance of such license, is offered for sale, or if any advertising or statement relating to such sale is untrue or misleading, and after such suspension, such license may be revoked by the city council, and it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed with any such sale under any license issued hereunder after the said license has been suspended as herein set forth until such time as the city council shall have restored the same. In the event of suspension or revocation, no part of the license fee shall be refunded. (1941 Code § 1045, Ord. 538, (1953))

 

6.20.040 Inspection of premises.
     It shall be the duty of the chief of police to inspect the premises where such sale is being conducted to ascertain if all of the conditions imposed upon the licensee are being fully carried out. (1941 Code § 1045, Ord. 538, (1953))

 

6.20.050 Penalty for violations.
     The penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be as set forth in Section 1.12.010. (1941 Code § 1045, Ord. 538, (1953))

Chapter 6.22 MERCHANDISE SALES FROM RESIDENCES
6.22.010 No sale without permit.
     No person shall sell or offer for sale any used or new clothing, furniture, appliances, bric-a-brac, or furnishings from a dwelling where the general public is invited to participate by signs or advertising, known as garage sales or backyard sales, without obtaining a permit therefor and conforming to the regulations which follow. (Ord. 908 § 1, (1970))

 

6.22.020 Application for permit.
     To obtain such permit, applicant must file a written application therefor in the office of the license collector which shall set forth:

     (1)   Location of proposed sale;

     (2)   A reasonable inventory of the goods to be offered for sale;

     (3)   Date or dates during which the proposed sale is to be conducted;

     (4)   Names and addresses of all persons providing goods for the sale. (Ord. 908 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1257 § 1, (1983))

 

6.22.030 Time limitation and sign limitation for permitted sales.
     (a)   No permit shall be approved and no such sale shall be permitted for more than five (5) days within any fifteen (15) day period and no more than one such permit shall be issued in any calendar year at any location.

     (b)   A sign, no larger than three (3) square feet in area, may be displayed on the property announcing the sale during the permitted period, other prohibitions of this code notwithstanding. (Ord. 908 § 1, (1970))

 

6.22.031 Displays.
     Personal property offered for sale shall not be displayed or stored in the front or side yards of any premises or on adjoining public streets or rights-of-way, provided that the property may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within the front or side yards. (Ord. 1257 § 2, (1983))

 

6.22.032 Owned personal property.
     All personal property sold at said sale shall have been owned, utilized and maintained for at least six (6) months prior to the sale by person or persons listed on the application or by members of his or her family, on or in connection with, the residential premises which they occupy and shall not have been acquired or consigned for the purpose of resale. (Ord. 1257 § 3, (1983))

Chapter 6.24 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
6.24.010 Permit required.
     Unless exempted from the provisions of this title pursuant to Chapter 6.04, it is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on within the city, the business of peddler or solicitor unless a permit for such business and the individual engaged in peddling or soliciting has first been obtained from the police department of the city and remains in effect in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

 

6.24.020 Application for permit.
     Any person, including those holding a license issued under other chapters of this title, desiring a permit to peddle or solicit (except those who sell to merchants with a fixed place of business for purpose of resale) shall first make an application therefor by filing with the license collector a sworn application in writing on a form to be Famished by the license collector which shall give the following information:

     (a)   Name, residence and telephone number;

     (b)   The previous address of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     (c)   Taxpayers identification number and driver’s license number, if any;

     (d)   Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history investigation purposes) and three (3) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within the last sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which photograph shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinct manner;

     (e)   Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     (f)    Business occupation or employment of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     (g)   The business license, if any, and permit history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or any other city or state, under license has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspensions or revocation;

     (h)   Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If there has been any such conviction, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and thee sentence imposed as a result of such conviction;

     (i)    A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or services to be sold;

     (j)    The name of the business under which the solicitation in the city will be conducted;

     (k)   The application will also include a separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city, its agents and employees to seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

 

6.24.030 Permit fee and investigation.
     All applications for permits shall be accompanied by an investigation and permit fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable, together with the fee charged by the state for fingerprint submittal. Upon receipt of the application, the license collector shall refer the application to the police department, which within a period of ten (10) business days from the date of filing the application shall interview the applicant or any other person and make any other investigation necessary to approve or deny the permit. If the police department is unable to complete its review within ten (10) business days from the date of filing the application, the application will be deemed approved and the department shall issue the permit; however, should the department determine after issuance that the application should have been denied, the permit will be suspended pursuant to Section 6.24.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1823 § 2, (2008))

 

6.24.040 Business license.
     At the time of the application for a permit, applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code unless the applicant will be an employee of another person who has obtained or is obtaining a city business license. No business license shall be issued until the investigation is completed and the permit is approved. The business license shall be issued upon payment of the business license fee as provided in Chapter 6.04 of this code. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

 

6.24.050 Issuance or denial of permit.
     The police department shall issue such permit if all required information has been furnished and the report filed finds that:

     (a)   The applicant has not been convicted of any law involving fraud or moral turpitude; and

     (b)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent oral or written statements to the permit application or to any person investigating the application.

     The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant upon which the reasons have been endorsed by first class mail. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

 

6.24.060 Appeal.
     In the event a permit has been denied, applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice within which to appeal to the city council by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. Notice and a public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the council, at a regular meeting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the appeal and shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant at the address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior thereto;

     (b)   On the date set, the council shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. If the council finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, it shall order the issuance of the permit and business license. If it finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, it shall deny the permit and license;

     (c)   All findings of the council shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

 

6.24.070 License and permit not transferable.
     No license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

 

6.24.080 Display of permit.
     Each person issued a permit under this chapter shall keep it in the person’s personal possession when going door to door conducting any soliciting or peddling in the city, and it shall be displayed to any person upon request. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

 

6.24.085 No soliciting at residence when posted.
     No person shall peddle any services or goods or solicit any payments for any services or goods at any dwelling unit where a sign is prominently posted or displayed indicating “No Solicitors” or “No Soliciting” or a similar indication that no solicitation is desired by the occupant of the dwelling unit. (Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

 

6.24.090 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     (a)   Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager for violation of, or for causing or permitting violation of any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permits in the first instance.

     (b)   Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or the manager’s designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked or whether the permit may be retained. In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of the reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of first class mail.

     (c)   In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit, the permittee may appeal to the city council in the manner as provided in Section 6.24.060. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1776 § 2, (2006))

Chapter 6.30 VALET PARKING
6.30.010 Fixed location valet parking and special event valet parking permits.
     No corporation, partnership or other business entity or employee thereof shall solicit the storage or parking of any motor vehicle unless the corporation, partnership or business entity holds a valid and unrevoked valet parking permit. This chapter shall not apply to any business which provides such parking solely on its premises and does not use the public streets for pick-up, drop-off, or movement of vehicles.

     (a)   A fixed location valet parking permit shall be required for any valet parking operator who performs valet parking services at a business or place of public assembly that utilizes valet parking services on a daily or regularly scheduled basis. Any location which uses valet parking services at least once each week requires a fixed location valet parking permit. Applications for fixed location valet parking permits shall include verification by the owner of an off-street parking garage or lot that a specified number of parking spaces will be guaranteed for the use of the applicant.

     (b)   A special event valet parking permit shall be required of any valet parking operator who performs valet parking services at locations other than those defined as fixed locations in subdivision (a) of this section.

     Special event valet parking permit holders shall provide the police department with seven (7) days’ advance written notice of the location, date, and hours of each special event valet parking operation which they may thereafter perform, or, if seven (7) days’ advance notice is impossible, the permit holders shall notify the police department as soon after the permit holder’s services are engaged for an event as is possible. The police department shall have the right to prohibit the use of a special event valet parking permit at a given location if it finds that there are insufficient parking spaces in the locale and the permit holder has presented no adequate plan to park the vehicles legally.

     There shall be no appeal from the department’s denial unless the notice of an intended event at a particular location has been given twenty (20) days before the event, in which case appeal shall be to the city manager.

     (c)   A holder of valet parking permit may charge a fee for the use of the valet parking service up to the amount approved by the council. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995); 1605 § 2, (1998))

 

6.30.020 Application for permit.
     Any person desiring a fixed location valet parking permit or a special event valet parking permit shall first make an application therefor by filing with the license collector a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the license collector which shall give the following information:

     (a)   Name, residence, and telephone number;

     (b)   The previous address of the applicant during the five (5) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     (c)   Social security number and driver’s license number, if any; whether the driver’s license has been revoked or suspended and the reason therefor;

     (d)   Birth certificate or other written proof acceptable to the police department that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

     (e)   Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history information);

     (f)    Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     (g)   The business license and permit history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state, under license or permit has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;

     (h)   Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, including misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction;

     (i)    The location of the business or event at which the valet parking services will be performed, the location of the drop-off and pick-up site, the off-street parking location at which vehicles will be parked and the number of parking spaces available at that location;

     (j)    Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     (k)   The application will also include a separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city of Burlingame, its agents, and employees to seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application and qualifications and record of the applicant. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995))

 

6.30.030 Corporations and partnerships.
     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. The information hereinafter required shall be provided for each officer of the corporation. If the application is a partnership, the information hereinafter required shall be supplied for each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions above pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995))

 

6.30.040 Permit fee and investigation.
     All applications shall be accompanied by an investigation fee a filing fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, in addition to any charges for processing fingerprints which may be assessed by the State of California, and no part of either fee is refundable. Upon receipt of said application, the license collector shall refer the application to the police department which shall interview the applicant or any other person and make any other investigation necessary to approve or deny the permit. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1823 § 3, (2008))

 

6.30.050 Business license.
     At the time of the application for permit, the applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code. No business license shall be issued until the investigation is completed and the permit is approved. The business license shall be issued upon payment of the business license as provided in Chapter 6.04 of this code. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995))

 

6.30.060 Insurance.
     The applicant shall meet the following insurance requirements throughout the term of any permit issued under this ordinance:

     (a)   Workers’ compensation, with employers liability limits not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each accident, but only if permittee have employees as defined by the California Labor Code.

     (b)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage, including contractual liability, personal injury, broadform property damage, products and completed operations coverage.

     (c)   Comprehensive automobile liability insurance with limits not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage, including owned, non-owned and hired auto coverage, as applicable.

     (d)   Garagekeepers’ legal liability insurance with limits not less than five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) each occurrence, including coverage for fire and explosion, theft of the entire motor vehicle, riot, civil commotion, malicious mischief and vandalism, collision or upset.

     Comprehensive general liability, comprehensive automobile liability and garagekeepers’ legal liability insurance policies shall be endorsed to provide the following:

     (1)   Name as additional insured the city of Burlingame, its officers, agents, and employees.

     (2)   That such policies are primary insurance to any other insurance available to the additional insureds, with respect to any claims arising out of activities conducted under the permit, and that insurance applies separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought.

     All policies shall be endorsed to provide that thirty (30) days’ advance written notice to the city of cancellation, nonrenewal or reduction in coverage. Certificates of insurance, satisfactory to the city, evidencing all coverage above shall be furnished to the city prior to issuance of a permit and renewal of a license or before commencing any operations under a permit, with complete copies of policies furnished to the city upon request. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995))

 

 

6.30.070 Issuance or denial of permit.
     The police department shall issue a permit if all required information has been furnished and the report filed finds that:

     (a)   The character of the applicant is satisfactory;

     (b)   Any owner, officer or partner of the business entity within four (4) years prior to the date of application, has not been convicted of burglary, robbery, theft, receipt of stolen property, breaking or removing parts from a vehicle, malicious mischief to a vehicle, unlawful use or tempering by bailee of a vehicle, altering a vehicle identification number, or any offense related to the use of alcohol, narcotics or controlled substances;

     (c)   The number of proposed off-street parking spaces is sufficient to ensure that the valet parking operation will not be required to use public parking spaces, and such off-street spaces are not required parking for any other business or use during the time of proposed use for valet parking.

     (d)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any false, misleading or fraudulent oral or written statements in his or her application or to any person investigating his or her application.

     The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. The permit may be granted subject to receipt of criminal history information. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant of the disapproval with a copy of the application upon which the reasons have been endorsed by first class mail. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995))

 

6.30.080 Appeal.
     In the event a fixed location permit has been denied, the applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice within which to appeal to the city council by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. Notice and public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the council, set a regular meeting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the appeal, and shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant at his or her address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior thereto.

     (b)   On the date set, the council shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. If the council finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, it shall order the issuance of the permit and business license. If it finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, it shall deny the permit and license.

     (c)   All findings of the council shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995))

 

6.30.090 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager for violation of, or for causing or permitting violation of, any provision of this code or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permits in the first instance.

     Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his or her designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked or whether the permit may be retained. In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of the reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of first class mail.

     In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit, the permittee may appeal to the city council in the manner as provided in Section 6.30.080. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995))

 

6.30.100 Rules and regulations—Additional requirements.
     (a)   The chief of police is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations after noticed hearing to implement this ordinance. Failure to comply with such rules and regulations, or with any other requirements imposed by this ordinance, shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit.

     (b)   The permittee shall have the permit(s) required by this ordinance in its possession at the place where it is conducting any valet parking activity under the permit(s), and shall exhibit such permit(s) on demand of any peace officer.

     (c)   A drop-off and pick-up site upon a public street shall only be at the city approved passenger loading zone set forth in the permit. At no time shall vehicles be accepted for valet parking when stopped in a traffic lane, nor shall vehicles be returned to customers in a traffic lane.

     (d)   At no time shall a valet parking permittee use any public parking space on any street for valet parking. Unless expressly approved by the council, no valet parking permittee shall use any public parking space located in a city parking lot for valet parking.

     (e)   The permittee shall, upon the receipt of each motor vehicle accepted for valet parking, give to the owner or operator a claim check for said motor vehicle; said claim check shall show the corporate or business name of the permittee and shall explicitly state the terms and conditions under which the vehicle is being accepted.

     (f)    The permittee shall, within ten (10) days of the change of location of its off-street parking location, or of the name of the permittee entity or the change in one or more partners or officers or in the ownership of ten (10) percent or more of the corporate stock, inform the police department, in writing, of such change. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1605 § 3, (1998))

 

6.30.110 Requirements for permittee’s employees.
     (a)   Every corporation, partnership or other business entity holding a permit under this ordinance shall maintain a continuously updated list of the names and residence addresses and current driver’s license numbers of all of its employees who perform valet parking. Such list shall be maintained at the business address listed on the permit application, and shall be exhibited on demand of any peace officer.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any employee who has been convicted of any of the offenses listed in Section 6.30.070(b) to perform valet parking.

     (c)   Every employee who performs valet parking shall wear conspicuously upon their person a badge to be provided by the permittee, of a type and design previously approved by the chief of police. Such badge shall contain the name or other individual identification of the employee. In addition, while performing valet parking services, each employee shall wear a brightly colored vest, shirt, or jacket that is readily visible to drivers of motor vehicles. (Ord. 1523 § 1, (1995); 1605 § 4, (1998))

 

6.30.120 Conformance with applicable laws.
     Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, or authorizes, the parking of motor vehicles by valet parking operators in a manner contrary to applicable state laws and local parking and traffic regulations. (Ord. 1523 § 1, 1995))

Chapter 6.36 TAXICABS
6.36.010 Definitions.
     “Driver” means every person in charge of, or operating, any taxicab as defined in this chapter, either as owner or employee or under the direction of owners or employees.

     “Owner” means every person who in any manner has the proprietary use, ownership or control of any taxicab.

     “Taxicab” means a motor-propelled passenger-carrying vehicle of a distinctive color or colors and which is of such a public appearance as is customary for taxicabs in common usage in this country, and which is operated at rates per mile or upon a waiting time basis or both, and is equipped with a taximeter, and which motor-propelled vehicle is used for the transportation of passengers for hire over and along public streets, not over a defined route, but as to route and destination in accordance with, and under the direction of the person hiring such vehicle.

     “Taximeter” means a mechanical device attached to a vehicle for hire, by means of which device the authorized charge for hire of such vehicle is mechanically calculated on the basis of distance traveled, or for waiting time, or a combination of both, which charges shall be indicated upon such mechanical device by means of figures in dollars and cents. (1941 Code § 1437, Ord. 417, (1945); Ord. 1269 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.36.020 Owner and driver permits required.
     It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating any taxicab company, where passenger pick-up is within the city, without first obtaining an owner’s permit from the police department. It is unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab, where passenger pick-up is within the city, without first obtaining a driver’s permit from the police department. All permits shall be non-transferable. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996))

 

6.36.030 Application for permit.
     Any person desiring a permit to own or drive a taxicab shall first make an application therefor by filing with the license collector a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the license collector which shall give the following information. An owner-driver may make a single application and pay a single fee.

     (a)   Name, residence and telephone number;

     (b)   The previous address of the applicant during the five (5) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     (c)   Social Security number and driver’s license number, if any;

     (d)   Birth certificate or other written proof acceptable to the police department that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

     (e)   Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history investigation);

     (f)    Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     (g)   The business license and permit history of the applicant, including a list of other jurisdictions in which the applicant holds a current owner’s or driver’s permit; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state, under license or permit has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;

     (h)   Owner or owner-driver applications shall include license number, make, model and year of all vehicles the applicant proposes to operate, the location of any proposed depots and offices, and the color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant.

     (i)    Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction;

     (j)    Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     (k)   The application will also include a separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city of Burlingame, its agents, and employees to seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application and the qualifications and record of the applicant.

     (l)    The applicant shall provide two (2) passport size photos taken within the last thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1522 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996))

 

6.36.035 Controlled substance testing.
     No application for a new or renewed driver’s permit shall be accepted without proof that the applicant has tested negative for controlled substances as set forth in Section 53.075.5(b)(3) of the Government Code. (Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996))

 

6.36.040 Corporations and partnerships.
     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. The information hereinafter required shall be provided for each officer of the corporation. If the application is a partnership, the information hereinafter required shall be supplied for each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions above pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.36.050 Permit fee and investigation.
     All applications shall be accompanied by a filing and investigation fee in an amount as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Applications for an owner’s permit shall include a certificate of insurance meeting the requirements of this chapter. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs of processing the applicant’s fingerprints by the state of California. Upon receipt of said application, the license collector shall refer the application to the police department which within thirty (30) days of filing the application shall interview the applicant or any other person and make any other investigation necessary to approve or deny the permit, provided that said thirty (30) days may be extended for such period as may be necessary to obtain fingerprint records from the appropriate state agency. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1823 § 4, (2008))

 

6.36.060 Business license.
     At the time of the application for an owner’s or owner-driver’s permit, applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code. No business license shall be issued until the investigation is completed and the permit is approved. The business license shall be issued upon payment of the business license as provided in Chapter 6.04 of this code. In addition, each owner or owner-driver shall pay an annual business license of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each vehicle operated under the permit. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996))

 

6.36.070 Issuance or denial of owner’s permit.
     The police department shall issue an owner’s permit if all required information has been furnished and the report filed finds that:

     (a)   The character of the applicant is satisfactory;

     (b)   The applicant has not been convicted of any crime which would cause him or her to be unfit to operate a taxi company;

     (c)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any false, misleading or fraudulent oral or written statements in his or her application or to any person investigating his or her application;

     (d)   That the name, monogram or insignia to be used upon the vehicles is not in conflict with and does not imitate any other name, monogram, or insignia used by any other person heretofore licensed by the city in such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public.

 

     The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant of the disapproval with a copy of the application upon which the reasons have been endorsed by first class mail. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996))

 

6.36.080 Issuance or denial of driver’s permit.
     The police department shall issue a driver’s permit if all required information has been furnished and the report filed finds that:

     (a)   The character of the applicant is satisfactory;

     (b)   If the applicant is over eighteen (18) years of age;

     (c)   If the applicant possesses a valid driver’s license issued by the state of California;

     (d)   If within the five (5) years preceding the application the applicant has not been convicted of reckless driving or driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors, drugs or narcotics;

     (e)   If the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude; and

     (f)    The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent oral or written statements in his or her application or to any person investigating his or her application.

     The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant of the disapproval with a copy of the application upon which reasons have been endorsed by first class mail. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1832 § 2, (2008))

 

6.36.090 Appeal.
     In the event a permit has been denied, applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice within which to appeal to the city council by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. Notice and public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the council, set a regular meeting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the appeal, and shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant at his or her address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior thereto;

     (b)   On the date set, the council shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. If the council finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, it shall order the issuance of the permit and business license. If it finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, it shall deny the permit and license.

     (c)   All findings of the council shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.36.100 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager for violation of, or for causing or permitting violation of, any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permits in the first instance.

     Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his or her designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked or whether the permit may be retained. In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of the reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of first class mail.

     In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit, the permittee may appeal to the city council in the manner as provided in Section 6.36.090. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.36.110 Rates of fare.
     (a)   Taximeter. It is unlawful for any owner or driver to operate any taxicab in the city unless and until such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter, and it shall be the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to maintain such taximeter in perfect condition so that it will at all times correctly and accurately indicate the correct charge for the distance traveled and waiting time. Such taximeter shall be at all times subject to inspection by the San Mateo county sealer of weights and measures.

     (b)   Dial of Taximeter. Every taximeter shall be equipped so as to register the cost of transportation of passengers in the city and the taximeter shall be so placed in the taxicab that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged may be readily seen by the passengers in the taxicab. It is unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of a taxicab in the city to charge any sum in excess of the amount shown on the dial for conveyance in the taxicab.

     (c)   Taximeter Flag. It is unlawful for a taxicab driver while carrying passengers to display the flag or the device attached to the taximeter in such position as to denote that the vehicle is for hire or to cause the taximeter to record when the vehicle is not actually employed or to fail to cause the device on the taximeter to be placed into a non-recording position at the termination of each and every service.

     (d)   Rates. It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab in the city to fix, charge or collect for a service a rate more than the rate approved by resolution of the city council. Applications for any adjustment in rates shall first be filed in writing with the city clerk, setting forth justification for such adjustment and requesting a hearing thereon. The application shall include a comparison to rates being charged in other cities in San Mateo and Santa Clara Counties. The city council shall set the matter for hearing and any interested person may be heard concerning the requested adjustment.(Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1740 § 2, (2004))

 

6.36.120 Safe maintenance of taxicabs—Inspection.
     (a)   All public passenger vehicles for hire shall be under the supervision and control of the chief of police, and he or she shall not permit any driver to operate any taxicab in the city while the same or any equipment used thereon, or therewith, is unsafe, defective or in an unsanitary condition. Every taxicab shall be at all times subject to the inspection of any police officer of the city.

     (b)   At least every twelve (12) months every taxicab shall be safety checked by an independent state licensed auto service or repair facility which is an approved brake and lamp station. Written proof of the safety check shall be carried in each vehicle.

     (c)   Before placing any taxicab in operation under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the taxicab operator shall present the taxicab to the police department for inspection to ensure that the taxicab complies with the requirements of this chapter. In addition, not more than sixty (60) days before the annual renewal of the operator’s permit, the operator shall present all of its taxicabs that are being operated by the taxicab operator under the operator’s permit to the police department for inspection to ensure that the taxicab complies with the requirements of this chapter.

     (d)   An inspection fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time shall be paid by the taxicab operator before the initial or annual city inspection is performed. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1522 § 2, (1995); Ord. 1823 § 5, (2008))

 

6.36.130 Insurance.
     Each owner shall carry liability insurance in the amount of not less than three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00) per accident for bodily injury and property damage. All insurance shall name the city as additional insured; such insurance shall be primary to all others and shall contain a provision that it will not be canceled except upon thirty (30) days’ written notice to the city. All insurance carriers shall be admitted in the state of California. Evidence of current insurance shall be on file with the city clerk at all times. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1505 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1708 § 2, (2003))

 

6.36.132 Markings and decal required.
     (a)   Each taxicab operated by the holder of an owner’s permit shall be painted and marked in accordance with the application currently on file with the license collector.

     (b)   No color, markings or insignia shall be allowed which is the same as or similar to the colors, markings or insignia then currently on file by any other permittee.

     (c)   Each taxicab shall, in plain view on each side of its exterior, have the business name and telephone number of the owner printed in letters at least two (2) inches high. Magnetic or other temporary signs shall not be allowed. Each taxicab shall also display in such area the identifying number for the taxicab which number shall be issued by the police department.

     (d)   Each taxicab shall display a decal issued by the police department for that vehicle. A new decal shall be issued each year at the time of payment of the business license for the vehicle. No person shall alter, remove or transfer the decal to another vehicle. (Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996))

 

6.36.133 Replacing taxicabs.
     If an owner desires to replace any taxicab for which he or she has a permit with another taxicab, he or she shall so inform the police department in writing. The notification shall be accompanied by all pertinent information and data to identify the vehicle and shall be accompanied by a policy of insurance as required herein. The decal from the replaced vehicle shall be returned to the police department or evidence provided that it has been destroyed. In the event the police department finds that such taxicab fulfills the requirements set forth in this chapter, it shall permit such replacement. (Ord. 1540 § 1; (1996))

 

 

6.36.135 Preferences prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, having the ability or authority to control the selection of taxicabs for hire at any premises, to solicit a fee or other compensation or favor for the purpose of granting preference or priority rights to any taxi. (Ord. 1505 § 2, (1994))

 

6.36.140 Driver to take direct route to destination.
     Any driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route that will take the passengers to their destination, safely and expeditiously. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.36.150 Failure to pay lawful fare.
     It is unlawful for any person, except where credit is extended, to refuse to pay the lawful fare, as fixed in this chapter, for the use of any taxicab, after hiring the same. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.36.160 Refusal of service.
     It is unlawful for any driver, operating under a permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter, to refuse, when the vehicle is in service and not otherwise engaged, to provide service to or from any location in the city or to refuse to transport any person who presents him or herself for carriage in a sober and orderly manner and for a lawful purpose. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.36.170 Display of driver’s permit.
     The driver’s permit shall be fixed in a conspicuous place in the taxicab so as to be seen from the passenger’s compartment. It shall display a photo of the driver and shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the taxicab and the name of the driver. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1522 § 3, (1995))

 

6.36.180 Change of employment by driver.
     The owner shall notify the city immediately upon termination of a driver’s employment. The driver’s permit shall become void upon such termination and shall be returned to the police department. It may be renewed upon reemployment under the procedures set forth in Section 6.36.190 hereof. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996))

 

6.36.190 Expiration and renewal of driver’s permit.
     (a)   Every operator’s permit shall be renewed annually, no later than June 1st of each year. Any permit not renewed shall be null and void on July 31st of that year.

     (b)   Every driver’s permit shall be renewed annually, no less than ninety (90) days prior to the anniversary date of its issuance. Any permit not renewed shall be null and void on such anniversary date.

     (c)   The investigation fee for renewals shall be as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs such as processing fingerprints. Prior to permit renewal being granted the permittee must provide a new photograph and current information concerning any changes to the facts set forth in the original application. Failure to renew the permit in a timely manner shall be cause for requiring a completely new permit. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1540 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1823 § 6, (2008))

Chapter 6.38 FORTUNETELLING AND PSYCHIC SERVICES
6.38.010 Fortunetelling and psychic services.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in or practice fortunetelling or psychic services or cause the same to be done for pay, without having first obtained a permit therefor and without having posted and maintained in full force and effect a surety bond as required by this chapter.

     (b)   No person shall conduct a fortunetelling or psychic service business at a location that is not in accord with Title 25 of this code, nor shall any person conduct a fortunetelling or psychic service business at any address or location other than the address or location listed on the application and for which the permit is issued. (Ord. 1310 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1753 § 3, (2005))

 

6.38.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings as hereinafter set forth:

     (a)   “For pay” means for a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.

     (b)   “Fortunetelling” means telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, clairaudiance, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic of any kind or nature. (Ord. 1310 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.030 Application for license.
     Any person desiring a fortuneteller’s permit shall first make application therefor by filing with the license collector a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the license collector which shall give the following information:

     (a)   Name, residence and telephone number;

     (b)   The previous address of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     (c)   Social Security number and driver’s license number if any;

     (d)   Birth certificate or other written proof acceptable to the police department that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

     (e)   Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history investigation);

     (f)    Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     (g)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     (h)   The business license and permit history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state, under license or permit has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspensions or revocation;

     (i)    Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction;

     (j)    Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters hereinabove specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     (k)   The application will also include a separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city of Burlingame, its agents, and employees to seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application. (Ord. 1310 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.040 Business license.
     At the time of application for a permit applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code. No business license shall be issued until the investigation is completed and the permit is approved. The business license shall be issued upon payment of the business license fee as provided in Chapter 6.04 of this code. (Ord. 1310 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.050 Surety bond.
     The applicant shall post with the city clerk, a surety bond in the principal sum amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do a surety business in the state of California and as principal by the applicant. The form of the bond shall have been approved by the city attorney and shall have been given to insure good faith and fair dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, theft or other unfair dealings suffered by an by patron of the applicant within the city during the term of the permit and for a period of five (5) years from and after the date of the permit issued, or any renewal thereof. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.060 Permit fee and investigation.
     All applications for permits shall be accompanied by an investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable, and a surety bond meeting the requirements of this chapter. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs of processing the applicant’s fingerprints by the state of California. Upon receipt of said application, the license collector shall refer the application to the police department which shall make a written recommendation to the license collector within thirty (30) days, provided that said thirty (30) days may be extended for such period as may be necessary to obtain fingerprint records from the appropriate state agency. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1823 § 7, (2008))

 

6.38.070 Issuance or denial of permit.
     The police department shall issue such permit if all required information has been furnished and the report filed finds that:

     (a)   The character of the applicant is satisfactory;

     (b)   The establishment as proposed, if permitted, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s zoning regulations;

     (c)   The applicant has not been convicted of any violation of this chapter or of any law relating to fraud or moral turpitude.

     (d)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent oral or written statements in his or her application or to any person investigating his or her application. The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant thereof by first class mail. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.080 Appeal.
     In the event a permit has been denied, applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice within which to appeal to the city council by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. Notice and a public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the council, at a regular meeting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the appeal and shall give written notice such hearing to the applicant at his or her address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at ten (10) days prior thereto;

     (b)   On the date set, the council shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. If the council finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, it shall order the issuance of the permit and business license. If it finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, it shall deny the permit and license;

     (c)   All findings of the council shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.090 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager for violation of, or for causing or permitting violation of any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permits in the first instance or upon termination or revocation of the bond required by this chapter.

     Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his or her designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked or whether the permit may be retained. In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of the reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of first class mail.

     In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit, the permittee may appeal to the city council in the manner as provided in Section 6.38.080. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.100 License and permit not transferable.
     No license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.110 Display of permit.
     Each person issued a permit under this chapter shall have it in his or her possession, and it shall be displayed to any person upon request. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.38.120 Exceptions.
     (a)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mindreading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance or the giving of horoscopic readings at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.

     (b)   No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer or clairvoyant, hereinafter collectively referred to as minister, form any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith, provided that:

     (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits here shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association as defined in this subsection (b);

     (2)   The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this subsection (b) shall file with the license collector a certified copy of the minister’s certificate of ordination with the minister’s name, age, street address and phone number in this city where the activity set forth in this subsection (b) is to be conducted;

     (3)   Such bona fide church of religious association, as defined in this subsection (b), may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a percentage of basis pursuant to an agreement between the church and the minister which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

Chapter 6.39 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Note
*       Editor’s Note: Due to a typographical error, this chapter was originally assigned Chapter 6.50. To remedy the duplicative chapter assignment, this chapter has been renumbered to 6.39. All internal references have been revised, and no substantive changes were made.

 

6.39.010 Purpose.
     It is the purpose and intent of the city council that the operation of massage services and persons offering services therein, wherein the principal function is giving of massages, as defined in this chapter, should be regulated in the interests of public health, safety and welfare by providing minimum sanitation and health standards for such establishments, and to ensure that persons offering services therein shall possess the minimum qualifications necessary to operate such businesses and to perform such services offered. It is the city’s intent to rely upon the uniform statewide regulations set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq. It is further intended that these provisions provide a framework that is consistent with regulations imposed by nearby communities on similar businesses. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     (a)   “Applicant” means any person or entity applying for registration from the city, including each of the following persons: the responsible managing officer/employee, a general partner, a limited partner, a shareholder, a sole proprietor, or any person who has a five (5) percent or greater ownership interest in a massage business whether as an individual, corporate entity, limited partner, shareholder or sole proprietor.

     (b)   “California Massage Therapy Council” means the message therapy organization formed pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., as amended, and referred to as CAMTC herein.

     (c)   “Certificate of registration” means a certificate issued by the police department upon submission of satisfactory evidence that an individual or business has a current and valid state certification and has satisfied all other requirements pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     (d)   “Certified” means any person holding a current and valid state certificate issued by the CAMTC pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., as amended.

     (e)   “Certified massage business” means any business where the only persons employed or used by that business to provide massage services have current and valid state certifications.

     (f)    “Certified massage practitioner” means any person holding a current and valid state certificate issued by the CAMTC pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., as amended.

     (g)   “Health officer” means the health officer of the county of San Mateo or the health officer’s authorized representative.

     (h)   “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the human body for any form of consideration. This includes, but is not limited to, bathing, rubbing, pressing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the hands, other parts of the human body, or any instrument, with or without the aid of any instruments or supplementary aids, such as oils and creams.

     (i)    “Massage establishment” means any business where massages, baths or health treatments, involving massage, hot tubs, saunas, or baths as the principal function, are given, engaged in or carried on, or permitted to be given, engaged in or carried on in any manner described in this section.

     (j)    “Massage practitioner” means any person who administers a massage within a massage establishment for any form of consideration.

     (k)   “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, joint venture, or combination of individuals.

     (l)    “Registered” means any individual or business having a current and valid certificate of registration from the city, unless otherwise noted. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.030 State certification and city registration required.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on (as the owner of the business premises or in any other capacity) in or upon any premises within the city, the business of a massage establishment all as defined herein, unless the person has first been certified for such a business, and the certification remains in effect in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage practitioner unless that person has first registered with the city and the registration remains in effect in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.040 Grant of authority.
     The police chief or designated representative shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules, regulations, and requirements consistent with provisions of this chapter and other law in connection with the issuance of a certificate of registration. The police chief may designate an employee of his or her department to make decisions and investigations and take actions under this chapter. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.050 Application for registration.
     Any person, except as herein otherwise provided, desiring to operate a massage business, or to engage in the practice of giving massages, shall first file a registration application to the police department on forms provided by the city. This application shall contain all of the following:

     (a)   State Certification Verification.

     (1)   The applicant and all massage practitioners currently employed or to be employed in the massage business shall produce in person all of the following:

     i.      A valid and current state certification;

     ii.     A valid and current CAMTC issued identification card;

     iii.    A current and valid driver’s license or identification card issued by a state, federal governmental agency, or photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government;

     iv.    With respect to the approved massage schools attended by the applicant and all certified massage practitioners, certified copies of transcripts, a true and correct copy of the diploma(s) issued, and current contact information of all school(s) the certified massage practitioners attended;

     v.     If the applicant is the owner of the business and a certified massage practitioner, the applicant shall produce a sworn statement that the certified massage business shall employ only certified massage practitioners;

     vi.    A list of other jurisdictions where massage registration certificates or similar licenses are held, and a statement as to whether any of those certificates or licenses have been revoked or suspended along with a description of the reasons for such revocation or suspension.

     (2)   An applicant who is not certified and owns five (5) percent or more of the business shall produce in person all of the following:

     i.      Name, residence, and telephone number;

     ii.     Acceptable proof that the employee is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

     iii.    Social Security number and driver’s license, if any;

     iv.    The previous address of the applicant for the ten (10) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     v.     Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     vi.    Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history investigation) and three (3) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within the last sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinct manner;

     vii.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. For each such conviction, a statement shall be made giving the place and court in which the conviction occurred, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of the conviction;

     viii. Whether any previous person while employed by the applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or a violation of Sections 266(i), 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316, 318, 318.5, 318.6, or 647(a), (b), (d), (h), (i), or (k) of the Penal Code;

     ix.    A list of other jurisdictions where massage registration certificates or similar licenses are held, and a statement as to whether any of those certificates or licenses have been revoked or suspended along with a description of the reasons for such revocation or suspension.

     (b)   General Business Information.

     (1)   The full true name under which the business will be conducted.

     (2)   The present or proposed address where the business is to be conducted.

     (3)   A complete description of all services to be provided.

     (4)   The name and address of any massage business or other like business owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given pursuant to this section.

     (5)   A description of any other business to be operated on the same or adjoining premises, owned or controlled by the applicant.

     (6)   The contact information of the owner and lessor of the real property, if any, upon or in which the business is to be conducted.

     (7)   A true and complete copy of any lease associated with the premises.

     (8)   If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall provide certified copies of the Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws, along with the name and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock of that corporation, and its registered agent for receipt of process.

     (9)   If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall provide the names and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one or more partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporate applicants shall apply to the corporate partner.

     (c)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application.

     (d)   A separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city and its authorized agents, and employees to obtain information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application.

     (e)   A signed statement that the owner/applicant shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees or independent contractors working on the premises of the business and that failure to comply with California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., with any local, state, or federal law, or with the provisions of this chapter may result in the suspension or revocation of the certificate of registration.

     (f)    Payment of All Appropriate Fees. A registration fee, if applicable, shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be required only for background check for those applicants of a certified massage business who are not state certified and own five (5) percent or more of the certified massage business. A registration fee shall not be charged to certified applicants. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.060 Registration process.
     Registration with the city is required in order to conduct a massage business. Initial registration shall be for a period of two (2) years, subject to renewal as described below.

     (a)   The police department shall issue a certificate of registration to any certified sole proprietorship that demonstrates all of the following:

     (1)   That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, complies with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s building, zoning, business license, and health regulations. If a fixed location for the massage business is proposed, no registration certificate shall be granted for a new massage establishment opening within three hundred (300) feet of an existing massage establishment. (Registered massage establishments in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter are permitted to remain in their current locations, subject to all otherwise-applicable restrictions.)

     (2)   The owner is the only person employed or used by that business to provide massage services.

     (3)   The owner holds a valid and current state certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code and that the owner/applicant is the same person to whom the CAMTC issued a valid and current state certificate and identification card.

     (4)   That the applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in this application or with respect to any other document or information required by the city with respect to this application or for an application for a city massage permit under applicable law within the last ten (10) years.

     (b)   The police department shall issue a certificate of registration to a certified massage business that demonstrates all of the following:

     (1)   That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, complies with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s building, zoning, business license, and health regulations. If a fixed location for the massage business is proposed, no registration certificate shall be granted for a new massage establishment opening within three hundred (300) feet of an existing massage establishment. (Registered massage establishments in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter are permitted to remain in their current locations, subject to all otherwise-applicable restrictions.)

     (2)   The owner holds a valid and current state certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code and that the owner/applicant is the same person to whom the CAMTC issued a valid and current state certificate and identification card.

     (3)   The massage business employs or uses only state certified massage practitioners whose certifications are valid and current and that owners of the state certificates are the same persons to whom CAMTC issued valid and current identification cards.

     (4)   That the applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in this application or with respect to any other document or information required by the city with respect to this application or for an application for a city massage permit under applicable law within the last five (5) years.

     (5)   That the background check for any applicant/owner authorized by this chapter shows that such person has not been required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code; within five (5) years preceding the application had a conviction in court of competent jurisdiction for any of the crimes identified in Section 4.40.050(A)(1)(d)(vi)(A) through (G) herein; has not had an individual or business permit or license with any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state, denied, revoked, restricted, or suspended within the last five years; and has not been subject to an injunction for nuisance under Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 within the last five (5) years. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.070 Appeal.
     If registration or renewal is denied, applicant has thirteen (13) calendar days from the date of mailing the denial notice within which to appeal by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. The written appeal application must state the grounds on which the applicant objects to the denial of the registration or renewal. Notice and a public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before a hearing officer, as designated by the city manager, who may be an independent hearing officer retained by the city or a city department head other than the city attorney or chief of police, as soon as is practicable and shall give written notice of the hearing to the applicant at the applicant’s address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date, unless an earlier date is set by mutual agreement of the city and appellant. The date for the appeal hearing may be modified upon the request of the applicant or upon consultation and agreement between the applicant and the city. The appeal hearing shall be public, and notice of the scheduled hearing shall be provided in the same manner as for appeals of decisions of the planning commission.

     (b)   On the date set, the hearing officer shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. The proceedings before the hearing officer shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. However, the applicant and any interested parties may present such evidence as they deem appropriate, provided it complies with any procedures set forth by the council for appeals. If the hearing officer finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, she or he shall order the issuance of the registration and business license. If she or he finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, she or he shall deny the registration.

     (c)   All findings of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015); Ord. 1967 § 1, (2019))

 

6.39.080 Business license required.
     At the time of an initial application for an operator’s permit, applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code. No business license shall be issued until the investigation under this chapter is completed. The business license shall then be issued upon payment of the business license fee as provided in Chapter 6.04 of this code. The business license fee shall be commensurate with the business license fee charged to other professionals as established by this code. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

 

6.39.090 Exemptions from massage practitioner permit requirements.
     The massage practitioner registration required by this chapter shall not apply to the following:

     (a)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, nurses and physical therapists, and occupational therapists duly licensed to practice in the state of California, but only when engaged in the practice for which they are so licensed and in accordance with the terms of the licensing.

     (b)   Employees of hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California, but only when engaged in the scope of their employment, and only at their place of employment at the health care facility, and only within the scope of and in conformance with the state license.

     (c)   Cosmetologists or barbers who are licensed by the state of California, but only when engaged in the practice for which they are so registered and in accordance with the terms of the registration.

     (d)   Accredited elementary school, high school, or college coaches and trainers employed by a elementary, high school, or college, but only while acting within the scope of employment to the school.

     (e)   Trainers of semi-professional or professional athletic teams, but only while acting within the scope of employment to the team. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.100 Registration not entitlement to violate other laws.
     The issuance of a certificate under this chapter shall not entitle the registrant to engage in any business or practice which for any reason is in violation of any law or ordinance and shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business or practice unless he or she has complied with all the requirements under the other ordinances of the city and all other applicable laws, nor shall it entitle the registrant to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in such permit in the event that such business or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is a violation of any law. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.110 Health and safety operating requirements.
     Where applicable state laws, as they may be amended from time to time, directly conflict with the following, the state provisions shall prevail. Otherwise, all massage establishments shall be subject to periodic inspection by the city for compliance with the following:

     (a)   A massage establishment shall post a list of services, including prices, in readily understood language in an open, public place on the premises of the establishment. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, employee, contractor, or registrant shall permit nor offer any massage services on the premises other than those posted on the list.

     (b)   All persons shall only provide massages between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The hours stated here are the maximum permitted hours, actual hours may be further limited by applicable zoning or use permit restrictions. All massage activities must be completed within business hours. Patrons and visitors shall be permitted in the massage business only during hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the reception area and in any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage business. Massages commenced prior to 9:00 p.m. must conclude at that hour, regardless of the duration of the massage.

     (c)   No massage business shall place, publish, or distribute any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective clients that any service is available other than those services listed pursuant to this section. Nor shall any massage business employ language in the text of such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective client that any service is available other than those services listed pursuant to this section.

     (d)   All employees in a massage establishment and massage practitioners shall perform their work fully clothed, be clean and wear clean outer garments whose use is restricted to the establishment. Massage practitioners shall wear CAMTC-provided identification while on the premises. Doors to dressing rooms, bathing rooms, and treatment rooms shall open inward, and shall not be locked. Draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures are acceptable on all inner dressing and treatment rooms in lieu of doors.

     (e)   All establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in closed, sanitary cabinets. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is used only once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. Sanitary approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of all soiled linens.

     (f)    At least one entrance door allowing access to the establishment and any building it may be in, shall remain unlocked during business hours; notwithstanding this provision, the facility shall also comply with exiting and entrance requirements of other applicable laws and regulations. Where there is only one employee or a sole proprietor on site, entrance doors may be locked. All premises and facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day of operation. The premises and facilities shall meet all code requirements of the city as to safety of the structure.

 

     (g)   Minimum lighting shall be at least one sixty (60) watt light in each enclosure where massage services are performed. The light switch for the interior lights in such enclosure will be within the enclosure. There shall be no light in the enclosure that is operated from outside the enclosure. There shall be no sound device (i.e., buzzer or bell) than can be operated from outside the massage enclosure.

     (h)   Secure dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for patrons. Security deposit facilities for the protection of valuables of the patrons shall also be available.

     (i)    No massage building located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs, blurs, or darkens the view into the premises.

     (j)    Each massage establishment shall keep a written record of the date and hour of each treatment; the name of the massage therapist administering the treatment; and the type of treatment administered recorded on a patron release form. Such written record shall be open to inspection only by officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter and for no other purpose. Such records will be kept on the premises of the massage establishment for a period of two (2) years from the date of service.

     (k)   All establishments shall comply with the following minimum standards of conduct:

     (1)   No employee, contractor, or massage practitioner shall make any intentional, occasional, or repetitive contact with the mouth, genitals, anus, or breasts of another person in the massage establishment or while providing massage services.

     (2)   No person afflicted with an infection or parasitic infestation transmissible to a patron shall knowingly massage a patron, or remain on the premises of a certified massage business while so infected or infested.

     (3)   All persons on the massage establishment premises must be clothed in non-transparent clothing at all times that shall not expose their genitals, pubic area, or buttocks, or for any operator of a massage business to allow prohibited dress. Massage clients currently receiving a massage shall have appropriate draping to cover female breasts and genital and pubic areas. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.120 Display of signs and permits.
     No person registered pursuant to this chapter shall begin operations until a recognizable and legible sign has been posted at the main entrance to the business premises. All certificates of registration and shall be posted within the establishment in a location immediately available for inspection for representatives of the city. No person granted a registration pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any other name or at any other location than that specified in the certificate of registration. All signs must be in compliance with applicable sign ordinances. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.130 Inspection by officials.
     The investigating officials of the city, including the health officer, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.140 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     (a)   Certificates of registration may be suspended or revoked or renewal may be denied upon any of the following grounds:

     (1)   A practitioner is no longer in possession of current and valid CAMTC certification. This subsection shall apply to a sole proprietor or a person employed or used by a massage business to provide massage.

     (2)   An owner or sole proprietor: is required to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290 (sex offender registration); is convicted of California Penal Code Section 266i (pandering), 315 (keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame), 316 (keeping disorderly house), 318 (prevailing upon person to visit a place for prostitution), 647(b) (engaging in or soliciting prostitution), 653.22 (loitering with intent to commit prostitution), 653.23 (supervision of prostitute); has a business permit or license denied, revoked, restricted, or suspended by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; is subject to an injunction for nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 (red light abatement); is convicted of a felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance; is convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, violence, or moral turpitude; or is convicted in any other state of an offense which, if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or more referenced offenses in this subdivision.

     (3)   The city determines that a material misrepresentation was included on the application for a certificate of registration or renewal.

 

     (4)   Violations of any of the following occurred on the premises of a massage business or were committed  by a practitioner: California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.; any local, state, or federal law; or the provisions of this chapter.

     (b)   Prior to the suspension or revocation or refusal of renewal of any permit issued under this chapter, the registrant shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or the manager’s designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not the registration shall be suspended or revoked or renewal refused or whether the registration may be retained. In the event the registration is suspended or revoked or renewal refused, the notification of the reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the registrant by means of first class mail. The manager may impose conditions or restrictions on the registration in lieu of suspension or revocation to attempt to eliminate violations or nuisances that have been found.

     (c)   In the event of suspension or revocation of any registration, the registrant may appeal to the city council in the manner as provided in Section 6.39.070. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.150 Sale or transfer of establishment.
     Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the registration shall not be transferable without the written approval of the chief of police and the finance director. An application for such a change shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing and investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time and provide all of the information required in Section 6.39.040. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.160 Notice of changes.
     All persons registered pursuant to this chapter shall report immediately to the city finance department and the police department all changes of residence or business address or change of ownership of the establishment or service. Failure to give such notice within fifteen (15) days of the event shall render the registration null and void. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.170 Renewal of registration.
     A registration certificate issued under this section shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of issuance. Sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of a current registration certificate, the certificate holder must submit a renewal request to the police department, updating any information from the last submission. If the police department is unable to make a determination on the renewal request within the remaining term of the certificate, the certificate shall not expire while the police department is in the process of evaluating the request.

     If an application for renewal of a city registration certificate and all required information is not timely received and the certificate expires, no right or privilege to provide massage shall exist. (Ord. 1894 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

 

6.39.180 Enforcement—Remedies cumulative.
     The remedies provided for in this chapter are cumulative and are in addition to existing enforcement mechanisms, including those provided in Title 1 of this code and those available under applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 1918 § 1, (2015))

Chapter 6.40 SPA AND BATHING ESTABLISHMENTS
6.40.010 Purpose.
     It is the purpose and intent of the city council that the operation of spa, bathing and other similar establishments and persons offering services therein, wherein the principal function is the provision of baths and spa services, as defined in this chapter, should be regulated in the interests of public health, safety and welfare by providing minimum building sanitation and health standards for such establishments, and to ensure that persons offering services therein shall possess the minimum qualifications necessary to operate such businesses and to perform such services offered. It is further intended that these provisions provide a framework that is consistent with regulations imposed by nearby communities on similar businesses. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1426 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.020 Permit required.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on (as the owner of the business premises or in any other capacity) in or upon any premises within the city, the business of a spa, bathing or other similar establishment having baths or spa services as their principal function, all as defined herein, unless the person has first obtained an operator’s permit for such a business from the city and the permit remains in effect in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person to act as a spa or bathing practitioner as defined in this chapter unless that person has first obtained a practitioner’s permit from the city and the permit remains in effect in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1426 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.030 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     (a)   “Health officer” means the health officer of the County of San Mateo or the health officer’s authorized representative.

     (b)   “Instrument” means any tool or instrument, but does not include physical agent modalities, including light/laser therapy, ultrasound, phonophoresis, microcurrent, TENS, neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES), iontophoresis, interferential current, or HiVolt. Heat or cold packs are not considered instruments under this chapter.

     (c)   “Operator” means any person who owns or operates a spa, bathing or similar establishment.

     (d)   “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, joint venture, or combination of individuals.

     (e)   “Practitioner” means any person who administers a bath or health treatment involving baths or spa services as a principal function to another person for any consideration whatsoever.

     (f)    “Spa, bathing or other similar establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where baths or health treatments, involving hot tubs, saunas, or baths as the principal function, are given, engaged in or carried on, or permitted to be given, engaged in or carried on in any manner described in Section 6.40.030(g). “Spa, bathing, or other similar establishments” does not include massage services, or those services subject to independent regulation or certification under state or local law.

     (g)   “Spa services” means any beauty and health treatment not subject to independent regulation or certification under state or local law. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1426 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484

§ 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1821 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.035 Corporations and partnerships.
     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. Each officer of the corporation or each partner in a partnership must submit an application and comply with Section 6.40.040. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions above pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. (Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.040 Application for permit.
     Any person, except as herein otherwise provided, desiring a permit to operate a spa, bathing or similar establishment having baths or spa services as their principal function shall first make application therefor for permit under this chapter by filing with the license collector a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the license collector which shall give the following information; an operator-practitioner may make a single application and pay a single fee:

     (a)   Name, residence, and telephone number;

     (b)   The previous address of the applicant for the ten (10) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     (c)   Social Security number and driver’s license number, if any;

     (d)   Birth certificate or other written proof acceptable to the police department that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

     (e)   Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history investigation) and three (3) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within the last sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinct manner;

     (f)    Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     (g)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     (h)   The business license and permit history of the applicant for similar businesses, whether individually or as a member or part of a corporation, partnership, or other business, wherever located. The history shall include a statement as to whether any previous permit or license in which the applicant was involved was revoked or suspended or any revocation or suspension is pending, and the reasons for the previous or proposed revocation or suspension;

     (i)    If the application is for a practitioner permit, the name and address of the establishment where the applicant is to be employed and the name of the operator of the same;

     (j)    Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. For each such conviction, a statement shall be made giving the place and court in which the conviction occurred, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of the conviction;

     (k)   Whether any previous employer or person while employed by or with the applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code subsection 290, or a violation of subsection 266(i), 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316, 318, 318.5, 318.6, or 647(a), (b), (d), (h), (i), or (k) of the Penal Code;

     (l)    Proof of applicable certifications, if any, including, but not limited to, diplomas and transcripts from schools providing coursework in the fields of the spa and bathing therapy;

     (m)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     (n)   A certificate executed under penalty of perjury from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within thirty (30) days immediately prior to the filing of the application, been examined and found to be free from any infectious, contagious or communicable disease capable of being transmitted through bathing and spa therapy;

     (o)   A separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city and its authorized agents, and employees to obtain information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application and the qualifications and record of the applicant;

     (p)   Current certification in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and first aid from the American Heart Association or the American Red Cross.

     (q)   If the application is for an operator’s permit, the name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in or from which the business is to be conducted. If the applicant is not the owner of the real property, the owner of the real property must sign and acknowledge the application.

 

     (r)    If the application is for an operator’s permit, a safety plan including, but not limited to, exterior lighting, parking lot security, and emergency access to the establishment. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1426 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1755 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.050 Exemptions.
     The permits required by this chapter for operators shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other healthcare facilities duly licensed by the state of California. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.055 Exemptions from practitioner permit requirements.
     The practitioner permit required by this chapter shall not apply to the following:

     (a)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, and physical therapists, and occupational therapists duly licensed to practice in the state of California, but only when engaged in the practice for which they are so licensed and in accordance with the terms of the licensing.

     (b)   Nurses duly registered by the state of California, but only when engaged in the practice for which they are so registered and in accordance with the terms of the registration.

     (c)   Employees of hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California, but only when engaged in the scope of their employment, and only at their place of employment at the health care facility, and only within the scope of and in conformance with the state license.

     (d)   Cosmetologists or barbers who are licensed by the state of California, but only when engaged in the practice for which they are so registered and in accordance with the terms of the registration.

     (e)   Accredited elementary school, high school, or college coaches and trainers employed by an elementary, high school, or college, but only while acting within the scope of employment to the school.

     (f)    Trainers of semi-professional or professional athletic teams, but only while acting within the scope of employment to the team.

     (g)   Massage practitioners as defined and regulated under Chapter 6.39 of this code. (Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1821 § 3, (2008); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.057 Permit not entitlement to violate other laws.
     The issuance of a permit under this chapter shall not entitle the permittee to engage in any business or practice which for any reason is in violation of any law or ordinance and shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business or practice unless he or she has complied with all the requirements under the other ordinances of the city and all other applicable laws, nor shall it entitle the permittee to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in such permit in the event that such business or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is a violation of any law. In particular, a permit issued under this chapter does not entitle any person to use physical agent modalities that require separate licensing by the state of California, including light/laser therapy, ultrasound, phonophoresis, microcurrent, TENS, neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) iontophoresis, interferential current, or HiVolt. (Ord. 1821 § 4, (2008); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.060 Permit fee and investigation.
     (a)   All applications for initial permits shall be accompanied by a filing and investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs of processing the applicant’s fingerprints by the state of California and for the medical examiner’s competency examination.

     (b)   Upon receipt of a complete operator’s application, the license collector shall refer the application to the director of community development, building official, the fire department and the police department, each of which within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of filing the application shall inspect the premises proposed to be used as a spa or bathing establishment, interview the applicant or any other person and make any other investigation necessary to make a written recommendation to the police department; provided that the thirty (30) days may be extended for such period as may be necessary to obtain fingerprint records from the appropriate state agency.

     (c)   Applications for practitioner permits shall be referred only to the police and community development departments. The community development department shall provide its findings to the police department within thirty (30) days of the filing of a complete application. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1806 § 5, (2007); Ord. 1823 § 8, (2008); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

 

6.40.070 Business license.
     At the time of an initial application for an operator’s permit, applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code. No business license shall be issued until the investigation under this chapter is completed and the permit to operate is approved. The business license shall then be issued upon payment of the business license fee as provided in Chapter 6.04 of this code. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.080 Issuance or denial of permit.
     (a)   Upon receipt of the investigation reports from each of the departments to whom the application has been referred, the police department shall issue the requested permit if all required information has been furnished and the reports filed find that:

     (1)   If the application is for an operator’s permit, the establishment as proposed would comply with all and not violate any applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s building, fire, health and zoning regulations;

     (2)   The applicant has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving:

     (A)  Conduct that requires registration under Penal Code Section 290, or

     (B)   Violations of Penal Code Sections 266(1), 311, 311.1, 311.2, 311.3, 311.4, 311.5, 311.6, 311.7, 311.10, 311.11, 314, 315, 316, 318, 318.5, 318.6, 459, 518, or 647(a), (b), (d) or (h), or comparable provisions of the laws of any other state, the United States, or any other country, or

     (C)   Any other offense involving sexual misconduct with a child;

     (3)   The applicant has not been convicted of the use of force or violence upon another, provided that misdemeanor convictions shall be a basis for denial for a period of five (5) years from the date of conviction;

     (4)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent oral or written statements in the permit application or to any person investigating the application;

     (5)   The applicant does not have an infectious, contagious or communicable disease that could be transmitted through the provision of bathing or spa services, and is not in violation of any federal, state or local health law or regulation;

     (6)   The city has not denied a previous application by the applicant for an operator’s or practitioner permit within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the application.

     (b)   The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant of the disapproval with a copy of the application upon which the reasons have been endorsed by first class mail. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1833 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.090 Appeal.
     If a permit is denied, applicant has ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice within which to appeal to the city council by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. Notice and a public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the council, at a regular meeting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the appeal, and shall give written notice of the hearing to the applicant at the applicant’s address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.

     (b)   On the date set, the council shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. If the council finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, it shall order the issuance of the permit and business license. If it finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, it shall deny the permit.

     (c)   All findings of the council shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.100 Operating and sanitation requirements.
     All spa, bathing or other similar establishments shall comply with the following operating and sanitation requirements:

     (a)   Sanitation and Conduct. All establishments shall comply with the following minimum sanitation requirements:

     (1)   Employees and Practitioners. All employees in spa and/or bathing establishments shall perform their work fully clothed, be clean and wear clean outer garments whose use is restricted to the establishment. Doors to dressing rooms, bathing rooms, and treatment rooms shall open inward, and shall not be locked. Draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures are acceptable on all inner dressing and treatment rooms in lieu of doors. Separate dressing rooms and toilet facilities complying with the city building codes shall be provided for each sex.

     (2)   Linens. All establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered linens in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in closed, sanitary cabinets. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is used only once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. Sanitary approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of all soiled linens.

     (3)   Facilities. At least one entrance door allowing access to the establishment and any building it may be in; shall remain unlocked during business hours; notwithstanding this provision, the facility shall also comply with exiting and entrance requirements of other applicable laws and regulations. All premises and facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day of operation. The premises and facilities shall meet all code requirements of the city as to safety of the structure, adequacy of plumbing, heating, ventilation and waterproofing of rooms where showers, water or steam baths are given.

     (4)   Patron Facilities. Patrons of the establishments shall be furnished with securable locker facilities, for which the patron has the control of the key or lock, and security deposit facilities for the protection of their valuables.

     (5)   Hours. Spa and bathing establishment operations shall be carried on or conducted, and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The hours stated here are the maximum permitted hours; actual hours may be further limited by applicable zoning or use permit restrictions.

     (6)   Disabled Access. Each establishment shall be disabled accessible with restrooms available with disabled access.

     (7)   Changing Rooms. Each establishment shall provide separate restroom and changing rooms for male and female patrons.

     (8)   No Residential Use. No part of the establishment shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes. No cooking or food preparation will be allowed on the premises unless a full service kitchen is installed. Such kitchen will be for the sole use of employees, and will be installed in an employees-only area. The full service kitchen will have a minimum of a sink with hot and cold running water, a refrigerator, a stove, and sufficient cabinets to store cooking utensils. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1426 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.110 Inspection by officials.
     The investigating officials of the city, including the health officer, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations. (Ord. 988 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1431 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.115 Surety bond.
     (a)   Each applicant for an operator’s permit shall post with the city clerk, a surety in the principal sum amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) either in cash or executed as surety by good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do a surety business in the state of California and as principal by the applicant. The form of the bond shall have been approved by the city attorney and shall provide that should the applicant be issued a permit under this chapter which is subsequently suspended or revoked, the city shall be reimbursed from such bond for all costs of any investigation or other proceedings related to the suspension or revocation.

     (b)   If a holder of an operator’s permit under this chapter successfully completes twenty-four (24), consecutive months in actual operation under the permit without any suspension of the permit or the filing of any criminal or civil complaint regarding operations under the permit by either a city attorney, a district attorney, the California Attorney General, or a United States Attorney, the permitholder may request the city to release the surety bond, which the city shall do upon verification that no such suspension or complaint filing has occurred during the period. However, if at any time following such a release of the surety bond, the city determines that the permitholder is conducting its operations in violation of this chapter, the chief of police may order the posting of a surety bond in accordance with subsection (a) above as a condition of continued operations under the permit. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1689 § 2, (2002); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.120 Sale or transfer of establishment.
     (a)   Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a spa, bathing or similar establishment, the permit shall not be transferable without the written approval of the chief of police and the finance director. An application for such a change shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing and investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time and provide all of the information required in Section 6.40.040. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1823 § 9, (2008); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.130 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     (a)   Any spa, bathing or similar establishment permit, or practitioner permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager for violation of, or for causing or permitting violation of, any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permits in the first instance.

     (b)   Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or the manager’s designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not the permit shall be suspended or revoked or whether the permit may be retained. In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of the reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of first class mail. The manager may impose conditions or restrictions on the permit in lieu of suspension or revocation to attempt to eliminate violations or nuisances that have been found.

     (c)   In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit, the permittee may appeal to the city council in the manner as provided in Section 6.40.090. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.140 Display of signs and permits.
     No person granted an operator’s permit pursuant to this chapter shall begin operations until a recognizable and legible sign has been posted at the main entrance to the permit premises. All permits granted shall be posted within the establishment in a location immediately available for inspection for representatives of the city. No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any other name or at any other location than that specified in the permit. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.150 Notice of changes.
     All persons granted permits pursuant to this chapter shall report immediately to the city finance department and the police department all changes of residence or business address or change of ownership of the establishment or service. Failure to give such notice within fifteen (15) days of the event shall render the permit null and void. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

 

6.40.160 Renewal of permits.
     Each permit shall be renewed annually, no less than ninety (90) days prior to the anniversary date of its issuance. Any permit not renewed shall be null and void on such anniversary date. The investigation fee for renewals shall be as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs such as processing fingerprints. Prior to permit renewal being granted the permittee shall:

     (1)   Provide two (2) photographs of passport size at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinct manner taken with the sixty (60) days immediately prior to filing the renewal application and current information concerning any changes to the facts set forth in the initial or immediately prior renewal application;

     (2)   Provide a new certificate, dated within thirty (30) days of the renewal, from a medical doctor stating that the licensee is free from infectious, contagious or communicable diseases capable of being transmitted through spa and bathing therapies and provide a current certification in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and first aid from the American Heart Association or the American Red Cross;

     (3)   Obtain clearance from the police department that the permittee has had no arrests or convictions for violations listed in Section 6.40.080(a)(2) or (3) of this chapter since the permit was issued or last renewed;

     (4)   Provide copies of applicable certifications consistent with industry customs. However, this requirement does not apply if the original permit was approved before March 22, 2005.

     Upon complete submission of this information together with the required filing fee, the permit shall be renewed. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1750 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1755 § 3, (2005); Ord. 1823 § 10, (2008); Ord. 1833 § 3, (2008); Ord. 1894 § 1, (2013))

Chapter 6.41 MODEL STUDIOS, ESCORT BUREAU, AND INTRODUCTORY SERVICES
6.41.010 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on (as the owner of the business premises or in any other capacity) in or upon any premises within the city of Burlingame, the business of a model studio, escort bureau, introductory service, or to be employed as an escort as defined herein, unless a permit has first been obtained from the police department of the city and remains in effect in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     (a)   “Escort” means a person who for pecuniary compensation or any consideration escorts or accompanies others to, from or about social affairs, entertainments, places of public assembly or places of amusement, or who may consort with others, for hire or reward, about any place of public or private resort or within any private quarters.

     (b)   “Escort bureau” means any business or agency which, for pecuniary compensation or any consideration furnishes, or offers to furnish, escorts or persons who accompany others to, from or about social affairs, entertainments, places of public assembly or places of amusement, or who consorts with others, for hire or reward, about any place of public or private resort or within any private quarters.

     (c)   “Figure model” means any person, male or female, who poses to be observed, viewed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.

     (d)   “Introductory service” means a service offered or performed for any pecuniary compensation or other consideration by any person, the principal purpose of which is to aid individuals to become socially acquainted or to otherwise assist individuals to meet for social purposes, or which service is generally known by the offering or performing party to be used by the recipients thereof for the purpose of obtaining information about others to be used for social purposes.

     (e)   “Model studio” means:

     (1)   Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing figure models who pose for the purpose of being observed or viewed by any person or being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons who pay a fee, or other consideration or compensation, or a gratuity, for the right of opportunity so to depict the figure model, or for admission to, or for permission to remain upon, or as a condition of remaining upon the premises.

     (2)   Any premises where there is conducted the business of providing or procuring for a fee or other consideration or compensation or gratuity, figure models to be observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.

     (3)   The words “model studio” do not include:

     (A)  Any studio which is operated by any state college, or public community college or school wherein the persons, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating it has met the requirements established in Division 21 of the Education Code for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary diploma.

     (B)   Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing, providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio described in paragraph (a) of this subsection.

     (f)    Escort bureau or introductory service does not mean the lawful business of an employment agency licensed under the laws of the state of California. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.025 Corporations and partnerships.
     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. The information hereinafter required shall be provided for each officer of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the information hereinafter required shall be supplied for each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions above pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.030 Application for license.
     Any person desiring a permit to operate a model studio, escort bureau, introductory service, or to be employed as an escort shall first make application therefor for permit under this chapter by filing with the license collector a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the license collector which shall give the following information; an operator-escort may make a single application and pay a single fee:

     (a)   Name, residence, and telephone number;

     (b)   The previous address of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     (c)   Social security number and driver’s license number if any;

     (d)   Birth certificate or other written proof acceptable to the police department that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

     (e)   Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history investigation) and three (3) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within the last sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which photographs shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinct manner;

     (f)    Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     (g)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     (h)   The business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state, under license or permit has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;

     (i)    Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction;

     (j)    If the application is for an escort permit, the name and address of the establishment were the applicant is to be employed and the name of the operator of the same;

     (k)   Whether any person while employed by the applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code subsection 290, or a violation of subsections 266(i), 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 645(a), (b);

     (l)    Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     (m)  The application will also include a separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city of Burlingame, its agents, and employees to seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.040 Permit fee and investigation.
     All applications for initial permits shall be accompanied by a filing and investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which shall be refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs of processing the applicant’s fingerprints by the State of California. Upon receipt of an operator’s application, the license collector shall refer the application to the director of community development, building official, the fire department, the police department and health officer, each of which within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of filing the application shall inspect the premises proposed to be used as a model studio and shall make a written recommendation to the police department provided that said thirty (30) days may be extended for such period as may be necessary to obtain fingerprint records from the appropriate state agency. Escort applications shall only be referred to the police department. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1806 § 6, (2007); Ord. 1823 § 11, (2008))

 

6.41.050 Business license.
     At the time of application for a permit to operate, applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code. No business license shall be issued until the investigation is completed and the permit to operate is approved. The business license shall be issued upon payment of the business license fee as provided in Chapter 6.04 of this code. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.060 Issuance or denial of permit.
     Upon receipt of the investigation reports from each of the departments to whom the application has been referred, the police department shall issue such permit if all required information has been furnished and the reports filed find that:

     (a)   The character and responsibility of the applicant is satisfactory;

     (b)   If the application is for an operator’s permit, the operation of the establishment as proposed would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s building, fire, health and zoning regulations;

     (c)   The applicant has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or violations of Sections 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a), (b), (d) or (h) of the Penal Code;

     (d)   The applicant has not been convicted of the use of force and violence upon another;

     (e)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of facts in his or her application or any other documents required by the city to be submitted in conjunction with the application.

     The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant of the disapproval with a copy of the application upon which the reasons have been endorsed by first class mail. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.070 Appeal.
     In the event a permit has been denied, applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice within which to appeal to the city council by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. Notice and a public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the council, at a regular meeting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the appeal, and shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant at his or her address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior thereto.

     (b)   On the date set, the council shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. If the council finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, it shall order the issuance of the permit and the business license. If it finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, it shall deny the permit and license.

     (c)   All findings of the council shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.080 Regulations—Model studios.
     The following regulations shall be applicable to model studios:

     (a)   Advertising and Signs. No person granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any sign or other advertising matter that describes or depicts any portion of the human body in a manner, or with the use of descriptive language, which would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other than those services described in Section 6.41.020 of this chapter.

     (b)   Hours. A person shall not conduct or operate a model studio between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of the following day.

     (c)   Supervision. A person operating a model studio, or a manager previously fingerprinted and approved by the police department, shall be present on the premises at all times when the establishment is in operation.

     (d)   Visibility. A person operating a model studio shall not permit conditions to exist wherein the interior of the said model studio shall be visible from the outside of the premises.

     (e)   Records. A person operating a model studio shall maintain a current file of all figure models employed by him or her or using the premises. This file shall contain true name and aliases used by the figure model, age, birth date, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, home address, phone numbers, Social Security number and the date of employment and termination. Inactive file cards shall be maintained on the premises for the period of one year following termination. Such person shall make all records available immediately upon demand of any peace officer. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.085 Records—Escort bureaus and introductory services.
     The permittee shall maintain a duplicate record of every transaction whereby any escort is employed or engaged, or whereby any introductions are arranged for or on behalf of any patron, customer or person. The duplicate of such record shall be filed with the police department within twenty-four (24) hours after such transaction and shall include the following information:

     (a)   The date and hour of the transaction;

     (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the patron, customer or person requesting or employing the escort bureau or introductory service; and

     (c)   The name of the escort furnished or other persons who were introduced or arranged to be introduced. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.090 Inspection by officials.
     The investigating officials of the city, including the health officer, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.100 Sale or transfer of establishment.
     Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a model studio, the permit and business license shall not be transferable without the written approval of the license collector. An application for such change shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing and investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time and provide all of the information required in Section 6.41.030. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1823 § 12, (2008))

 

6.41.110 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager for violation of, or for causing or permitting violation of, any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permits in the first instance.

     Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his or her designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked or whether the permit may be retained. In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of and reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of first class mail.

     In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit, the permittee may appeal to the city council in the same manner as provided in Section 6.41.070. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.120 Notice of changes.
     All persons granted permits pursuant to this chapter shall report immediately to the license collector all changes of address, or change of ownership of the establishment. Failure to give such notice within fifteen (15) days of the event shall render the permit null and void. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.41.130 Renewal of permits.
     Every permit shall be renewed annually, no less than ninety (90) days prior to the anniversary date of its issuance. Any permit not renewed shall be null and void on such anniversary date. The filing and investigation fee for renewals shall be as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs such as processing fingerprints. Prior to permit renewal being granted, the permittee must:

     (a) Provide a new photograph and current information concerning any changes to the facts set forth in the application;

     (b) Obtain clearance from the police department signifying that the licensee has had no arrests or convictions for violations of those penal code sections listed in Section 6.40.080(a)(3) of this code since the permit was issued or last renewed. (Ord. 993 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1823 § 13, (2008))

Chapter 6.42 TANNING FACILITIES
6.42.010 Purpose.
     It is the purpose and intent of the city council that the operation of tanning facilities, as defined in this chapter, should be regulated in the interests of public health, safety and welfare by providing minimum building sanitation and health standards for such establishments. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.020 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on (as the owner of the business premises or in any other capacity) in or upon any premises within the city of Burlingame, the business of a tanning facility or other similar establishment, unless a permit for such business has first been obtained from the police department of the city and remains in effect in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.030 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     (a)   “Health officer” means the health officer of the county of San Mateo or his or her authorized representative.

     (b)   “Tanning facility” means any establishment meeting the definition of Section 22702 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California.

     (c)   “Person” means any individual, copartnership, firm, association, corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.035 Corporations and partnerships.
     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. Each officer of the corporation or each partner in a partnership must submit an application and comply with Section 6.42.040. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions above pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.040 Application for permit.
     Except as otherwise herein provided, any person desiring a permit to operate a tanning facility or similar establishment or be employed in a tanning facility or similar establishment shall first make application therefor for permit under this chapter by filing with the license collector a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the license collector which shall give the following information:

     (a)   Name, residence and telephone number;

     (b)   The previous address of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     (c)   Social Security number and driver’s license number if any;

     (d)   Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history investigation) and three (3) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within the last sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which photographs shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinct manner;

     (e)   Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     (f)    Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     (g)   The business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state, under any license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;

     (h)   If the application is for an employee permit, the name and address of the establishment where the applicant is to be employed and the name of the operator of the same;

     (i)    Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction;

     (j)    Whether any previous employer or person while employed by or with the applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code subsection 290, or a violation of subsections 266(i), 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a), (b), (d) or (h) of the Penal Code;

     (k)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     (l)    The application will also include a separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city of Burlingame, its agents, and employees to seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application and the qualifications and record of the applicant;

     (m)  An applicant for an operator’s permit shall provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.050 Exemptions.
     The permits required by this chapter shall not apply to a tanning facility employing two (2) or fewer persons on its premises at any one time. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.060 Permit fee and investigation.
     All applications for initial permits shall be accompanied by a filing and investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs of processing the applicant’s fingerprints by the state of California. Upon receipt of an operator’s application, the license collector shall refer the application to the director of community development, building official, the fire department and the police department, each of which within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of filing the application shall inspect the premises proposed to be used as a tanning facility, interview the applicant or any other person and make any other investigation necessary to make a written recommendation to the police department, provided that said thirty (30) days may be extended for such period as may be necessary to obtain fingerprint records from the appropriate state agency. Employee applications shall be referred only to the police department. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1806 § 7, (2007); Ord. 1823 § 14, (2008))

 

6.42.070 Business license.
     At the time of the application for a permit to operate, applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code. No business license shall be issued until the investigation is completed and the permit to operate is approved. The business license shall be issued upon payment of the business license fee as provided in Chapter 6.04 of this code. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.080 Issuance or denial of permit.
     Upon receipt of the investigation reports from each of the departments to whom the application has been referred, the police department shall issue such permit if all required information has been furnished and the reports filed find that:

     (a)   The character of the applicant is satisfactory;

     (b)   If the application is for an operator’s permit, the establishment as proposed, if permitted, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s building, fire, health and zoning regulations;

     (c)   The applicant has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code subsection 290, or violations of subsections 266(i), 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316, 318, or 647(a), (b), (d) or (h) of the Penal Code;

     (d)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent oral or written statements in his or her application or to any person investigating his or her application;

     (e)   The applicant has a current cardiopulmonary resuscitation certificate and first aid card from the American Heart Association or the American Red Cross.

     The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant of the disapproval with a copy of the application upon which the reasons have been endorsed by first class mail. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.090 Appeal.
     In the event a permit has been denied, applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice within which to appeal to the city council by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. Notice and a public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the council, at a regular meeting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the appeal, and shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant at his or her address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior thereto.

     (b)   On the date set, the council shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. If the council finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, it shall order the issuance of the permit and business license. If it finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, it shall deny the permit and license.

     (c)   All findings of the council shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.100 Operating and sanitation requirements.
     All tanning facilities or other similar establishments shall comply with the following operating and sanitation requirements:

     (a)   Advertising. No such establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that describes or depicts any portion of the human body or any service in a manner which would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other than those services described in Section 22700 et seq., of the Business and Professions Code.

     (b)   Sanitation and other requirements. All establishments shall comply with the following minimum requirements:

     (1)   Employees. All employees shall perform their work fully clothed, be clean and wear clean outer garments. Doors to dressing rooms and tanning rooms shall open inward and shall not be closed if more than one person is present in the room. Draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures are acceptable on all inner dressing and tanning rooms in lieu of doors.

     (2)   Each room and tanning bed shall be cleaned after each use and shall be sanitized in accordance with common health practices and prevailing local and state health laws.

     (c)   Facilities. At least one entrance door, allowing access to the establishment and any building it may be in, shall remain unlocked during business hours. All premises and facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day of operation. The premises and facilities shall meet all code requirements of the city as to safety of the structure, adequacy of plumbing, heating, and ventilation.

     (d) Hours. Business shall be carried on or conducted, and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

     (e)   Handicapped Areas. Each establishment must have handicap access and restrooms equipped for handicapped patrons.

     (f)    Records. Every establishment shall keep a written record of the name and address of each patron and the date and hour of service, and of all hours worked by employees. Such written record, as well as those required by Business and Professions Code Sections 22700 et seq., shall be open to inspection only by officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter and for no other purpose. Such records will be kept on the premises of the establishment for a period of two (2) years.

     (g)   No Residential Use. No part of the establishment shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes. No cooking or food preparation will be allowed on the premises unless a full service kitchen is installed. Such kitchen will be for the sole use of employees, and will be installed in an employees only area. The full service kitchen will have a minimum of a sink with hot and cold running water, a refrigerator, a stove, and sufficient cabinets to store cooking utensils.

     (h)   At no time shall employees apply tanning liquids or otherwise touch or come into physical contact with customers.

     (i)    No alcohol shall be allowed on the premises. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.110 Inspection by officials.
     The investigating officials of the city, including the health officer, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.115 Surety bond.
     Every applicant for an operator’s permit shall post with the city clerk, a surety in the principal sum amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) either in cash or executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do a surety business in the state of California and as principal by the applicant. The form of the bond shall have been approved by the city attorney and shall provide that should the applicant be issued a permit under this chapter which is subsequently suspended or revoked, the city shall be reimbursed from said bond for all costs of said any investigation or other proceedings related to said suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.120 Sale or transfer of establishment.
     Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a tanning facility, the permit and business license shall not be transferred without the written approval of the license collector. An application for such change shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing and investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time and provide all of the information required in Section 6.42.040. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1823 § 15, (2008))

 

6.42.130 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager for violation of, or for causing or permitting violation of, any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permits in the first instance.

     Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his or her designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked or whether the permit may be retained. In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of the reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of first class mail.

     In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit, the permittee may appeal to the city council in the manner as provided in Section 6.42.090. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.140 Display of signs and permits.
     No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall begin operations until a recognizable and legible sign has been posted at the main entrance to the permit premises. All permits granted shall bear the picture of the permittee and shall be posted within the establishment in a location immediately available for inspection for representatives of the city, including the permits for employees. No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any other name or at any other location than that specified in the permit. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.150 Notice of changes.
     All persons granted permits pursuant to this chapter shall report immediately to the license collector and the police department all changes of residence or business address or change of ownership of the establishment or service. Failure to give such notice within fifteen (15) days of the event shall render the permit null and void. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994))

 

6.42.160 Renewal of permits.
     Every permit shall be renewed annually, no less than ninety (90) days prior to the anniversary date of its issuance. Any permit not renewed shall be null and void on such anniversary date. The filing and investigation fee for renewals shall be as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs such as processing fingerprints. Prior to permit renewal being granted the permittee must:

     (a)   Provide a new photograph and current information concerning any changes to the facts set forth in the application;

     (b)   Obtain clearance from the police department signifying that the permittee has had no arrests or convictions for violations of those penal code section listed in Section 6.42.080(c) of this code since the permit was issued or last renewed. (Ord. 1514 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1823 § 16, (2008))

Chapter 6.43 BINGO
6.43.010 Purpose.
     It is the intention of the city council to authorize the licensing of bingo games in the city of Burlingame pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the Constitution of the State of California and Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 1318 § 1, (1986))

 

6.43.020 Licenses—Issuance, renewal, suspension, revocation.
     (a)   The license clerk shall issue licenses to conduct bingo games in the city to applying organizations which qualify for such licenses under Penal Code Section 326.5; provided, that no license shall be issued to any organization which has not submitted an application to the license clerk which is complete with the information required pursuant to Section 6.43.040 or which has submitted an application which indicates that the organization does not qualify for a license under state law.

     (b)   Original licenses shall be valid from the date of issuance until the next following June 30th. Renewed licenses shall be valid for one year from July 1st until the next following June 30th. A license which is suspended or revoked pursuant to subsection (c) shall not be deemed valid. Each licensee shall pay a yearly license fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

     (c)   The city council shall have the power to revoke a license or to suspend a license for periods up to its scheduled expiration date if the council finds that the licensee or any person functioning on behalf of the licensee has violated any provision of this chapter or any provision of state law pertaining to the operation of bingo games. No suspension or revocation shall take place unless and until the city council shall have conducted a hearing on the matter, with at least ten (10) days written notice to the licensee. (Ord. 1318 § 1, (1986))

 

6.43.030 License requirement.
     No person or organization shall operate, conduct, carry on, or cause, allow, permit or suffer to be operated, conducted or carried on, any bingo game except pursuant to a valid license in full force and effect issued to an organization authorized to conduct such a game. (Ord. 1318 § 1, (1986))

 

6.43.040 Application for license to conduct bingo game.
     Any organization desiring to conduct a bingo game in the city shall apply to the license clerk for a license to do so on a form provided by the license clerk. The applicant shall provide the following information:

     (a)   Name, business address and business telephone of the organization;

     (b)   The day of the week and hours of the day when the bingo games will be played;

     (c)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property at which it is proposed to conduct the bingo game;

     (d)   If the organization which proposes to conduct the bingo games does not own the property where the games are to be played, whether the property is leased to the organization;

     (e)   If the organization does not lease or own the property, whether its use is donated to the organization;

     (f)    The functions of the organization which are conducted in the building where the bingo games are to be played, other than the bingo games themselves;

     (g)   The type of organization which is going to conduct the bingo games (i.e., labor organization; agricultural or horticultural organization; fraternal organization; mobilehome park association; senior citizen organization; one of the following types of nonprofit organization: cemetery company; religious organization; charitable organization; organization for testing for public safety; literary organization; educational organization; amateur sports organization; organization for prevention of cruelty to animals; business league; chamber of commerce; or board of trade; civic league; club);

     (h)   The section of the Revenue and Taxation Code under which the organization is exempt from the California bank and corporation tax, with documentation verifying the claim for exemption;

     (i)    The name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the individuals in charge of the bingo game, and how such person(s) can be reached during business hours. (Ord. 1318 § 1, (1986))

 

 

6.43.050 Number of days per week of operation—Limit.
     No person or organization shall operate, conduct or carry on, or cause, allow, permit, or suffer to be operated, conducted or carried on, on behalf of any organization any bingo game in the city if, during any calendar week, such person or organization had already conducted a bingo game in the city during any previous day of such calendar week. (Ord. 1318 § 1, (1986))

 

6.43.060 Use of facilities for bingo—Limit per week.
     No person or organization shall operate, conduct or carry on, or cause, allow, permit or suffer to be operated, conducted or carried on, on behalf of any organization any bingo game in the city within any building, structure, lot or premises within any calendar week if two (2) bingo games have been conducted, carried on or operated within such building, structure, lot or premises during the same calendar week. (Ord. 1318 § 1, (1986))

 

6.43.070 Hours of operation—Limit.
     No person or organization shall operate, conduct or carry on, or cause, allow, permit or suffer to be operated, conducted or carried on, on behalf of any organization any bingo game in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. of one day and 8:00 a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 1318 § 1, (1986))

Chapter 6.44 PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS
6.44.010 Private patrol operator—Definition.
     “Private patrol operator” means a street patrol system or business to keep under watch, inspection or periodic examination any persons or property in the city of Burlingame and licensed by the State of California pursuant to Chapter 11.5 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 1111 § 1, (1977) Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.020 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on within the city of Burlingame, the business of a private patrol operator or to be employed as a security guard or street patrol person by a private patrol operator unless such operator, security guard or street patrol person has registered with the police department and filed therewith a copy of their state identification card, provided that any employee of a private patrol operator not so registered shall obtain a local security guard permit as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1111 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.030 Business license.
     At the time a private patrol operator registers with the police department it shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 6.04 of this code. It shall also inform the police department of the areas of locations in the city of Burlingame in which it proposes to provide patrol services. (Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.040 Application for local security guard permit.
     Any person desiring to be employed by a private patrol operator and not registered pursuant to Chapter 11.5 of the Business and Profession Code shall first make application for a local security guard permit by filing with the license collector a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the license collector which shall give the following information:

     (a)   Name, residence and telephone number;

     (b)   The previous address of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     (c)   Social security number and driver’s license number;

     (d)   Birth certificate or other written proof acceptable to the police department that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

     (e)   Fingerprints (taken by the police department for criminal history investigation) and three (3) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within the last sixty (60) days;

     (f)    Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     (g)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

     (h)   The private patrol or similar business license and permit history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state, under license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;

     (i)    Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction;

 

     (j)    Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     (k)   The application will also include a separately signed waiver and release authorizing the city of Burlingame, its agents, and employees to seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements made on the application and the qualifications and record of the applicant. (Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.050 Permit fee and investigation.
     All applications for initial permits shall be accompanied by a filing and investigation fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs of processing applicant’s fingerprints by the State of California. Upon receipt of said application, the license collector shall refer the application to the police department which shall make a written recommendation to the license collector within thirty (30) days, provided that said thirty (30) days may be extended for such period as may be necessary to obtain fingerprint records from the appropriate state agency. (Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1823 § 17, (2008))

 

6.44.060 Issuance or denial of permit.
     The police department shall issue such permit if all required information has been furnished and the reports filed find that:

     (a)   The character of the applicant is satisfactory;

     (b)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent oral or written statements in his or her application or to any person investigating his or her application.

     The permit shall be denied if all of the above findings cannot be made or if all of the information required is not supplied to the city. If denied, the reasons therefor shall be endorsed upon the application, and the police department shall notify the applicant of the disapproval with a copy of the application upon which the reasons have been endorsed by first class mail. (Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.070 Appeal.
     In the event a permit has been denied, applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice within which to appeal to the city council by filing a written application for a public hearing with the clerk of the city. Notice and a public hearing shall be given as follows:

     (a)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the council, at a regular meeting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the appeal, and shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant at his or her address set forth in the appeal by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior thereto.

     (b)   On the date set, the council shall hear the matter, and may continue it from time to time before reaching a decision. If the council finds that the applicant has satisfactorily met all of the requirements of this chapter, it shall order the issuance of the permit. If it finds that the requirements have not been met satisfactorily, it shall deny the permit.

     (c)   All findings of the council shall be final and conclusive upon the applicant. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993) Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.080 Renewal of permits.
     Every permit shall be renewed annually, no less than ninety (90) days prior to the anniversary date of its issuance upon approval of the chief of police. The filing and investigation fee for renewals shall be as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, no part of which is refundable. Additional fees may be charged to cover costs such as processing fingerprints. Any permit not renewed shall be null and void on such anniversary date. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1823 § 18, (2008))

 

6.44.090 Transfer of permit.
     The holder of a local security guard permit may transfer employment from one private patrol operator to another without making reapplication. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993) Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.100 Revocation or suspension of permits.
     Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager for violation of, or for causing or permitting violation of, any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of such permit in the first instance.

     Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his or her designated representative, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked or whether the permit may be retained. In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of the reasons for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of first class mail.

     In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit, the permittee may appeal to the city council in the manner as provided in Section 6.44.070. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993))

 

6.44.110 Uniforms and badges.
     All uniforms and badges of private patrol operators and their employees shall be approved by the chief of police and shall in no way resemble those of the Burlingame police department or other law enforcement agency having any jurisdiction in San Mateo County. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.120 Titles.
     Private patrol operators and their employees are prohibited at all times from using the term or title “police,” “police officer,” “deputy sheriff,” “peace officer,” “law enforcement” or other term or title that would suggest to the public any official connection with the Burlingame police department or other law enforcement agency having any jurisdiction in San Mateo County. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993) Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.130 Operations.
     No private patrol operator or its employee shall knowingly represent him or herself or another to be a member of the Burlingame police department or other law enforcement agency. No private patrol operator or its employee shall use any sign, word, language or device to induce a false or mistaken belief that he or she is acting or purporting to act on behalf of the Burlingame police department or any other law enforcement agency. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.140 Vehicles.
     The chief of police may regulate the color, affixed signs, insignia and letter to be used on motor vehicles operated by a private patrol operator so as to eliminate confusion with those of the Burlingame police department, or any other law enforcement agency having any jurisdiction in San Mateo County. Knowingly using any vehicle which is colored or has affixed thereon any sign, badge, title or device that would reasonably induce the belief that the vehicle is being operated by the Burlingame police department or by any other law enforcement agency having any jurisdiction in San Mateo County is prohibited.

     Vehicles shall comply with all mechanical and equipment regulations of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993) Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.150 Notice of termination of employees.
     The person in charge of a private patrol operator shall notify the chief of police in writing within five (5) days of the termination of any employee. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

 

6.44.160 Terminated employee delivering permit.
     Any employee having a permit issued pursuant to this chapter whose employment is terminated with a private patrol operator shall deliver and surrender his or her permit to the chief of police. The permit shall be held by the chief of police until expiration, or until the person gains employment with another private patrol operator in the city of Burlingame, whichever occurs first. If the person gains employment prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit will, upon request, be returned to the person. (Ord. 1484 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1533 § 1, (1995))

Chapter 6.50 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDED BY STATE FRANCHISE HOLDERS
6.50.010 Purpose and applicability.
     The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations for the provision of video service by state franchise holders, in accordance with the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act, California Public Utilities Code Sections 5800 through 5970 (“DIVCA”). This chapter shall apply to video service providers operating within the city of Burlingame pursuant to a valid state franchise. (Ord. 1872 § 3, (2012))

 

6.50.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

     “City” means the city of Burlingame.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Burlingame, or designee.

     “Franchise fee” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (g) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

     “Gross revenues” shall have the meaning given that term by the California Public Utilities Code Section 5860 or its successor.

     “Holder” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (j) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

     “Material breach” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (j) of Public Utilities Code Section 5900 or its successor.

     “Network” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (l) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830 or its successor.

     “State franchise” shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (p) of Public Utilities Code Section 5830.

     “Video service” shall have the meaning given that term by the California Public Utilities Code Section 5830(s) or its successor. (Ord. 1872 § 3, (2012))

 

6.50.030 Franchise fee for state franchise holders.
     Any state franchise holder shall remit to the city a franchise fee in the amount of five (5) percent of the gross revenues of the state franchise holder in compliance with California Public Utilities Code Section 5840(q). (Ord. 1872 § 3, (2012))

 

6.50.040 Public, educational, and government channels.
     (a)   In accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n), upon termination of all incumbent cable provider franchises, each state franchise holder shall remit to the city a fee to support PEG channel facilities in the amount of one percent of gross revenues. Each state franchise holder shall remit such fee to support PEG channel facilities quarterly, within forty-five (45) calendar days after the end of the quarter for the preceding calendar quarter. All revenue collected pursuant to this fee shall be deposited in a separate fund and shall only be expended for the purpose of supporting PEG channel facilities.

     (b)   Each payment of the fee established in subsection (a) of this section delivered to the city shall be accompanied by a summary report: (1) explaining the basis for the calculation of the payment; (2) reflecting the total amount of gross revenues for the remittance period and all payments, deductions and computations used to determine the amount of the quarterly remittance; and (3) the fourth quarter payment shall include the total amount of gross revenues for the remittance period and a summary of the gross revenues submitted for the entire calendar year. The city manager may establish, and from time to time revise, such additional reporting requirements as are reasonably necessary to ensure that the basis for the calculation of the amount of remittance is adequately explained and documented, and each state franchise holder shall comply with such additional reporting requirements provided that each state franchise holder shall have agreed to such additional reporting requirements. Any additional reporting requirements must be mutually agreed upon by the city and the franchise holder.

     (c)   Each state franchise holder shall designate a sufficient amount of capacity on its network to allow the provision of PEG channels in accordance with California Public Utilities Code Section 5870. Each state franchise holder shall have three (3) months from the date the city requests the PEG channels to designate the capacity. The three (3) month period shall be tolled by any period during which the designation or provision of PEG channel capacity is technically infeasible.

     (d)   This section shall be enforced, and disputes regarding this section shall be resolved, pursuant to California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(p). (Ord. 1872 § 3, (2012); Ord. 1951 § 2, (2018))

 

6.50.050 Customer service penalties by state franchise holders.
     (a)   Any state franchise holder shall comply with the customer service provisions set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5900.

     (b)   The city shall impose the following penalties against a state franchise holder for any material breach of the customer service provisions set forth in Section 6.50.050(a):

     (1)   For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach;

     (2)   For a second occurrence of a material breach of the same nature as the first material breach that occurs within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach;

     (3)   For a third or further occurrence of a material breach of the same nature as the previous material breaches that occurs within twelve (12) months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.

     (c)   The city manager shall have the authority to assess penalties for any material breach by a holder of a state franchise. Prior to assessing penalties for a material breach, the city manager shall first have provided the state franchise holder with written notice of any alleged material breach of the customer service provisions set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5900 and shall allow the state franchise holder at least thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.

     (d)   A material breach for the purposes of assessing penalties shall be deemed to have occurred for each day within the jurisdiction of the city, following the expiration of the period specified in this section that any material breach has not been remedied by the video provider, irrespective of the number of customers affected. No monetary penalties shall be assessed for a material breach if it is out of the reasonable control of the state franchise holder.

     (e)   The city shall submit one half of any penalty amounts it receives to the Digital Divide Account established by California Public Utilities Code Section 280.5.

     (f)    No monetary penalties shall be assessed for a material breach if it is out of the reasonable control of the state franchise holder. (Ord. 1872 § 3, (2012))

 

6.50.060 Authority to examine and audit business records.
     The city shall ensure that it receives all franchise fee revenue to which it is entitled to at the times and in the amounts specified by Public Utilities Code Section 5860, and, to that end, the city manager is hereby authorized, either with or without the assistance of a duly authorized representative, to examine the business records of the holder of the state franchise in accordance with subdivision (i) of Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 1872 § 3, (2012))

Chapter 6.52 BROADWAY AREA IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
6.52.010 Definitions.
     In order to distinguish between district businesses and for the purpose of calculating and applying the amount of assessments owed, the following definitions shall apply:

     “District” is the Broadway Area Business Improvement District.

     “Finance” shall mean a business that offers bank, savings and loan, thrift, or credit union financial services.

     “Fiscal Year” means July 1st to and including June 30th of the following year.

     “Government” shall mean public, local, state or federal agencies.

     “Professional” includes attorneys, architects, engineers, surveyors, physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors and others in a medical/health service field, consultants, real estate brokers, laboratories (including dental and optical), hearing aid services, artists and designers.

     “Restaurant” businesses include cafes, eating establishments, sandwich shops, dinner houses, restaurants, fast food services and other similar businesses.

     “Retail” businesses include all businesses not covered by other definitions set out in this Section, at least fifty (50) percent of whose gross income is derived from “retail sales” as that term is defined under the California Sales and Use Tax Law. The fact that a substantial part of its business consists of sales and other than retail sales does not exclude said business from this classification so long as such other business component does not account for more than fifty (50) percent of said business’ gross income.

     “Service” businesses include general office, news and advertising media, printers, photographers, personal care facilities and outlets, contractors/builders, service stations, repairing and servicing businesses, renting and leasing businesses, utilities, vending machine businesses and other similar businesses not otherwise included in the other definitions of this Section. (Ord. 1461 § 2; (1992))

 

6.52.020 Establishment of boundaries.
     A parking and business improvement district known as the “BROADWAY AREA BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT” is hereby established pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq. The boundaries of the district shall be as set forth on Exhibits “A” and “B”, attached to Ordinance No. 1461. (Ord. 1461 § 2; (1992); Ord. 1524 § 3, (1995); Ord. 1592 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1917 § 2, (2015))

 

6.52.030 Advisory board.
     There shall be an advisory board, which shall consist of seven (7) members. Members shall be elected for a term of two (2) years by the businesses participating in the district. Voting shall be based on the value of the benefit assessments. The members of the board shall be classified so that the terms of four (4) members shall expire during one year, and the terms of the other three (3) members shall expire the following year. The board shall be incorporated as a non-profit corporation. Board members shall represent businesses which have currently paid the annual benefit assessment. The board shall make recommendations to the city council on expenditure of district revenues, make an annual report for each fiscal year for which assessments are levied, and do those things required by the Streets and Highways Code to be performed by the advisory board. (Ord. 1461 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1592 § 3, (1998))

 

6.52.040 Establishment of benefit assessments.
     All businesses, trades and professions located within the district boundaries shall pay an annual benefit assessment to the district for each fiscal year in the following amounts:

 

Business Types

Number of Employees

 

 

 

 

Retail and

4+

$450

Restaurant

1-3

300

 

 

 

Service

3+

250

 

1-2

150

Professional

3+

$200

 

1-2

150

 

 

 

Financial

 

500

 

(Ord. 1461 § 2, (1992))

 

6.52.050 Purpose and use of benefit assessments.
     All funds derived from the assessment will be used for the enhancement and appearance of the district and promotion, advertising and image building for the businesses within the district. Funds derived from the district shall not be used to offset or diminish maintenance, capital improvement and/or business promotion programs currently sponsored by the city within the district. The types of improvements and activities proposed to be funded by the levy of assessments on businesses in the district are as follows:

     (a)   Streetscape Beautification, Seasonal Decorations and Public Arts Programs.

     (1)   Erect a district sign on El Camino Real,

     (2)   Place kiosks for posting local events, public information, local business information, and for relocation of newspaper racks,

     (3)   Place benches along Broadway,

     (4)   Seasonal street plantings of flowers,

     (5)   Seasonal flags and banners and relocation of city signs,

     (6)   Sidewalk enhancement and maintenance;

     (b)   Business Recruitment and Retention.

     (1)   Shopper preference survey to determine most desired new businesses,

     (2)   Develop strategy to fill commercial vacancies,

     (3)   Small business assistance workshops;

     (c)   Parking.

     (1)   Remove parking meters,

     (2)   Create more effective directional signage to lots,

     (3)   Sponsor parking maps and/or directories,

     (4)   Annual contribution to parking facility development and maintenance fund;

     (d)   Commercial Marketing, Public Relations and Advertising.

     (1)   Create cable T.V. and radio spots,

     (2)   Produce seasonal direct mail pieces,

     (3)   Organize special events throughout the year;

     (e)   Shuttle. Establish a people mover system between the area and the hotel district, to be funded on a cooperative cost sharing basis. (Ord. 1461 § 2, (1992))

 

6.52.060 Exclusions from benefit assessment.
     No person or business shall be required to pay an assessment if it is:

     (a)   A residential use of the property within the district, or

     (b)   A nonprofit organization, as defined by Section 6.04.040 of this code, located within the district. (Ord. 1461 § 2, (1992))

 

6.52.070 Collection of benefit assessment.
     The benefit assessment authorized by this chapter shall be billed and collected at the same time and manner as city business licenses. The city will make such collections without charge and will forward collected funds to the advisory board monthly. (Ord. 1461 § 2, (1992))

 

6.52.080 Late payment penalties and prorations.
     Late payment penalties shall be applied to businesses that do not provide their respective assessment payments in the same time, manner, and amount as penalties upon late payment of city business licenses. Assessments shall be prorated for new business in the same manner as city business licenses. (Ord. 1461 § 2, (1992))

 

6.52.090 Annual budget process.
     (a)   The advisory board shall present an annual budget for city council review and approval prior to the beginning of each fiscal year.

     (b)   The city shall not adopt, modify or otherwise amend any fiscal year budget of the district that is inconsistent in any way with said fiscal year’s budget as agreed to and presented by the advisory board, except in the case of a written majority protest (regarding elimination or modifications of any specific budget item) from business owners who will pay fifty (50) percent or more of the assessments proposed to be levied as to any specific budget item pursuant to Government Code Section 36525(b). In such case the written protest regarding any specific budget item shall be grounds to eliminate or modify said expenditure from the proposed budget.

     (c)   The original assessment formula shall not be increased unless requested by a majority of the businesses located within the district.

     (d)   Decisions of the advisory board regarding expenditures of all funds generated under these programs shall be final to the extent they are consistent with the district’s fiscal year budget adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1461 § 2, (1992))

Chapter 6.54 BURLINGAME AVENUE AREA BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
6.54.010 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

     (a)   “District” means the Burlingame Avenue Area Business Improvement District.

     (b)   “Financial” means a business that offers bank, savings and loan, thrift, title insurance, or credit union financial services.

     (c)   “Fiscal year” means October 1st to and including September 30th of the following year.

     (d)   “Government” means public, local, state or federal agencies.

     (e)   “Professional” means attorneys, architects, engineers, surveyors, physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors and others in a medical/health service field, consultants, real estate brokers, laboratories (including dental and optical), hearing aid services, artists, insurance brokers, and designers.

     (f)    “Restaurant” means businesses that sell prepared food and/or drink and includes cafés, eating establishments, sandwich shops, dinner houses, restaurants, bars, fast food services, and other similar businesses.

     (g)   “Retail” means businesses that buy and resell goods and includes all businesses not covered by other definitions set out in this section, at least fifty (50) percent of whose gross income is derived from “retail sales” as that term is defined under the California Sales and Use Tax Law. The fact that a substantial part of its business consists of sales and other than retail sales does not exclude such business from this classification so long as such other business component does not account for more than fifty (50) percent of such business’ gross income.

     (h)   “Service” means businesses that sell services, include general offices, news and advertising media, printers, photographers, personal care facilities and outlets, contractors/builders, service stations, repairing and servicing businesses, automobile repair shops, insurance brokers, renting and leasing businesses, utilities, vending machine businesses, beauty service, and other similar businesses not otherwise included in the other definitions of this section.

     (i)    “Salons” mean personal service businesses which provide tanning, nail and hair personal services to individual customers on the premises. (Ord. 1735 § 2, (2004); Ord. 1854 §§ 2—4, (2010))

 

6.54.020 Establishment of boundaries.
     A parking and business improvement district known as the “Burlingame Avenue Area Business Improvement District” is hereby established pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq. The boundaries of the district shall be as set forth in Exhibit “A,” attached to Ordinance No. 1854, and located at the end of this chapter. (Ord. 1735 § 2, (2004); Ord. 1854 § 5, (2010))

 

6.54.030 Advisory board.
     (a)   There shall be an advisory board, which shall consist of nine (9) members. Members shall be nominated and elected for a term of two (2) years by the businesses participating in the district.

     (b)   Terms. The positions on the board shall be classified so that the initial terms of five (5) board positions shall expire at the end of the first year (September 30, 2011), and the initial terms of the other four (4) positions shall expire at the end of the second year (September 30, 2012).

     (c)   Qualifications. Board positions shall be filled with persons owning businesses within the district and who have currently paid the annual benefit assessment. At least three (3) of the board members shall be owners of businesses in zone 1 and three (3) of the board members shall be owners of businesses in zone 2. The advisory board should be composed of members representing different business sectors, including retail, restaurants, salons, and professional or service businesses.

     (d)   A vacancy on the advisory board shall be filled by appointment by the city council, upon nomination by the remaining members of the advisory board. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired portion of the position vacated.

     (e)   The board shall make recommendations to the city council on expenditure of district revenues, make an annual report for each fiscal year for which assessments are to be levied, and perform those functions required by the Streets and Highways Code to be performed by the advisory board.

     (f)    The board shall elect a chair and shall make such rules and by-laws concerning their procedures as they deem necessary. (Ord. 1854 § 6, (2010))

 

6.54.040 Establishment of benefit assessments.
     All businesses located within the district boundaries shall pay an annual benefit assessment to the district for each fiscal year as levied by the city council.

     (a)   Assessments Zones. For assessment purposes, the district shall be divided into three (3) zones:

     (1)   Zone 1 shall consist of all businesses located on the ground floor of buildings on Burlingame Avenue;

     (2)   Zone 2 shall consist of all businesses located on the ground floor of buildings on all streets within the district boundaries other than Burlingame Avenue;

     (3)   Zone 3 shall consist of all businesses located either below or above the ground floor of buildings on all streets within the district boundaries.

     (b)   Assessment Amounts.

     (1)   Zone 1. All businesses in zone 1 shall be assessed each fiscal year, a basic assessment fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) and an additional assessment based upon the square foot measurement of their ground floor space as follows:

     (A)  Under five hundred (500) square feet, zero dollars ($0.00);

     (B)   Five hundred (500) square feet, one hundred dollars ($100.00);

     (C)   For each additional five hundred (500) square feet or portion thereof above five hundred (500) square feet, an additional fifty dollars ($50.00);

     (D)  The additional square foot assessment shall be capped at the rate for five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet.

     (2)   Zone 2. All businesses in zone 2 shall be assessed each fiscal year, a basic assessment fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and an additional assessment based upon the square foot measurement of their ground floor space as follows:

     (A)  Under five hundred (500) square feet, zero dollars ($0.00);

     (B)   Five hundred (500) square feet, eighty dollars ($80.00);

     (C)   For each additional five hundred (500) square feet or portion thereof, above five hundred (500) square feet, an additional forty dollars ($40.00);

     (D)  The additional square foot assessment shall be capped at the rate for five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet.

     (3)   Zone 3. All businesses in zone 3 shall be assessed a basic assessment fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).

     The annual amount of assessment for each of the businesses in each zone shall not exceed these amounts without notice, a public hearing and adoption of an ordinance amendment pursuant to state law. The total annual assessment shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from receipt of invoice. (Ord. 1854 § 7, (2010))

 

6.54.050 Purpose and use of benefit assessments.
     All funds derived from the assessments will be used for the enhancement and appearance of the district and for the promotion, advertising and image building of the businesses within the district. Funds derived from the district shall not be used to offset or diminish maintenance, capital improvement or business promotion programs currently sponsored by the city within the district. The types of improvements and activities proposed to be funded by the levy of assessments on businesses in the district are as follows:

     (a)   Commercial marketing and advertising, including, but not limited to, signage; website design and maintenance; print, radio, television and electronic advertising; and publications for use with hotels and the San Mateo County Convention and Visitors Bureau.

     (b)   Promotional, special, and seasonal events.

     (c)   Streetscape beautification and seasonal decorations, including, but not limited to, plantings of flowers, seasonal decorations, and banners.

     (d)   Shuttle service, including contributing to a shuttle operation connecting hotels and Burlingame’s downtown.

     (e)   Personnel, including the option to fund a salary for a person to administer district programs, organize events, and promote the district. (Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010))

 

6.54.055 Appeal of assessment amount.
     Any business within the district may appeal the amount or computation of their annual assessment. The appeal must be in writing, must state the grounds and basis for the appeal and must be presented to the advisory board within fifteen (15) days of the date of the assessment billing statement. The advisory board shall appoint three (3) of their members to serve as an adjustment board to hear the appeal. The adjustment board shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days of its receipt. At the appeal hearing, the appellant and the district may appear, submit evidence and present their case. The adjustment board shall render a decision in writing within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The adjustment board’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 1854 § 9, (2010))

 

6.54.060 Exclusions from benefit assessment.
     No person or business shall be required to pay an assessment if it is:

     (a)   A residential use of the property within the district; or

     (b)   A nonprofit organization, as defined by Section 6.04.040 of this code, located within the district. (Ord. 1735 § 2, (2004))

 

6.54.070 Collection of benefit assessment.
     The benefit assessment authorized by this chapter shall be billed in September of each year, shall be due on October 1st of each year and shall be delinquent on October 31st of each year. The city will make such collections in the same manner as it collects the business license fee. The city will forward collected funds to the advisory board monthly. (Ord. 1854 § 10, (2010))

 

6.54.080 Late payment penalties and prorations.
     Businesses which do not timely provide their respective assessment payments shall be subject to late payment penalties in the same time, manner, and amount as penalties upon late payment of city business licenses. Assessments shall be prorated for new business in the same manner as city business licenses. (Ord. 1854 § 11, (2010))

 

6.54.090 Annual budget process.
     (a)   The advisory board shall present an annual budget for city council review and approval prior to the beginning of each fiscal year.

     (b)   The city shall not adopt, modify or otherwise amend any fiscal year budget of the district that is inconsistent in any way with the fiscal year’s budget as agreed to and presented by the advisory board, except in the case of a written majority protest (regarding elimination or modifications of any specific budget item) from business owners who will pay fifty (50) percent or more of the assessments proposed to be levied as to any specific budget item pursuant to Streets and Highways Code Section 36525. In such a case, the written protest regarding any specific budget item shall be grounds to eliminate or modify the expenditure from the proposed budget as provided by state law.

     (c)   Decisions of the advisory board regarding expenditures of all funds generated under these programs shall be final to the extent they are consistent with the district’s fiscal year budget adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1735 § 2, (2004))

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 8.04 HEALTH NOTICES
Chapter 8.08 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
Chapter 8.10 REGULATING THE USE OF DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE
Chapter 8.12 RESTRICTION OF THE USE OF SINGLE-USE CARRY-OUT BAGS BY RETAILERS
Chapter 8.16 SOLID WASTE
Chapter 8.17 RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF DEBRIS FROM CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
Chapter 8.18 SMOKING

Chapter 8.04 HEALTH NOTICES
8.04.010 Removal of health notices unlawful.
 For the purpose of protecting the public health and keeping the public informed of rules, regulations and orders of the health officer or any orders of the health officer or any of his or her deputies, it is unlawful for any person to remove any notice posted by the health officer or his or her deputies on or about any premises under any of the ordinances of the city of Burlingame or the laws of the state of California, without permission of the health officer or one of his or her deputies. (1941 Code § 1670, Ord. 376,(1941)

Chapter 8.08 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
8.08.010 Adoption of Environmental Health Code.
     (a)   The following chapters of titles 4 and 5 of the San Mateo County Ordinance Code are adopted by reference:

     (1)   Chapter 4.08 – Manure and Fertilizers;

     (2)   Chapter 4.12 – Mosquito Control;

     (3)   Chapter 4.16 – Rodents;

     (4)   Chapter 4.20 – Milk Regulations;

     (5)   Chapter 4.48 – Abatement of Nuisances;

     (6)   Chapter 4.52 – Environmental Health Code Generally;

     (7)   Chapter 4.56 – Food Establishments;

     (8)   Chapter 4.60 – Public Fresh Water Sports Areas;

     (9)   Chapter 4.68 – Wells;

     (10) Chapter 4.72 – Backflow Prevention;

     (11) Chapter 4.76 – Chemical Toilets

     (l2)  Chapter 4.80 – Rodent and Insect Control;

     (13) Chapter 4.84 – Individual Sewage Disposal Systems;

     (14) Chapter 4.92 – Storage of Hazardous Substances;

     (15) Chapter 4.108 – Prohibited Fuels; and

     (16) Chapter 5.68 – Food Establishments. (Ord. 1103 § 2, (1977); 1679 § 2, (2002))

 

8.08.020 Additional provisions concerning wells.
     The following additional provisions regarding wells shall apply within the city:

     (a)   Double Check Valve Arrangement. Between the house or structure being served and the water meter box or distribution system, there shall be installed a double check valve arrangement approved jointly by the health officer and the city engineer.

     (b)   As a part of the investigation required by Chapter 4.68 of Title 4 of the San Mateo County Ordinance Code as adopted by this title, the health officer shall consult the city engineer and shall not issue any well permit without the city engineer’s concurrence. (Ord. 1103 § 2, (1977); Ord. 1679 § 2, (2002))

 

8.08.030 Inspection fees and permit procedures.
     The inspection and application fees and the permit procedures established pursuant to Title 4 and Chapter 5.64 of the San Mateo County Ordinance Code, with the exception of the five (5) year tobacco sales permit, are approved for use by the county health officer in administering this chapter. The penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1103 § 2, (1977); Ord. 1679 § 2, (2002))

 

8.08.040 Health officer defined.
     Unless otherwise specified, “health officer” as used in this code means the county of San Mateo health officer appointed pursuant to Chapter 4.52 of the San Mateo County Ordinance Code as adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1672 § 2, (2002))

Chapter 8.10 REGULATING THE USE OF DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE
8.10.010 Adoption of San Mateo County ordinance by reference.
     Chapter 4.107 of Title 4 of the San Mateo County Code of Ordinances, entitled “Regulating the Use of Disposable Food Service Ware,” and any amendment thereto, are hereby adopted by this reference and made part of the Burlingame Municipal Code and are, accordingly, effective in this city. Certified copies of Chapter 4.107 of Title 4, as adopted hereby, and any subsequent amendment, shall be deposited with the city clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by the clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1976 § 1, (2020))

 

8.10.020 Authorization of enforcement by San Mateo County personnel.
     The county manager of the county of San Mateo or their designee is hereby authorized to enforce, on behalf of the city, Chapter 4.107 “Regulating the Use of Disposable Food Service Ware” of Title 4 of the San Mateo County Code of Ordinances, and any amendments thereto, within the city’s jurisdiction. Such enforcement authority includes, but is not limited to, the authority to hold hearings, issue citations, and assess administrative fines on behalf of the city. (Ord. 1976 § 1, (2020))

Chapter 8.12 RESTRICTION OF THE USE OF SINGLE-USE CARRY-OUT BAGS BY RETAILERS
8.12.010 Adoption of San Mateo County ordinance by reference.
     Chapter 4.114 of Title 4 of the San Mateo County ordinance code, entitled “Reusable Bags,” and any amendment thereto, are hereby adopted by this reference and made part of the Burlingame Municipal Code and are, accordingly, effective in this city. Certified copies of Chapter 4.107 of Title 4, as adopted hereby, and any subsequent amendment, shall be deposited with the city clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by the clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1883 § 2, (2013))

 

8.12.020 Authorization of enforcement by San Mateo County personnel.
     The county of San Mateo, its officers, employees and agents are hereby authorized to enforce, on behalf of the city, Chapter 4.114 “Reusable Bags” of Title 4 of the San Mateo County ordinance code, and any amendments thereto, as adopted by reference herein, within the jurisdiction areas of the city of Burlingame. Such enforcement authority includes, but is not limited to, the collection of fees and fines, expending such revenue in the enforcement of the regulation of single-use carry-out bags, holding hearings, suspending permits and issuing administrative fines. (Ord. 1883 § 2, (2013))

 

8.12.030 Violations.
     (a)   It is unlawful for a retail establishment, and any person who is an agent, employee or owner of a retail establishment, to provide a single-use carry-out bag to a customer in violation of the chapter adopted by reference.

     (b)   Violation of the chapter adopted by reference is an offense that may be charged as set forth in Chapter 1.12 or may be remedied by any means available to remedy a violation of this code. (Ord. 1883 § 2, (2013))

Chapter 8.16 SOLID WASTE
8.16.010 Definitions.
     Whenever the following defined words and phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the definitions or meanings established by this section, unless it is clearly apparent from the context in which the word or phrase appears that a different definition or meaning is intended.

     (a)   “Collection” means the scheduled pick up of solid waste but does not include the random picking up of loose litter from public places or places open to the public.

     (b)   “Commercial and/or industrial property” means property upon which business activity is conducted, including, but not limited to, hotel, motel, trailer court, restaurant, cafeteria, market, hospital or any educational, professional, commercial or industrial establishment of any nature whatsoever where there is generation of solid wastes.

     (c)   “Composting” means the controlled biological decomposition of organic wastes that are source separated from the solid waste stream. Such organic wastes include vegetable, animal, yard and wood wastes which are not hazardous wastes.

     (d)   “Demolition and construction debris” means discarded materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition activities on housing, commercial or governmental buildings and any other structure and pavement as defined in Chapter 8.17 of this code.

     (e)   “Franchisee” means any solid waste collector authorized by the city council pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter.

     (f)    “Garbage” includes, but is not restricted to, every accumulation of animal, vegetable or other matter:

     (1)   Resulting from the preparation and consumption of edible foodstuffs; or

     (2)   Resulting from decay or the storage of meats, fish, fowl, or vegetables, including the cans, containers or wrappers of such materials; or

     (3)   Industrial, domestic and organic solid wastes or residue of animals sold for meat; or

     (4)   Vegetable and animal matter from kitchens, dining rooms, markets, food establishments or any other place using, dealing in or handling meats, fish, fowl, vegetables or grains; or

     (5)   Offal, animal excreta or carcasses of animals, fish or fowl; or

     (6)   Any waste material for which there is not currently a feasible collection system available.

     (g)   “Hazardous waste” means all substances defined as hazardous waste, acutely hazardous waste or extremely hazardous waste by the state of California, or identified as hazardous waste by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, under applicable laws or regulations.

     (h)   “Non-combustible rubbish” means ashes, bottles, broken crockery, glass, tin cans, metal and metallic substances which will not incinerate through contact with flames of ordinary temperature.

     (i)    “Owner or occupant” means and includes every owner of, every tenant or person who is in possession or an inhabitant of or has the care and control of a residential property or a commercial and/or industrial property located in the city.

     (j)    “Person” means any individual, form, corporation, association or group or any combination thereof acting as a unit.

     (k)   “Recyclable materials” or “recyclables” means solid waste which may be reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture consistent with the requirements of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, including, without limitation, paper, newsprint, printed matter, pasteboard, paper containers, cardboard, glass, aluminum, PET, HDPE, and other plastics, beverage containers, compostable materials (including yard waste), and wood, brick and stone in reusable size and condition. Recyclable materials shall include those items of construction debris and demolition debris which are described in this definition.

     (l)    “Recycling operator” means a person or persons, firm, partnership, joint venture, association or corporation engaged in the collection and recycling of recyclable materials.

     (m)  “Residential property” means property used for residential purposes, irrespective of whether such dwelling units are rental units or are owner-occupied.  A structure may have one or more residential dwelling units. No place used primarily for commercial or industrial purposes shall be considered as a residential dwelling unit.

     (n)   “Rubbish” includes, but is not restricted to, all non-recyclable waste or debris, cardboard, tree or shrub trimmings, rugs, straw, clothing, wood or wood products, crockery, glass, rubber, metal, plastic, construction waste and debris and other similar materials.

     (o)   “Solid waste” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semi-solid and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes. “Solid waste” does not include abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, hazardous waste or low-level radioactive waste, medical waste, recyclable materials, source-separated plant materials, or source-separated organic materials.

     (p)   “Solid waste collector” means any person or persons, firm, partnership, joint venture, association or corporation engaged in the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste generated in the city.

     (q)   “Solid waste disposal” includes the collecting, transporting and disposal of solid waste generated within the city.

     (r)    “Solid waste facility” means any licensed recycling center, materials recovery facility, intermediate processing center, incineration facility or landfill where solid waste may be taken for immediate processing or final disposal. “Solid waste facility” includes a solid waste transfer or processing station and a composting, transformation or disposal facility.

     (s)    “Streets” means the public streets, alleys and rights-of-way as the same now or may hereafter exist within the city.

     (t)    “Yard wastes” means leaves, grass, weeds and wood materials from trees and shrubs. (1941 Code § 1602, Ord. 696, (1959); Ord. 1535 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1828 § 2, (2008))

 

8.16.020 Solid waste accumulations and disposal.
     (a)   All occupied premises within the limits of the city shall have solid waste removal service as specified in this chapter.

     (b)   No person shall, for another, collect, remove or dispose of any solid waste within the city, nor transport the same over any public street or rights-of-way, unless a franchise to do so has first been obtained from the city; provided, that any person who collects, removes, or disposes of only recyclables shall only be required to obtain a city business license.

     (c)   It is unlawful for any person to permit, allow or enter into any agreement whatsoever for the collection or transportation of solid waste or recyclable material with any person who does not possess a franchise or business license.

     (d)   It is unlawful for any person to store or accumulate the following material for any length of time in violation of the following requirements:

     (1)   Solid waste shall be removed a minimum of at least once a week pursuant to this chapter, or more often as necessary or mandated by the San Mateo County Health Department; and

     (2)   Recyclable materials shall be removed a minimum of at least once every thirty (30) days pursuant to this chapter, or more often as necessary or mandated by the San Mateo County Health Department;

     (d)   No person shall place or cause to be placed any solid waste generated upon any property or by any residential, commercial or industrial use into any container other than those owned or controlled by such person, unless permission for such use is granted by the commercial, industrial or residential customer owning or controlling the container and approved by the city and its franchisee.

     (e)   It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to set out or cause to be set out for collection any solid waste other than that originating on the premises.

     (f)    It is unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste in or near litter or recycling containers placed by the city or any other agency in public places for incidental use by pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or in recycling containers or enclosures maintained by the city in commercial zones.

     (g)   It is unlawful for any person to accumulate, keep or deposit solid waste in such a manner that a public nuisance is created, including, but not limited to, allowing insects, or rodents to breed therein.

     (h)   Other than as herein set forth, it is unlawful for any person to dump, bury, burn, incinerate or otherwise dispose of or store or accumulate any garbage, combustible or non-combustible rubbish, miscellaneous debris or combined rubbish or solid waste on any private or public property within the city;  provided, however, that leaves, grass clippings and the like may be composted but only in accordance with state and county regulations governing composting.

     (i)    No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit any solid waste on any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, storm drain, creek, parkway or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city except in an appropriately designated solid waste container.

     (j)    No commercial, industrial, or residential customer owning, occupying or having the control of any premises or vacant lot or any person occupying a dwelling within the city shall permit any solid waste to become or remain offensive, unsightly or unsafe to the public health or safety or to deposit, keep or accumulate or permit to cause any solid waste to be deposited, kept, or accumulated, upon any property, lot, or parcel of land or upon any public or private place, street, lane, alley or driveway, except as allowed in this chapter. (1941 Code § 1603, Ord. 696, (1959); Ord. 1535 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1828 § 2, (2008))

 

8.16.030 Exemptions.
     The following types of collection or transportation of solid waste are exempted from the requirements of this chapter:

     (a)   Yard waste removed from a premises by a gardening, landscaping or tree trimming contractor having a city business license and as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than as a disposal service, and tree trimmings, clippings and all similar materials generated at parks and other publicly maintained premises;

     (b)   Demolition debris removed from a premises by a licensed contractor as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than as a disposal service;

     (c)   By-products of sewage treatment, including sludge, grit and screenings;

     (d)   The collection of hazardous or dangerous waste as part of regular services, including, without limitation, liquid and dry caustics, acids, bio-hazardous, flammable or explosive materials, insecticides and similar substances;

     (e)   Recyclable materials and yard wastes which are generated at any residential, commercial, or industrial property and which are transported personally by the owner or occupant of such premises (or by his or her full-time employees) to a licensed solid waste or recycling facility in a manner consistent with this chapter and other applicable laws;

     (f)    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person or the person’s employees from transporting  to a licensed transfer station or materials recovery facility any solid waste, garbage, rubbish, or yard waste that is incidental to the conduct of the person’s individual business within the city or to the maintenance of the person’s individual residence, so long as there is no spillage on city streets and the transport is conducted pursuant to applicable laws governing the transport of materials. However, any such transport does not relieve the person from the ongoing obligation to contract with a city franchisee pursuant to Section 8.16.040 of this chapter;

     (g)   An exemption to the mandatory disposal requirements set forth above may be applied for under the condition that the individual or property owner shows proof of use of a city-approved solid waste collection alternative, including, but not limited to, on-site composting. Any such exemption shall be subject to approval of the city manager or the city manager’s designee. (1941 Code § 1604, Ord. 696, (1959); Ord. 1535 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1828 § 2, (2008))

 

8.16.040 Obligations of customers.
     (a)   Unless otherwise expressly excepted by this chapter, the owner, occupant or other person responsible for the day-to-day operation of any residential, commercial, or industrial property in the city shall contract with a city franchisee for the removal and disposal of solid waste generated from the use of the property.

     (b)   The franchisee is authorized to charge all customers a fee for the collection and transportation of solid waste, subject to the approval by the city council of the fee. Such fees may include charges for collection, landfills, recovery or recyclables, composting and may include the cost of preparing and implementing source reduction, recycling elements and integrated waste management plans.

     (c)   All solid waste shall be kept free of all hazardous materials and placed in a container or containers unless other acceptable arrangements are made with the franchisee.

     (d)   Containers shall be made of metal or plastic, and of sufficient strength to prevent them from being broken under ordinary conditions.

     (e)   Containers containing any solid waste except recyclable materials shall be maintained in a clean, safe, sanitary condition, and continuously enclosed by a solid tight-fitting cover secured from access by insects, animals and rodents, except when solid waste is being dumped into or removed from the container.

     (f)    Garbage or other refuse containing water or other liquids shall be drained before being placed in a container and the drainage properly disposed of to the sanitary sewer.

     (h)   Animal waste shall not be placed directly in a container for regular collection and disposal, but shall be placed within a secondary containment (i.e., plastic bag) within the container for regular collection and disposal, as required by the franchisee and the San Mateo County Health Department.

     (i)    Unless provisions to prevent litter are otherwise provided, no person shall so fill any container with garbage or rubbish above the top of the container to such extent as to permit the contents of any container to be blown or otherwise strewn about.

     (j)    If solid waste from either residential, commercial, or industrial property is of such a nature that it cannot be placed in a container, it shall be carefully placed beside the container in securely tied bundles. Solid waste which exceeds size or type limitations set by the franchisee shall be scheduled for special collection, and special collection charges may be assessed by the franchisee for this service.

     (k)   Any containers placed for collection along a street, roadway or alley shall be set out only on the day established for the collection on the particular route or after 5:30 p.m. on the day immediately prior to such collection, and shall not remain thereon for more than eighteen (18) hours after it has been emptied. Any containers placed for collection along a street, roadway or alley in the Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area and Broadway Commercial Area, as defined by the Burlingame Zoning Code, shall be removed from the streets and sidewalks by 1:00 p.m. on the day of garbage collection.

     (l)    Any container placed for collection in any alley shall be placed as close to the property line as practicable.

     (m)  No person, including a solid waste collector, shall place or cause to be placed any solid waste or solid waste container in any public street or roadway without an encroachment permit from the city or in any place or in any manner inconsistent with the regulations of this chapter.

     (n)   Each owner or occupant of residential, commercial, or industrial property shall maintain supervision and surveillance over the solid waste containers on the premises and shall maintain the same in a sanitary condition. If the containers are not emptied and the contents removed on the date and time scheduled by the franchisee, the owner or occupant should immediately notify the franchisee and it shall be the duty of the franchisee to, within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter, arrange for the collection and disposal of the solid waste.

     (o)   Solid waste which exceeds the limitations hereinabove set forth may, in the discretion of the franchisee, be scheduled for special collection upon the application of the owner or occupant of the premises. Special collection charges may be assessed by the franchisee for this service.

     (p)   No person, other than the owner thereof, owner’s agents or employees or an officer or employee of the city or any person holding a franchise or license from the city for the collection or disposal of refuse or recyclables shall remove any materials set out for recycling collection or tamper or meddle with any solid waste or recycling container or the contents thereof, or remove the contents of any such container, or remove any such container from the location where the same shall have been placed by the owner thereof or owner’s agent. (1941 Code § 1605, Ord. 696, (1959); Ord. 1535 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1828 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1931 § 1, (2016))

 

8.16.050 Recyclable materials.
     (a)   Recyclables placed at the curb of residential properties shall be separated from other solid waste in a manner approved by the city and shall be placed for collection in the container provided by the recycling operator for such material.

     (b)   Recyclables placed at the curb of residential properties or placed for collection at other recycling locations for pick up by a franchisee or licensee shall become the property of the franchisee or licensee at the time of their placement in the recycling containers or otherwise set out for collection. (1941 Code § 1606, Ord. 696, (1959); Ord. 1535 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1828 § 2, (2008))

 

8.16.060 Special provisions regarding method of disposal.
     (a)   Highly flammable or explosive or radioactive refuse shall not be placed in a container for regular collection and disposal but shall be removed under the supervision of the Central County Fire Department at the expense of the owner or possessor of such material.

     (b)   No hazardous waste shall be mixed or placed with any rubbish, garbage or other solid waste which is to be collected, removed or disposed of by the city’s franchisee. Hazardous waste or household hazardous waste may only be disposed of in a manner allowed by federal, state, and county regulations. (1941 Code § 1607, Ord. 696, (1959); Ord. 1535 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1828 § 2, (2008))

 

8.16.070 Health officer to settle disputes.
     In all case of disputes or complaints arising from or concerning the place where receptacles for refuse shall be placed awaiting the removal of their contents, the quantities to be removed, and the times for removal, the health officer shall designate the place, the estimated quantity, the frequency and manner of removal. (Ord. 1828 § 2, (2008))

Chapter 8.17 RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF DEBRIS FROM CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
8.17.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     (a)   “ADC” or “alternative daily cover” means cover material in addition to at least six (6) inches of earthen material placed on the surface of the active face of fill at the end of each operating day to control vectors, fires, odors, blowing litter, and scavenging.

     (b)   “AIC” or “alternative intermediate cover” means cover material in addition to earthen material of at least twelve (12) inches placed on all fill surfaces where additional cells are not to be constructed for one hundred eighty (180) days or more to control vectors, fires, odors, blowing litter, scavenging, and drainage. AIC does not include final cover.

     (c)   “Alteration” means, for the purposes of the recycling and diversion requirements in this chapter, any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of a building or structure.

     (d)   “Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting any use or occupancy that encompasses two hundred (200) square feet or more of area in any one plane. “Building” does not include decks, fences, balconies, machinery, equipment, or appliances installed for manufacture or process purposes only.

     (e)   “Chief building official” means the city chief building official or the chief building official’s designee.

     (f)    “Contractor” means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor’s license of any type under the laws of the State of California, or who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor, owner-builder, or otherwise) any construction, alteration, demolition, or landscaping service relating to buildings or structures in the city.

     (g)   “Demolition” means, for the purposes of the recycling and diversion requirements in this chapter, the intentional removal an existing building or structure.

     (h)   “Demolition and construction debris” means and includes:

     (1)   Discarded materials generally considered to be not water soluble and non-hazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure or building as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction or demolition project;

     (2)   Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any construction and/or landscape project;

     (3)   Non-construction and demolition debris wood scraps.

     (4)   De-minimis amounts of other non hazardous wastes that are generated at construction or demolition projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry.

     (5)   Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste will cause it to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris.

     (i)    “Designated recyclable and reusable materials” means and includes:

     (1)   Masonry building materials including all products generally used in construction including, but not limited to asphalt, concrete, rock, stone, and brick;

     (2)   Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure treated, contaminated or painted with lead paint.

     (3)   Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for construction or other use.

     (4)   Metals including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences.

     (5)   Roofing materials including wood shingles as well as asphalt, stone and slate based roofing material.

     (6)   Salvageable materials including all salvageable materials and structures including, but not limited to wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures, toilets, sinks, bath tubs and appliances.

     (7)   Any other materials that the chief building official determines can be diverted due to the identification of a recycling facility, reuse facility, or market accessible from the city.

     (j)    “Final cover” means cover material that represents the permanently exposed final surface of a fill.

     (k)   “New construction” means, for the purposes of the recycling and diversion requirements in this chapter, the construction of a completely new structure or building.

     (l)    “Structure” means, for the purposes of the recycling and diversion requirements of this chapter, anything built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or compose of parts joined together in some definite manner that encompasses two hundred (200) square feet or more of area in any one plane, except decks, fences, or balconies.

     (m)  “Total value” means the total value of new construction or an alteration as calculated and determined by the chief building official in the same manner as for permit and building plan review fees under Section 107.2 of the California Building Code as adopted by the city. (Ord. 1645 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001); Ord. 1704 § 2, (2003))

 

8.17.020 Deconstruction and salvage and recovery.
     (a)   This section shall apply to the following:

     (1)   Every building or structure planned for demolition; or

     (2)   Every building or structure planned for alteration, in which the alteration has a total value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more.

     (b)   No person shall begin such a demolition or alteration until a period of five (5) working days has elapsed from the date of issuance of the demolition or construction permit, in order to facilitate that pre-demolition deconstruction, salvage and recovery. The owner, the general contractor and all subcontractors shall recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable designated recyclable and reusable materials prior to demolition or alteration.

     (c)   In the event that it is determined that no materials can be salvaged for reuse from a particular project, written documentation shall be provided to the city as to the reasons why salvaging cannot take place at least three (3) working days before demolition or alteration begins.

     (d)   Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials from the deconstruction phase shall qualify to be counted in meeting the diversion requirements of this chapter. Recovered or salvaged materials may be given or sold on or from the premises at which they were recovered or salvaged, or may be removed to reuse warehouse facilities for storage or sale. Title to reusable or recyclable materials forwarded to the operator of a recycling facility, landfill, or other disposal facility will transfer to the service provider upon departure of the materials from the site. (1645 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001))

 

8.17.025 Construction site maintenance.
     Any property owner or person in charge of a construction site shall furnish covered litter containers for construction litter, including construction debris. All waste matter or litter from construction and related activities shall be picked up and placed in these covered containers at the end of each working day. Waste matter or litter receptacles of a sufficient number must be located on the construction site to receive construction debris, personal litter, and any other waste matter generated by the employees, workers, invitees, or other persons using the site. (Ord. 1802 § 4, (2007))

 

8.17.030 Diversion requirements.
     The minimum percentages of waste tonnage of demolition and construction debris generated from every demolition, remodeling and construction project, as defined below, shall be diverted from going to landfills by using recycling, reuse and diversion programs as follows:

     (a)   From demolition:

     For each residential (single-family and multi-family) or nonresidential demolition in the city: At least sixty (60) percent of all generated C&D tonnage from the project shall be diverted, excluding ADC and AIC. When total tonnage generated from a project includes source-separated soil, concrete and/or asphalt, the total diversion rate shall remain at sixty (60) percent but at least twenty-five (25) percent of the C&D tonnage that excludes source-separated soil, concrete, and asphalt shall be diverted. For example, if total tonnage generated is one hundred (100) tons, the total diverted tonnage shall be at least sixty (60) tons, excluding ADC and AIC. Of this amount, the total tonnage diverted through materials excluding source-separated soil, concrete and asphalt, shall be at least twenty-five (25) tons and the remainder (35 tons or more) can be obtained through diversion of source-separated soil, concrete and asphalt.

     (b)   From new construction:

     Each residential (single-family and multi-family) new construction and each nonresidential new construction shall comply with the same diversion requirements as for demolition: Sixty (60) percent of total waste tonnage generated from the project shall be diverted, excluding

ADC and AIC. When total tonnage generated from such a project includes source-separated soil, concrete and/or asphalt, the total diversion rate shall remain at sixty (60) percent, excluding ADC and AIC, but at least twenty-five (25) percent of the waste tonnage that excludes source-separated soil, concrete, and asphalt shall be diverted. For example, if total tonnage generated is one hundred (100) tons, the total diverted tonnage, excluding ADC and AIC, shall be at least sixty (60) tons. Of this amount, the total tonnage diverted through materials excluding source-separated soil, concrete and asphalt, shall be at least twenty-five (25) tons and the remainder (35 tons or more) can be obtained through diversion of source-separated soil, concrete and asphalt.

 

     (c)   From alterations:

     Each residential (single-family and multi-family) alteration with a total value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more and each nonresidential alteration with a total value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more shall comply with the same diversion requirements as for demolition: Sixty (60) percent of total waste tonnage generated from the project shall be diverted, excluding ADC and AIC. When total tonnage generated from such a project includes source-separated soil, concrete and/or asphalt, the total diversion rate shall remain at sixty (60) percent but at least twenty-five (25) percent of the waste tonnage that excludes source-separated soil, concrete, and asphalt shall be diverted. For example, if total tonnage generated is one hundred (100) tons, the total diverted tonnage shall be at least sixty (60) tons. Of this amount, the total tonnage diverted through materials excluding source-separated soil, concrete and asphalt, shall be at least twenty-five (25) tons and the remainder (35 tons or more) can be obtained through diversion of source-separated soil, concrete and asphalt.

     (d)   From roofing:

     When the chief building official determines that material from roofing repair or replacement can be diverted to uses other than ADC or AIC, the chief building official is authorized to require diversion of those materials. Upon this determination, the roofing materials shall be delivered to a facility that diverts material to uses other than ADC or AIC.

     (e)   Separate calculations and reports will be required for each portion of a project that involves demolition and alteration, demolition and new construction, or any combination of the three (3). (Ord. 1645 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1661 § 2 (part, (2001); Ord. 1704 § 3, (2003))

 

8.17.040 Information required before issuance of permit.
     (a)   Every applicant shall submit a properly completed “Recycling and Waste Reduction Form,” on a form as prescribed by the city as an integral part of the building or demolition permit application process. The applicant’s submission shall include an accurate estimate of the tonnage or other specified units of construction and demolition debris to be generated from construction and demolition on the site. Approval of the form as complete and accurate shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any building or demolition permit.

     (b)   The chief building official will review the Recycling and Waste Reduction Form for the purpose of confirming the accuracy of the estimated waste generation and gathering data on the amount of waste generated for the project in the city. (Ord. 1645 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001))

 

8.17.050 Deposit required.
     (a)   As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit for a building or a demolition permit that is subject to Section 8.17.030 above, the applicant shall post a cash deposit, surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit in the following amounts:

     (1)   For demolition, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each ton of demolition and construction debris estimated to be generated by the demolition;

     (2)   For alterations with a total value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, in an amount equal to 1.5% of the total value of the alteration, but not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for an alteration to a structure or building that is a single-family residence or accessory to a single family building or structure, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any other type of project; and

     (3)   For new construction, in an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the total value of the new construction, but not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00).

     (b)   If a project involves demolition and alteration, demolition and new construction, or any combination of the three (3) , a deposit shall be required for each portion of the project and be calculated pursuant to this section for each portion.

     (c)   The deposit or cash bond shall be returned, without interest, in total or in proportion, upon proof to the satisfaction of the chief building official, that no less than the required percentages or proven proportion of those percentages of the tons of debris generated by the demolition, alteration, or new construction have been diverted from landfills and have been recycled or reused. If a lesser percentage of tons or cubic yards than required is diverted, a proportionate share of the deposit will be returned. The deposit shall be forfeited entirely or to the extent that there is a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter for timely reporting or compliance with the percentage diversion. (1645 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001))

 

8.17.060 Administrative fee.
     As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit for a building or a demolition permit that involves the production of solid waste destined to be delivered to a landfill, the applicant shall pay to the city a fee as established by resolution to compensate the city for all expenses incurred in administering the permit. (Ord. 1645 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001))

 

8.17.070 On-site practices.
     During the term of the demolition or construction project, the contractor shall recycle or divert the required percentages of materials, and keep records of diversions in tonnage or in other measurements approved by the city that can be converted to tonnage. The chief building official will evaluate and monitor contractor reports from each project to gauge the percentage of materials recycled, salvaged, and disposed from the project. To the maximum extent feasible, on-site separation of scrap wood and clean green waste in a designated debris box or boxes shall be arranged, in order to permit chipping and mulching for soil enhancement or land cover purposes. In order to protect chipping and grinding machinery and personnel, metal and other materials which cannot be chipped or ground shall not be placed in such boxes. On-site separation for recycling and salvaging of other materials shall be undertaken to the extent feasible. (1645 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001))

 

8.17.080 Reporting.
     (a)   No later than sixty (60) days following the completion of a demolition project or construction project, the contractor shall, and as a condition of final inspection and for issuance of any certificate of occupancy if applicable, submit documentation to the city that proves compliance with the requirements of Section 8.17.030. The documentation shall consist of a final completed “Recycling and Waste Reduction Form” showing the tonnage of materials recycled and diverted, supported by originals or certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors, and landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether materials generated from the site have been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged or otherwise disposed of. If mixed debris is taken to a facility that provides both mixed C&D processing and disposal services, documentation shall be provided to show that the delivered materials were processed for recycling and also indicate the average diversion rate achieved by the facility from mixed load processing.

     (b)   If a project involves demolition and alteration or new construction, the report and documentation for the demolition portion of the project shall be submitted no later than sixty (60) days following the completion of the demolition portion of the project, and must be approved by the city before issuance of a building permit for the alteration or new construction portion of the project. The permittee shall then submit the report and documentation for the alteration or new construction portion of the project no later than sixty (60) days following completion of the alteration or new construction portion as specified in subsection (a) above.

     (c)   As an alternative, a permittee may submit a declaration stating that no waste or recyclable materials were generated from the permittee’s project or a particular portion of a project.

     (d)   Any deposit posted pursuant to Section 8.17.050 shall be forfeited to the city if the permittee does not meet the time requirements for reporting pursuant to this section.

     (e)   All reports, letters, and documentation submitted pursuant to this section are subject to verification by the city.

     (f)    On an annual basis, the chief building official will compile a report that, at a minimum, describes the number and type of permits issued, the number and type of projects covered by diversion requirements, the total tonnage generated, and the estimated diversion resulting from these projects.

     (g)   It is unlawful for any person to submit a report to the city under this section that the person knows to contain any false statement of tonnage of materials recycled or diverted, or any false or fraudulent receipt or weight tag or other record of measurement. (1645 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001))

 

8.17.090 Adjustment of values.
     In order to ensure that the values provided by this chapter that trigger requirements for reporting, diversion, and recovery remain fair and equitable, the values shall be adjusted by the chief building official according to the following formula:

             On July 1 of each year, the values payment shall be increased or decreased by the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index – All Urban Consumers/All Items (CPI-U, 1982-84=100) for the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA Metropolitan Area between April 2001 (189.1) and April of the adjustment year.

The adjusted values shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001))

 

8.17.100 Application to additional projects.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter will apply to any construction project that the chief building official determines will generate five (5) tons or more of construction or demolition debris. (Ord. 1661 § 2, (2001))

Chapter 8.18 SMOKING
8.18.010 Findings and purpose.
     The city council of the city of Burlingame hereby finds that:

     (a)   Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution; and

     (b)   Reliable studies have shown that breathing second-hand smoke, which has been classified as a carcinogen, is a significant health hazard for all persons; and

     (c)   Health hazards induced by breathing second-hand smoke include heart disease, lung cancer, respiratory dysfunction, bronchoconstriction, bronchospasm, and death; and

     (d)   Nonsmokers with allergies, respiratory diseases and those who suffer other ill effects of breathing second-hand smoke may experience a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of adverse reactions to same; and

     (e)   Smoking is a documented cause of fires, and cigarette and cigar burns and ash stains on merchandise and fixtures cause economic losses to businesses; and

     (f)    Cigarette butts, left as litter, are toxic to small children and wildlife that may ingest them and contribute to the solid waste burden of public space maintenance and stormwater processing facilities; and

     (g)   Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and in places of employment, as set forth herein. (Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014))

 

8.18.020 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:

     (a)   “Bar” means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the serving of food in that bar area is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term “bar” shall not include the restaurant’s primary dining area.

     (b)   “Business” means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

     (c)   “Employee” means any person who volunteers his or her services or who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.

     (d)   “Employer” means any person, partnership, corporation or nonprofit entity who employs the services of one or more persons.

     (e)   “Enclosed” means closed in by roof and at least three (3) walls.

     (f)    “Multi-family housing” means any structure containing two (2) or more contiguous dwelling units that share a wall, floor, or roof.

     (g)   “Nonprofit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, educational, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. A public agency is a “nonprofit entity” within the meaning of this section.

     (h)   “Place of employment” means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and class rooms, cafeterias and hallways.

     (i)    “Public place” means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to: banks, educational facilities, health facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, rail service establishments, retail stores, theaters and waiting rooms. Public place also means that city-owned or operated property—whether enclosed or open-air—described in Section 8.18.030.

     (j)    “Restaurant” means any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private or public school cafeteria and any other eating establishment, organization, club, boardinghouse or guest house, which gives or offers food for sale to the public, guests, patrons or employees.

     (k)   “Retail tobacco store” means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories.

     (l)    “Service line” means indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service includes the exchange of money.

     (m)  “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other combustible substance.

     (n)   “Sports arena” means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, athletic fields, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events.

     (o)   “Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product. (Ord. 1344 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1475 §§ 1, 2, (1993); Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014); Ord. 1919 § 1, (2015))

 

8.18.030 Smoking limitations in city-owned or city-controlled facilities and vehicles.
     In order to avoid the adverse effects of smoking on members of the public, employees, and property of the city, the city hereby bans smoking at city facilities as described in this section.

     (a)   Enclosed Facilities. Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed facilities owned by the city. For the purpose of this chapter, the building known as the Burlingame Lions Hall shall not be considered a city-owned building.

     (b)   Sports Fields and Courts. Smoking is prohibited at all times within twenty-five (25) feet of the following:

     (1)   Any bleachers, grandstands, playing fields, or dugouts of any city-owned sports field commonly used for activities such as baseball, softball, soccer, lacrosse, or football; and

     (2)   Any city-owned sports courts commonly used for activities such as tennis or basketball; and

     (3)   Players’ benches or spectator gathering areas during any city-conducted or city-sponsored activity.

     (c)   City Events. Smoking is prohibited during the performance or conduct of any city-conducted or city-sponsored event, including, but not limited to, sports, entertainment, plays, ceremonies, pageants, fairs, or training in any location that is close enough to the event that smoke is traveling to or over participants or spectators of the event. The director of parks and recreation is authorized, however, to designate smoking areas at such an event where smoking is to be allowed notwithstanding this subsection. This subsection does not apply to smoking by a person who is passing through the area to another destination, or to smoking by actors in a theatrical production if smoking is an integral part of the production.

     (d)   Specific Areas. Smoking is further prohibited in, and within twenty-five (25) feet of, the following locations:

     (1)   City-owned parking lots;

     (2)   Burlingame Golf Center;

     (3)   Murray Field;

     (4)   Burlingame School District property, including fields and courts;

     (5)   San Mateo Union High School District property, including fields and courts;

     (6)   City-owned playgrounds;

     (7)   City-owned parks;

     (8)   City-owned and maintained bayfront trails; and

     (9)   Mills Canyon Park.

     (e)   Posted Areas. In addition to the facilities described above, the city manager and the director of parks and recreation are authorized to post additional city-owned or city-controlled facilities for “no smoking,” and smoking is prohibited in any such facility that is so posted.

     (f)    City Vehicles. Smoking is prohibited in any city-owned or city-controlled vehicle. (Ord. 1344 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1485 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1777 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014))

 

8.18.040 Prohibition of smoking in public places.
     (a)   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places, including, but not limited to, the following places:

     (1)   Elevators and restrooms;

     (2)   Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city of Burlingame;

     (3)   Service lines;

     (4)   Retail stores;

     (5)   Restaurants;

     (6)   All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, business offices, and banks;

     (7)   Public areas of aquariums, libraries and museums when open to the public;

     (8)   Any building not open to the sky which is used primarily for exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except when smoking is part of any such production;

     (9)   Enclosed sports arenas;

     (10) Doctors offices, dentists offices, waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semi-private rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics and physical therapy facilities;

     (11) Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city;

     (12) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, senior citizen residences, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities;

     (13) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in multiple-unit commercial facilities;

     (14) Polling places;

     (15) Warehouse facilities of any size. (Ord. 1344 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1517 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014))

 

8.18.050 Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
     Smoking is prohibited in all places of employment. (Ord. 1344 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014))

 

8.18.055 Multi-family housing.
     Smoking is prohibited in multi-family housing. The use of medical marijuana with a valid prescription shall not be prohibited by this provision, but shall be subject to all other applicable regulations and prohibitions on creation of a nuisance. (Ord. 1919 § 1, (2015))

 

8.18.060 Where smoking not regulated.
     (a)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of the chapter:

     (1)   Bars;

     (2)   Private residences, other than those located in multi-family housing, except when used as a child care or a health care facility. Common areas or areas normally open to the public within residential apartments, residential co-ops, residential hotels, senior citizen projects, or other communal or similar facilities housing twelve (12) or more persons shall be subject to smoking restrictions;

     (3)   Sixty-five (65) percent of the guest room accommodations in a hotel, motel, or similar transient lodging establishment;

     (4)   Areas of the lobby in a hotel, motel, or similar transient lodging establishment designated for smoking by the establishment. Such an establishment may permit smoking in a designated lobby area that does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the lobby or, if the total area of the lobby is two thousand (2,000) square feet or less, that does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total floor area of the lobby. For the purposes of this paragraph, “lobby” means the common public areas of such an establishment in which registration and other similar or related transaction, or both, are conducted and in which the establishment’s guests and members of the public typically congregate;

     (5)   Meeting and banquet rooms in a hotel, motel, other transient lodging establishment similar to a hotel or motel, restaurant, or public convention center, except while food or beverage functions are taking place, including setup, service, and cleanup activities, or when the room is being used for exhibit purposes. At times when smoking is not permitted pursuant to this subsection, the establishment may permit smoking in corridors and prefunction areas adjacent to and serving the meeting or banquet room if no employee is stationed in that corridor or area on other than a passing basis;

     (6)   Theatrical production sites, but only in a theatrical production itself when smoking is an integral part of the story to the theatrical production;

     (7)   Cabs of motortrucks, as defined in Section 410 of the Vehicle Code, or truck tractors, as defined in Section 655 of the Vehicle Code, if no nonsmoking employees are present;

     (8)   Retail tobacco stores;

     (9)   Medical research or treatment sites, if smoking is integral to the research and treatment being conducted. Such a site must have not less than sixteen (16) air changes per hour;

     (10) Patient smoking areas in long-term health care facilities, as defined by Section 1418 of the Health and Safety Code. Such an area shall have not less than sixteen (16) air changes per hour.

     (b)   The exception to smoking prohibitions contained in subsection (a)(7) above does not apply to city-owned or city-controlled vehicles or equipment. (Ord. 1344 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1517 § 2, (1995); Ord. 1527 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1777 § 3, (2006); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014); Ord. 1919 § 1, (2015))

 

8.18.070 Posting of signs.
     (a)   “No Smoking” signs with letters of not less than one inch in height or the international “No Smoking” symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is controlled by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other place.

     (b)   Every theater owner, manager or operator shall conspicuously post signs in the lobby stating that smoking is prohibited within the theater or auditorium, and in the case of motion picture theaters, such information shall be shown upon the screen for at least five (5) seconds prior to the showing of each feature motion picture. (Ord. 1344 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014))

 

8.18.080 Violations.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in a place where smoking is prohibited.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the prohibition of this chapter to fail to post signs as required by this chapter or to knowingly permit a violation of this chapter; provided, however, that employees are not required to designate their individual work areas.

     (c)   Any person who violates this section may be subject to civil and criminal penalties, as defined in Chapters 1.12 and 1.14 of this municipal code. (Ord. 1344 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014))

 

8.18.090 Nondiscrimination and prohibition on retaliation.
     No person shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter.

     Further, no landlord, property manager, homeowners’ association, business manager, or other person in authority shall discriminate or retaliate against any person for making a complaint to the person or entity in authority, the city’s code enforcement or police departments, or to the County Health Department, regarding alleged violations of this chapter, unless such complaints have been determined by a competent court to be defamatory or malicious prosecution. Discrimination or retaliation against persons making complaints regarding alleged violations of this chapter shall themselves be deemed a violation of this code and shall be punishable and enforceable under its provisions. (Ord. 1344 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1481 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014); Ord. 1964 § 1, (2019))

 

8.18.100 Tobacco vending machines prohibited except in bars.
     No person, business, or tobacco retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises any vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing any tobacco product, except that vending machines shall be permitted in bars, provided the vending machines are not located adjacent or near any entrance of the bar. (Ord. 1475 § 3, (1993); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014))

 

8.18.110 Enforcement of Labor Code Section 6404.5.
     (a)   Authority. The provisions of Labor Code Section 6404.5 may be enforced by employees of the San Mateo County Health System, as designated by the Chief of the Health System, in addition to city employees, peace officers, and state employees and officers. However, employees designated by the County Health System with the authority to enforce Labor Code Section 6404.5 may only issue citations to employers and not to patrons, customers, or other guests when exercising the authority conferred by this subsection.

     (b)   San Mateo County Health System Employees as Public Officers. In the performance of their duties of monitoring and enforcing compliance with Labor Code Section 6404.5, and to the extent permitted by Labor Code Section 6404.5(j), the city confers all employees, as designated by the County Health System to engage in those enforcement efforts, the power, authority, and immunity of a public officer to engage in that activity, and issue citations as provided in this section.

     (c)   Training Program. In coordination with the sheriff of San Mateo County, the Chief of the San Mateo County Health System and/or designees will establish and cause to be administered an enforcement training program designed to instruct each of the Health Services employees designated to enforce under this section to exercise citation authority pursuant to state law. (Ord. 1599 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1901 § 1, (2014))

 

8.18.120 Sale of flavored tobacco products prohibited.
     (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall govern unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

     (1)   “Characterizing flavor” means a distinguishable taste or aroma or both, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco, imparted by a tobacco product or any byproduct produced by the tobacco product. Characterizing flavors include, but are not limited to, tastes or aroma relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, menthol, mint, wintergreen, herb, or spice. A tobacco product shall not be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because of the use of additives or flavorings or the provision of ingredient information. Rather, it is the presence of a distinguishable taste or aroma, or both, as described in the first sentence of this definition, that constitutes a characterizing flavor.

     (2)   “Constituent” means any ingredient, substance, chemical, or compound, other than tobacco, water, or reconstituted tobacco sheet that is added by the manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacture, or packing of the tobacco product.

     (3)   “Distinguishable” means perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.

     (4)   “Flavored tobacco product” means any tobacco product that contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor.

     (5)   “Labeling” means written, printed, pictorial, or graphic matter upon any tobacco product or any of its packaging.

     (6)   “Packaging” means a pack, box, carton, or container of any kind or, if no other container, any wrapping (including cellophane) in which a tobacco product is sold, or offered for sale, to a consumer.

     (7)   “Tobacco product” means any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, including any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic pipe, or electronic hookah and the nicotine-containing liquids manufactured for use in such devices.

     (8)   “Tobacco retailer” means any store, stand, booth, concession or any other enterprise, including an online or e-commerce vendor, that engages in the retail sale of tobacco products, including, but not limited to, stores that engage in the retail sale of food items.

     (b)   Sale or Offer for Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products Prohibited.

     (1)   The sale or offer for sale within the city of Burlingame, including a sale transacted remotely with delivery to an address within Burlingame, by any person or tobacco retailer of any flavored tobacco product is prohibited and no person or tobacco retailer shall sell, or offer for sale, any flavored tobacco product.

     (2)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product if a manufacturer or any of the manufacturer’s agents or employees, in the course of their agency or employment, has made a statement or claim directed to consumers or to the public that the tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor including, but not limited to, text, color, and/or images on the product’s labeling or packaging that are used to explicitly or implicitly communicate that the tobacco product has a characterizing flavor.

     (c)   Enforcement—Violation a Public Nuisance. The provisions of this section shall be enforced through the mechanisms provided in Title 1 of this code, and violations may be subject to administrative, civil, or criminal remedies as determined within the discretion of the city attorney as prosecutor. Violation of the provisions of this section is deemed to constitute a public nuisance and may be abated as such. Further, violation of this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of a violator’s business license under Section 6.04.280.

     (d)   No Conflict with State or Federal Law. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any requirement, power, or duty that is preempted by federal or state law. (Ord. 1970 § 1, (2019))

Title 9 ANIMALS
Chapter 9.04 ANIMALS
Chapter 9.08 KEEPING
Chapter 9.16 ANIMALS AS NOVELTIES

Chapter 9.04 ANIMALS
9.04.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     (a)   “Animal control officer” means that person designated as the animal control program manager of the division of animal control services for the county and his or her duly authorized officers or deputies, as well as the president of the county’s contract agent and his or her duly authorized officers or deputies.

     (b)   “Animal control program” means that program within the division of animal control services of the environmental services agency of the county, or the county’s designated contract agent or both, which is specifically charged with regulating and enforcing laws dealing with animal control within its jurisdiction.

     (c)   “Animal control shelter” means the facilities provided by the county or the county’s designated contract agent for the impounding of animals.

     (d)   “County” means the county of San Mateo.

     (e)   “Director of environmental services agency” means that person so designated by the governing body of the county.

     (f)    “Licensing program” means that program within the division of revenue services of the employee and public services agency of the county which is specifically charged with regulating and selling animal licenses and registrations in the county.

     (g)   “Impoundment” means the picking up and confining of an animal by the animal control program.

     (h)   “Owner” means that person eighteen (18) years of age or over who holds the license to the animal, or if the animal is not licensed, that person eighteen (18) years of age or over legally entitled to possession of the animal concerned and who has primary responsibility for the care of the animal.

     (i)    “Dangerous animal” means any animal, except a trained dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which because of its disposition, behavior, training, or other characteristic constitutes a danger to persons or property, or which demonstrates any or all of the following behavior:

     (1)   Any attack or other behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury or property damage or that results in an injury to a person or property; or

     (2)   Any aggressive attack or other behavior that constitutes a substantial threat of bodily harm to a person or animal, where such attack, injury or behavior occurs in a place where such person or animal is conducting him or herself peaceably and lawfully; or

     (3)   An attack on another animal or livestock which occurs off the property of the owner of the attacking animal; or

     (4)   Any animal that has been deemed by another governmental jurisdiction as “potentially dangerous,” “dangerous,” “vicious,” or any other similar designation.

     (j)    “Wolf hybrid” means any offspring of domestic dogs bred to wild canids (e.g., wolves or coyotes) and their subsequent generations.

     (k)   “Vicious animal” means any animal, except a trained dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which meets any or all of the following criteria:

     (1)   Any animal previously designated as “dangerous,” that after investigation by an animal control officer or a peace officer is found under conditions which constitute a violation of this chapter or applicable dangerous animal permit and which demonstrates a significant danger to the public health or safety; or

     (2)   Any animal seized under Section 599aa of the Penal Code or upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or caretaker under subdivision (a) of the Section 597.5 of the Penal Code; or

     (3)   Any animal which inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being or another animal; or

     (4)   Any animal which has engaged in any aggressive behavior which demonstrates that the animal represents a clear and present substantial danger to the public health or safety and that due to substantial risk to the public health or safety it is unlikely that the animal could be safely maintained under a dangerous animal permit.

     (l)    “Severe injury” means any physical injury directly caused by an animal attack that consists of muscle tears, multiple punctures, broken bones or disfiguring lacerations, or which requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1354 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1770 § 2, (2005))

 

9.04.011 Animal control program.
     (a)   Responsibility. The animal control program is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, and the duties of the director thereof and his or her officers, agents and employees include, but are not limited to, the following:

     (1)   To administer an animal control shelter and keep such records as may be required by law or contract;

     (2)   To impound animals which are in violation of this chapter, or for the safekeeping of the animal to protect its health and welfare;

     (3)   To remove and dispose of the carcass of any animal found on any public highway, street, alley or other public place;

     (4)   To quarantine animals under the direction of the county health officer;

     (5)   To destroy and dispose of animals after due notice to the owner and pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter;

     (6)   To sell, when appropriate, impounded animals after due notice to the owner;

     (7)   To enforce all provisions of this chapter.

     (b)   Scope of Authority of Humane Officers and Animal Control Officers. Humane officers qualified and appointed pursuant to California Corporations Code Section 14502, who are employees of any public pound, society for prevention of cruelty to animals, or humane society which has contracted with the county to provide animal control services, shall have the authority to issue notices to appear in court pursuant to Chapter 5c (commencing with Section 853.5 of Title 3 of part 2 of the Penal Code) for violations of state and local animal control laws. This authority is based on Section 14503 of the Corporations Code. Animal control officers shall have the authority provided by state law including, but not limited to, that described by Penal Code Section 830.9. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1770 § 3, (2005))

 

9.04.012 Rabies vaccinations.
     Every dog owner, after his or her dog attains the age of four (4) months of age and/or within ten (10) working days of purchasing a license shall procure from a licensed veterinarian, an antirabies vaccination to be administered in the manner prescribed or approved by the state department of public health. This vaccination shall be obtained prior to issuing a license for the dog. In addition, proof of vaccination shall be provided to the licensing program. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1304 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1354 § 2, (1987))

 

9.04.013 Dog license.
     (a)   Requirements. An annual license fee shall be paid for every dog over the age of four (4) months owned and harbored in this city. The annual license fee shall be first due when the animal reaches four (4) months of age or within sixty (60) days after the dog is acquired and due on the anniversary date of the original purchase date each year thereafter. New residents shall have sixty (60) days in which to acquire such license. Persons renewing their license shall have thirty (30) days following their due date before being delinquent and having to pay a late penalty. The fee for the license shall be as set forth in Section 9.04.031. The fee paid for the licensing of spayed or neutered dogs shall be no more than one-half of the license fee for unaltered dogs upon presentation of the proper certification. The fee paid by persons over the age of sixty (60) shall be one-half of the license fee. Any person who fails to pay the license fee after the fee is due, or the dog is required to be licensed, shall, in addition to paying any past due license fee or fees, also pay a penalty in accordance with Section 9.04.031. A license shall be obtained but no license fee shall be payable for the licensing of any dog which is being trained for guide or hearing purposes by a resident of the city or used for guide or hearing purposes by a handicapped resident of the city and which has come from a guide or hearing dog training facility, or for dogs which have served as a member of the armed forces of the United States of America, or any dog currently being used by a local law enforcement agency for the purposes of crime prevention or control. Dog licenses are not transferable between owners; however, if the dog dies and the owner acquires a new dog, the license is transferable to the new dog. The license does not have to be renewed until the original purchase anniversary date. The fee paid for a dog license is not refundable. Licenses provided for in this section shall be signed by the director of community services. The licenses shall be numbered consecutively.

     (b)   Exemptions. The licensing provisions in this chapter are not applicable to the following:

     (1)   Dogs used for diagnostic purposes or research, the use having been approved by the California State Department of Health Services pursuant to Section 1666 of the Health and Safety Code;

     (2)   Dogs used for teaching purposes in recognized educational institutions;

     (3)   Dogs owned by veterinarians which are licensed by the state and kept on the premises used by the veterinarians in their practice;

     (4)   Dogs kept by owners of pet shops for purposes of sale, for circuses, for animal exhibits or for other enterprises for which a business license has been granted by a local government.

     (c)   Tags. The director of community services shall procure plates or tags which bear the number of the license. He or she shall also keep a record of the name of the owner or possessor together with a description of the dog for which the license is issued and the number of the license, and he or she shall deliver the tag to such person upon payment for a license as provided by Section 9.04.031.

     (d)   Duplicate Tags. Whenever a tag has been lost or stolen, the owner or possessor of the dog concerned may request a duplicate tag upon payment of the required fee and on making and subscribing to an affidavit of such loss and filing the same with the director of community services.

     (e)   Wearing of Tag by Dog Required. The owner of a dog for which a license is required shall affix the tag to a suitable collar, which collar shall remain on the dog at all times.

     (f)    Records. The owner or operator of any kennel, animal breeding facility, pet shop or any place or establishment where animals are sold shall keep a permanent record of the name, address and phone number of the purchaser of any dog along with the breed, color, sex and age of each dog sold or given away and shall forward such information to the animal control program within thirty (30) days thereafter. An animal control officer shall have the right to inspect such records during normal business hours.

     (g)   Veterinarian Responsibilities. Every veterinarian who vaccinates or causes or directs to be vaccinated in the county any dog with antirabies vaccine shall use a form approved by the licensing authority to certify that such animal has been vaccinated. Every veterinarian shall submit to the licensing authority a copy of the county-approved antirabies vaccination form within ten (10) days of the beginning of each month, for any dog which he or she vaccinates or directs to be vaccinated with antirabies during the previous month. An animal control officer or animal licensing officer shall have the right to inspect records of rabies vaccinations during normal business hours. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1292 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1304 § 2, (1985); Ord. 1354 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1364 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1770 § 16, (2005))

 

9.04.014 Prohibited conduct.
     No owner or possessor of any animal shall cause or permit it to do any of the following:

     (a)   To be upon any public street, sidewalk, park, school ground, any public property or upon any unenclosed premises in a city unless the animal is properly licensed, if such licensing is necessary under this chapter, and under the control of the owner by being saddled, harnessed, haltered or leashed by a substantial chain, lead rope or leash, which chain, lead rope or leash shall be continuously held by some competent person capable of controlling the animal. All cats are exempt from this subsection. Notwithstanding this subsection, the owner or possessor of a dog may permit a dog to be on the upper field at Cuernavaca Park or the easternmost lawn in Washington Park between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. each day without being harnessed, haltered, or leashed, so long as the owner or possessor of the dog exercises control over the dog as otherwise required by this chapter and Chapter 10.55;

     (b)   To trespass upon any private property without the consent of the owner thereof, and to knowingly permit the animal to remain upon the property or to habitually continue to trespass thereon;

     (c)   To suffer or permit such animal to habitually bark or meow or act in such a manner as to continuously disturb the peace of any citizen or to be a public nuisance;

     (d)   To be without proper and adequate food, water, shelter, care and attention as described in Section 597(f) of the Penal Code. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); 1615 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1822 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1831 § 2, (2008))

 

9.04.014-1 Public protection from dogs.
     (a)   Every owner or possessor of a dog shall at all times prevent such dog from biting or physically harassing any person engaged in a lawful act and from interfering with the lawful use of public or private property.

     (b)   Every owner or possessor of a dog shall at all times prevent such dog from causing substantial injury to another domestic animal while such domestic animal is lawfully upon public or private property. Substantial injury means any injury which results in veterinarian treatment or death.

     (c)   Every owner or possessor of a dog shall desist from commanding or provoking such dog to attack, sic or threaten a person when such person is peaceably and lawfully upon public property.

     (d)   A trained dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties is excluded from this section.

     (e)   Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall authorize the bringing of a criminal action arising out of bite(s) upon or physical harassment of members of the dog owner’s or possessor’s household. (Ord. 1354 § 1, (1987))

 

9.04.015 Dangerous animal permit required.
     (a)   No person shall knowingly keep, have, maintain, sell, trade or let for hire an animal designated under the provisions of this chapter as dangerous without obtaining a dangerous animal permit from the animal control officer. The animal owner shall comply with all conditions of the dangerous animal permit, including, but not limited to,, all requirements of Section 9.40.019 of this chapter. Any animal which is determined to be dangerous under this chapter and for which a permit has not been obtained shall be surrendered to an animal control officer for appropriate disposition including humane destruction.

     (b)   If an animal control officer or a peace officer has investigated and determined that an animal is dangerous, the animal control officer or peace officer shall deliver written notice of such determination to the owner of the animal. Should the animal pose a threat to the public health and safety, an animal control officer may immediately impound the animal.

     (c)   If, after investigation by an animal control officer or a peace officer, that officer determines that probable cause does not exist to believe the animal is dangerous, any interested person may appeal that determination by submitting within five (5) calendar days of the decision a written request to the animal control officer or a peace officer for a hearing and paying the required fee as provided by Section 9.04.031. The hearing shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in Section 9.04.016-1 of this chapter.

     (d)   In determining whether or not an animal shall be declared dangerous, the animal control officer, peace officer, or hearing officer appointed pursuant to Section 9.04.016-1, may consider, as a mitigating factor or factors, whether, at the time of the injury, attack or molestation, the person or animal suffering the injury, attack or molestation:

     (1)   Provoked, tormented, teased, abused or assaulted the animal thereby causing or contributing to the alleged behavior; or

     (2)   Committed a wilful trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner or caretaker of the animal; or

     (3)   Threatened or committed an unjustified attack or assault against the owner, caretaker, or person in control of the animal; or

     (4)   Any other mitigating factors deemed appropriate for consideration by the animal control officer, peace officer, or hearing officer.

     (e)   Upon receipt of written or oral notification by the animal control officer or a peace officer that an animal is dangerous as defined in this chapter, the owner shall submit an application for a dangerous animal permit to the animal control officer within five (5) calendar days. The application for a permit shall contain the name of the applicant, applicant’s address, the applicant’s home and business phone numbers, the address and description of the proposed location of where the animal will be kept, if different from applicant’s, a complete description, and a photograph of the animal. The permit shall contain all of the requirements of Section 9.04.017 and any additional conditions or requirements deemed necessary by the animal control officer or peace officer to protect the public health or safety.

     (f)    Should the owner of the animal wish to contest the dangerous animal designation, the owner may request a hearing to be conducted according to the procedures set forth in Section 9.04.016-1 of this chapter. The owner shall submit a written request for a dangerous animal hearing to the animal control officer or peace officer within five (5) calendar days of written notification by the animal control officer or peace officer that the animal has been declared dangerous. Should the owner not submit a request for a hearing within five (5) calendar days of notification, the hearing process shall be deemed waived by the owner, and the dangerous animal declaration will be considered final by the city. In that event, the city may allow the dangerous animal permit to be issued without a hearing. Unless a dangerous animal permit is immediately obtained, the animal shall be impounded at the owner’s expense pending appropriate disposition as determined by the animal control officer or peace officer. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1354 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1770 § 4, (2005); Ord. 1879 § 1, (2012))

 

9.04.015-1 Declaration of vicious animals.
     (a)   No person shall keep, have, maintain, sell, trade, or let for hire an animal which has been designated as vicious pursuant to this chapter.

     (b)   If an animal control officer or a peace officer has investigated and determined that an animal is vicious, the animal control officer or peace officer shall deliver to the owner of the animal written notice of that determination. The animal control officer or peace officer shall immediately impound or cause to be impounded the animal and shall cause the animal to be humanely destroyed unless the owner requests a hearing under subsection (c) of this section.

     (c)   If the owner of the animal disputes the designation of an animal as a vicious animal by the animal control officer or peace officer, the owner may submit a written request for a hearing to the animal control officer or peace officer within five (5) calendar days of notification. Such hearing shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in Section 9.04.016-1 of this chapter. Failure of the owner to request a hearing shall result in the animal being declared vicious and humanely destroyed. The vicious animal declaration will be considered final by the city.

     (d)   If after investigation by an animal control officer or a peace officer, that officer determines that probable cause does not exist to believe that the animal is vicious, any interested person may appeal that determination by submitting within five (5) calendar days of the decision a written request to the animal control officer or peace officer for a hearing and paying the required fee.

     (e)   In determining whether or not an animal shall be declared vicious, the animal control officer, peace officer, or hearing officer may consider, as a mitigating factor or factors, whether at the time of the injury, attack or behavior, the person or animal suffering the injury, attack or behavior for which the animal is being determined vicious:

     (1)   Provoked, tormented, teased, abused or assaulted the animal thereby causing or contributing to the alleged behavior; or

     (2)   Committed a wilful trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner or caretaker of the animal; or

     (3)   Threatened or committed an unjustified attack or assault against the owner, caretaker or person in control of the animal; or

     (4)   Any other mitigating factors deemed appropriate for consideration by the animal control officer, peace officer, or hearing officer. (Ord. 1770 § 5, (2005))

 

9.04.016 Issuance of permit for dangerous animal.
     (a)   No permit obtained under this section is transferable. If the owner’s address or the location where the animal is kept changes or the owner transfers ownership of the animal, the permit shall become null and void and an application for a new permit must be submitted to the animal control officer.

     (b)   A permit issued under this chapter is subject to renewal and approval each year and is subject to conditions and requirements existing as of the date of renewal. The permittee shall pay an annual fee for this permit pursuant to the procedures established by the division of animal control services. If permittee fails to file an application for renewal or pay the permit fee prior to the permit anniversary date, the permit shall automatically become void. The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in Section 9.04.031. This fee shall not be refundable.

     (c)   If the owner or permittee has a history of multiple violations of this chapter or of the conditions of any previously issued dangerous animal permit, the animal control officer or hearing officer may deny the permit and impound the animal for appropriate disposition as determined by the animal control officer or hearing officer. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1354 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1770 § 6, (2005))

 

9.04.016-1 Hearing procedures.
     (a)   A hearing pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted by a hearing officer or designated representative appointed by the director of the environmental services agency. The hearings shall be scheduled no less than five (5) working days and no more than fifteen (15) working days from the receipt of the request for the hearing unless agreed upon by the involved animal control officer or peace officer and the animal owner. A hearing may be continued if the hearing officer deems it necessary and proper or if the owner, or animal control officer or peace officer shows good cause.

     (b)   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner consistent with due process of law. Both the owner of the animal and the animal control officer or peace officer may be represented by counsel. The parties may present relevant evidence and call and cross-examine witnesses. The strict rules of evidence shall not be applicable. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The hearing shall be tape-recorded and all documentary evidence submitted at the hearing shall be preserved. Any party may arrange for a court reporter to be present. Any party desiring the presence of a court reporter shall make all necessary arrangements and shall be responsible for payment of all costs.

     (c)   The hearing officer may exclude disorderly or disruptive persons from the hearing or make other orders as necessary to ensure the fair and orderly conduct of the hearing.

     (d)   The hearing officer may decide all issues for or against the owner of the animal should the owner fail to appear at the hearing.

     (e)   Within five (5) working days of the hearing, the hearing officer or designated representative shall render a brief written decision, which decision shall be final at the administrative level. The written decision shall be mailed to the parties by certified mail and include a declaration or proof of mailing which includes the date on which the decision was mailed to the parties.

     (f)    Unless the hearing officer for good cause otherwise determines, the owner of the animal is liable for all costs related to such hearing.

     (g)   The failure to conduct a hearing required by this section shall have no bearing on any criminal prosecution for violation of any provisions of this chapter.

     (h)   In the case of animals determined by an animal control officer or a peace officer to be dangerous or vicious, the hearing officer may decide any or all of the following:

     (1)   That the animal be designated “vicious,” and the owner of the animal lose all rights of ownership and control of the animal, and the animal shall be humanely destroyed. An animal designated as “vicious” will be held at the animal shelter for a minimum of five (5) calendar days from the date of the hearing officer’s decision, after which time it may be humanely destroyed without further notice to its owner;

     (2)   That the animal be designated “dangerous” and the owner must apply for and obtain a dangerous animal permit as provided by this chapter within five (5) calendar days of receipt of the decision letter in order to maintain the animal, and the owner must comply with all mandatory dangerous animal permit rules and regulations as defined in Section 9.04.017;

     (3)   That the dangerous animal permit shall contain additional permit conditions to supplement the mandatory dangerous animal permit rules and regulations as defined in Section 9.04.017 below, including, but not limited to,, the following:

     (A)  That the owner keep the animal muzzled at all times when the animal is off the owner’s property,

     (B)   That the owner prove financial responsibility by posting a bond or certificate of insurance for an amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per animal as determined by the hearing officer,

     (C)   That the owner provide private behavioral and obedience training to the animal, at the owner’s expense and within the time set forth by the hearing officer following the issuance of a dangerous animal permit. Proof of participation, a report of behavioral assessment, and/or a certificate of satisfactory completion from an animal behaviorist or organization approved by the hearing officer shall be provided to the animal control officer within seven (7) calendar days following any required training,

     (D)  That the owner comply with any other permit requirement the hearing officer deems necessary to protect the public health or safety,

     (E)   That the owner reimburse the victim for the victim’s medical expenses or the victim animal’s veterinary expenses,

     (F)   Pursuant to Section 9.04.019 of this chapter, that the dangerous animal permit be modified as ordered by the hearing officer, or revoked and the animal humanely destroyed. (Ord. 1770 § 7, (2005); Ord. 1879 § 2, (2012))

 

9.04.017 Mandatory dangerous animal permit requirements.
     Any owner of a dangerous animal shall insure compliance with the following rules and regulations which shall be mandatory requirements for any dangerous animal permit:

     (a)   When the animal is off the property of its owner, the owner shall ensure that the animal is restrained with a leash not to exceed four (4) feet in length and having a tensile strength of at least three hundred (300) pounds and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or a person of such age, size, and strength as can easily control such animal. Extraordinary care shall be taken by the owner to ensure that such restraint is sufficient to control the animal in a manner which it will not endanger other persons or animals.

     (b)   The owner shall maintain the animal so that it is not a threat to any mail carrier, sanitation worker, meter person, or other person who has the lawful right to enter the property.

     (c)   The owner shall ensure that the animal is not allowed to be upon any unenclosed premises unless it is leashed and controlled by a person capable of controlling such animal. The owner shall ensure that the animal is not tethered, tied, or staked on any unenclosed premises. The owner shall ensure that the animal is not kept in a house or structure when the windows or doors are open or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure.

     (d)   The owner shall ensure that the animal is kept in a fenced yard, kennel, run, or enclosure approved by the animal control officer or peace officer. The owner shall ensure that all structures used to confine the animals are locked with a key or combination lock when the animals are within the enclosure. The owner shall regularly inspect the fenced yard, kennel, run, or enclosure to ensure that it is secure to maintain the animal.

     (e)   The owner shall open premises upon which an animal is maintained at any reasonable hour for inspection by the animal control officer or peace officer and the premises shall be surrendered for inspection by the owner upon the request of the animal control officer or peace officer. The owner shall pay a fee for the costs incurred by county for the inspection or reinspection of property. Such fee shall be set forth in Section 9.04.031.

     (f)    The owner of the dangerous animal shall post the entrances to the property where the animal is kept with a legible sign conspicuous to the public warning persons of the presence of a dangerous animal. The owner of the dangerous animal shall obtain an approved sign from the animal control program for a non-refundable fee and shall surrender such sign in the event of the revocation of the permit, death of the animal, or approved relocation of the animal, or upon any other reasonable demand by an animal control officer.

     (g)   The owner of any dangerous animal shall advise all members who reside in the same household and on the same premises of the conditions established by the permit for keeping or maintaining such dangerous animal.

     (h)   The owner shall strictly comply with all local and state laws regarding the care, use, control, and maintenance of animals.

     (i)    In addition to a license, the owner shall ensure that the animal shall at all times wear a separate tag issued by the division of animal control services which designates it as a dangerous animal. The owner shall ensure that the dangerous animal be microchipped and registered with the animal control program for a fee specified by Section 9.04.031 within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the permit was issued. The animal owner shall be responsible for payment of the fee which shall be utilized by the animal control program to offset the cost of the chip and to maintain the registration program.

     (j)    The owner shall have the animal spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian, at the owners expense, within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the permit was issued. The owner shall present written proof to the animal control officer that the surgery was performed. In the event an animal cannot be safely spayed or neutered due to medical reasons, the owner shall present written proof from a licensed practicing veterinarian to the animal control officer that said animal cannot be spayed or neutered.

     (k)   The owner may not sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of such animal to another county or city without notifying animal control at least twenty-four (24) hours before such sale, transfer, or disposal. Animal control will notify the proper authorities of the jurisdiction to which the dangerous animal is transferred. Should the owner of a dangerous animal wish to transfer ownership of the animal to another individual within the county, the new owner shall submit to a property inspection, apply for and obtain a new dangerous animal permit, pay all requisite fees, and comply with all provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the permit.

     (l)    No more than two dangerous animals may be kept at any one household.

     (m)  The owner shall not allow any animal designated “dangerous” as the result of aggression against human(s) to be kept on property or within a household in which a juvenile person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age resides.

     (n)   The owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the animal control officer of the animal’s death within twenty-four (24) hours and shall produce the animal’s body for verification upon request. The owner of a dangerous animal must notify the animal control officer immediately in the event the animal becomes lost or stolen.

     (o)   The owner shall pay all permit and property inspection fees as described in Section 9.04.031 of this chapter.

     (p)   The owner shall comply with all other permit conditions or requirements imposed pursuant to Section 9.04.016-1 or 9.04.015(a). (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1354 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1770 § 8, (2005))

 

9.04.018 Possession of animals after revocation of dangerous animal permit or vicious declaration.
     No person who has been determined to be in possession or ownership of a vicious animal or a dangerous animal for which a permit has been revoked under this chapter shall be granted any dangerous animal permit for a period of three (3) years following such determination or revocation. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1770 § 9, (2005))

 

9.04.019 Revocation or modification of permit.
     (a)   Subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c), any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked if the animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe any of the following to be true:

     (1)   The dangerous animal owner or any person the owner has allowed to have possession of the animal has violated any local animal ordinances, or is in violation of any zoning, health and safety or building ordinance or Penal Code section relating to keeping, care, or use of any animals; or

     (2)   The dangerous animal owner or any person the owner has allowed to have possession of the animal has violated any rules, regulations, or conditions of this chapter, including, but not limited to,, dangerous animal conditions, or any requirement imposed by the animal control officer, peace officer, or hearing officer as necessary to insure the animal will not endanger the peace, health or safety of any person or property; or

     (3)   The dangerous animal owner has changed the location of his or her residence or his or her place of business or sells, assigns, transfers, donates, leases, or otherwise disposes of the animal for which the permit was issued.

     (b)   In the event that it is reasonably necessary to protect against a threat to the health or safety of the public, or of any animal, the animal control officer or peace officer may impound or cause to be impounded the animal while an investigation is taking place.

     (c)   If, after investigation, the animal control officer or peace officer concludes that it is probable that one or more of the above grounds for revocation has occurred, the officer shall cause written notice thereof to be transmitted to the owner. The notice shall specify the grounds of possible revocation or modification of the permit. Should the owner of the animal wish to contest the revocation or modification of the permit, he or she may request a hearing to be held before a hearing officer not previously involved with the permit issuance or investigation, as designated by the director of the environmental services agency within five (5) calendar days of receiving the notice of intent to modify or revoke permit. The hearing date shall be not less than five (5) working days or more than fifteen (15) working days subsequent to the date the request for hearing is received. The hearing shall be conducted as set forth in Section 9.04.016-1 of this chapter. After the hearing, the officer conducting the hearing may modify the terms of the permit or revoke the permit depending upon the permittee’s ability to comply with the requirements of this chapter and to control the animal so that the health, safety, and property of the public are protected.

     (d)   Upon written or oral notification by the animal control officer, or hearing officer if a hearing was held, of any modifications to a dangerous animal permit, the owner shall immediately comply with such modified permit requirements.

     (e)   Upon written or oral notification by the animal control officer, or hearing officer, if a hearing was held, of the revocation of a permit for a dangerous animal, the owner of such animal shall within two (2) calendar days of such notification surrender the animal to the animal control officer to be humanely destroyed or provide written proof to an animal control officer in the form of declaration(s) under penalty of perjury that such animal has been permanently removed from the county and declaring the new location or new address where the animal is to be kept. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1354 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1770 § 10, (2005))

 

9.04.020 Animals to be impounded.
     (a)   Every animal kept or found by an animal control officer or a peace officer under conditions which constitute a violation of this chapter or other local or state law may be impounded by an animal control officer or a peace officer. The animal’s owner shall be charged all costs incurred or fees applicable with respect to such impoundment.

     (b)   When the animal control officer or peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that any animal is dangerous or vicious, the animal control officer or peace officer may also impound or cause to be impounded the animal and keep it for such period not to exceed fifteen (15) days in order to observe, examine, and determine whether or not such animal is dangerous or vicious.

     (c)   Any animal subject to dangerous or vicious animal proceedings may be impounded at the discretion of the animal control officer or peace officer pending notice, hearings and determinations hereunder and until any required permit is obtained.

     (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or state law, an impounded animal may be redeemed by the owner, after payment of the required fees and charges as provided in Section 9.04.031 and after compliance with licensing requirements. In the event that the animal is not so redeemed within the time set forth by state law, it may be disposed of in the manner determined by an animal control officer. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1770 § 11, (2005); Ord. 1879 § 3, (2012))

 

9.04.021 Notice to owner of animals impounded.
     Within twenty-four (24) hours of the impoundment of any animal, the animal control officer shall mail a written notice thereof to the place of business or residence of the owner of the animal if known. If the animal may not be redeemed as provided by Section 9.04.020(d), the owner may request a hearing under Section 9.04.017, subsections (a) through (g), or applicable state law. The animal control officer shall maintain records of the impoundment pursuant to Section 9.04.026. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1770 § 12, (2005))

 

9.04.022 Misdemeanor violations.
     (a)   A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction except as otherwise specifically provided.

     (b)   A person violating any provision of subsection (a) of Section 9.04.015 or subsection (a) of Section 9.04.015-1 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1770 § 13, (2005))

 

9.04.023 Redemption.
     (a)   Except as otherwise required by this chapter or by any other law, the owner or person entitled to the control or custody of any animal impounded may, at any time before the sale or other disposition thereof, redeem the same by paying all proper fees assessed by animal control services. Animal control services shall issue to the owner duplicate receipts for the amount of the fee paid.

     (b)   Upon redemption of any impounded unaltered animal, the owner will be required to pay a spay/neuter fee in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) in addition to the impound fees imposed under Section 9.04.031. Such fee shall be refundable upon proof of spay/neuter of the animal within thirty (30) days of the redemption date. Any unaltered animal impounded twice or more within a three (3) year period shall be altered at the owner’s expense prior to redemption. At the option of the owner, required spaying or neutering may be performed by a private veterinarian.

     (c)   Any owner of an impounded animal subject to mandatory spay/neuter under subsection (b) may petition, in writing, for a hearing conducted by the animal control program manager or designee within three (3) days following notice of the second impoundment. The hearing shall be held within four (4) working days of such petition and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 9.04.016-1, subsections (a) through (g). After the hearing, the hearing officer may require that the animal be spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense, unless the hearing officer determines that good cause exists for not requiring that the animal be spayed or neutered. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1770 § 14, (2005))

 

9.04.024 Redemption fees.
     Fees for animal shelter services shall be as set forth in Section 9.04.031. No animal shall be released to its owner or possessor unless and until such fees are paid in full. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983))

 

9.04.025 License fee to be paid upon redemption.
     No impounded dog may be redeemed unless and until its license fee and applicable penalty have been paid. (Ord. 1252, § 2, (1983))

 

9.04.026 Record of impounded animals.
     The animal control program shall keep a record of all animals impounded, which record shall include a description of the animal, the date of its receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of the person redeeming or purchasing, and the fees and charges and proceeds of sales received on account thereof, and such additional matters as may be necessary and incidental to implementing this chapter. The records shall be kept for four (4) years. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1770 § 15, (2005))

 

9.04.026-1 Quarantine fee.
     A fee shall be charged for the costs incurred by the county for the quarantine of animals including, but not limited to, investigation, inspection of property, confinement, examination and release of the animal from quarantine. The fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has custody of the animal. Such fee shall be in addition to the actual costs of the health officer or designee in housing, feeding and otherwise caring for a quarantined animal. Such fee shall be as provided in Section 9.04.031. (Ord. 1879 § 4, (2012))

 

9.04.026-2 Inspection fee.
     A fee shall be charged for the costs incurred by the county for the inspection or reinspection of property. The fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has custody of the animal. Such fee shall be set forth in Section 9.04.031. (Ord. 1421 § 1, (1990))

 

9.04.026-3 Field return fee.
     A fee shall be charged for any animal impounded by an animal control officer and returned by the officer in the field to the owner or person who has custody of the animal. The fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has custody of the animal. Such fee shall be set forth in Section 9.04.031. (Ord. 1421 § 2, (1990))

 

9.04.026-4 Service fees.
     Animal control service fees for redemption of impounded animals, relinquishment, adoption, disposal, abatement, rescue, veterinary treatment or other services not specified in Section 9.04.031 shall be reviewed by the director of community services or his or her designee for reimbursement costs. The director of community services or designee shall have the authority to determine the fee charged for said services. The fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has custody of animal(s) for which said services have been provided. (Ord. 1421 § 3, (1990))

 

9.04.027 Epidemics.
     The county department of health services may determine and declare that rabies or other contagious diseases are epidemic or that other health and safety hazards exist among dogs or other animals within the county. Upon the making of such a declaration, the county health officer shall prepare and promulgate such orders, rules and regulations as are necessary for appropriate control of all the animals concerned within the county. The rules and regulations of the county health officer may include, but are not limited to, impoundment, quarantine, vaccination or destruction. It shall be the duty of animal control officers to assist the county health officer in carrying out such rules and regulation. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983))

 

9.04.028 Duty to report bite.
     It is the duty of every person having knowledge that any animal has bitten a human being to report that fact immediately to the county department of health services, animal control program or to the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983))

 

9.04.029 Right to contract for animal control service.
     The city council may contract for animal control services with the county or any humane society or other organization, corporation or association upon such terms and conditions as may be agreeable. (Ord. 1252 § 2, (1983))

 

9.04.030 Use of license and other revenue.
     All revenue derived from the fee scheduled and from fines, forfeitures and penalties related to the enforcement of this chapter shall be used to offset the cost of enforcement and administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1252 § 2, August 1, 1983).

 

9.04.031 Fees and charges.
     The fees and charges under this chapter shall be set or revised by city council resolution adopting or amending the city’s Master Fee Schedule. (Ord. 1879 § 5, (2012))

 

9.04.035 Mistreatment of or interference with police dogs.
     It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously torment, torture, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used or under the control of the Burlingame police department in the performance of the functions or duties of the department, or to interfere with any such dog while being used or under the control of the Burlingame police department and/or its officers, agents, employees or duly appointed representatives. (Ord. 1141 § 2, (1978))

 

9.04.037 Protection of animals in motor vehicles.
     (a)   No person, other than an individual actually working a dog or other animal for ranching purposes, shall transport or carry on any public highway or public roadway, any dog or any other animal in a motor vehicle unless the dog or other animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a cap or container, cage, cross-tether or other device to prevent the animal from falling from, being thrown from or jumping from said motor vehicle. As used herein “motor vehicle” includes, without limitation, automobile, pickup truck and trailer.

     (b)   No person shall leave a dog or other animal in any unattended motor vehicle without adequate ventilation, sanitary conditions, or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures which adversely affect the animal’s health or safety.

     (c)   Any animal control officer or law enforcement officer who witnesses such a violation shall have the right to impound the animal if, in his or her opinion, the animal’s health or safety is or will be thereby endangered. (Ord. 1304 § 3, (1985))

 

9.04.040 Number of dogs on premises limited.
     It is a public nuisance for any person, firm or corporation to have, keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained on any premises within the city, more than two (2) dogs, either male or female of the accepted age of nine (9) months and over. (1941 Code § 1313)

 

9.04.045 Three-year licenses for dogs.
     Notwithstanding Section 9.04.045 above, a three (3) year license may be obtained for a dog, excluding wolf-hybrids, by submitting to the licensing program adequate proof of a three (3) year rabies vaccination of the animal to be licensed and payment of the applicable fees as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1682 § 2, (2002))

 

9.04.050 Puppies under four months excepted from limitation of number on premises.
     In the event of the breeding of any dog on any premises within the city, the puppies shall not be permitted to remain on the premises for a longer period than the weaning time of same, which is hereby fixed at not later than four (4) months from birth of the puppies, nor shall it be permitted to remove the puppies to any other premises within the city, after the period of four (4) months, so as to cause an excess, including the puppies, of a two-dog limit on any premises; except, however, it is permitted to substitute any one or more puppies for any one or more grown dogs within the limit of two (2); and provided, however, that under no condition, unless as is hereinafter specified, shall there be more than two (2) dogs on any premises within the city at any time including the substitution of puppies of four (4) months and over for dogs of the accepted age of nine (9) months or over. (1941 Code § 1314)

 

9.04.054 Number of cats on premises limited.
     It is a public nuisance for any person, firm or corporation to have, keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained on any premises within the city, more than three (3) cats, either male or female of the accepted age of two (2) months and over. Maintenance shall include the feeding of cats, whether or not they are allowed within the buildings on the premises, and whether or not ownership is claimed. (Ord. 1377 § 1, (1988))

 

9.04.055 Kittens under two months excepted from limitation of number on premises.
     In the event of the breeding of any cat on any premises within the city, the kittens shall not be permitted to remain on the premises for a longer period than the weaning time of same, which is hereby fixed at not later than two (2) months from birth of the kittens, nor shall it be permitted to remove the kittens to any other premises within the city, after the period of two (2) months, so as to cause an excess, including the kittens of a three (3) cat limit on any premises. (Ord. 1377 § 1, (1988))

 

9.04.060 Permit to keep more than two dogs or three cats—Consent of neighbors.
     The provisions of Sections 9.04.040 to 9.04.055 are subject to the exception that the city council may grant a permit to an adult resident of the city to have or keep more than two (2) dogs or three (3) cats, but not to exceed five (5) dogs and/or cats in all, when such resident presents to the city council a verified petition containing the bona fide signatures of a majority of adult residents within four hundred (400) feet of the boundary lines of the premises of the applicant. The petition shall be accompanied by a drawing showing all adjoining or adjacent property within four hundred (400) feet from the boundary lines and adult residents owning or in possession of such property shall be eligible to sign the petition. The permit shall be revocable at any time by the city council, upon its own motion or upon a petition by a majority of adult residents within the radius. (1941 Code § 1315, Ord. 1377 § 2, (1988))

 

9.04.070 Premises defined.
     The word “premises” for the purpose of this chapter means any city lot or portion thereof, or adjoining lots or pieces or parcels of land, with a building thereon, and inhabited by a person or persons. (1941 Code § 1316)

 

9.04.080 Removal of canine excrement.
     No person owning or having custody or control of any dog shall knowingly or through failure to exercise due care or control, permit such dog to defecate and allow such excrement to thereafter remain on any public property, including parks, parking lots, sidewalks, planting strips and parkways, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. 1106 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1137 § 1, (1978))

Chapter 9.08 KEEPING
9.08.010 Conditions for keeping poultry and rabbits.
     It is unlawful to keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained within the city any live chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, doves, squabs or other fowl, or any rabbits, except under the following conditions, namely:

     (a)   Cannot Run at Large. Such poultry or rabbits shall under no circumstances be permitted to run or be at large, upon any premises other than those of the person in the immediate possession or control of such poultry or rabbits.

     (b)   Location of Enclosures. Such poultry or rabbits must at all times be kept within the confines of a yard or enclosure to be located on the rear half of the lot, which shall be enclosed on all sides by a good and substantial fence. The yard or enclosure shall not be within thirty-five (35) feet of any dwelling or within thirty-five (35) feet of any street lines.

     (c)   Enclosure to be Kept Clean. All yards, cages, coops, cotes, warrens or similar structures or enclosures for such poultry or rabbits shall be cleaned once each week and otherwise kept in a sanitary condition and free from offensive odors.

     (d)   Roosters. No rooster of over four (4) months of age shall be kept, enclosed, maintained or allowed within the city.

     (e)   Limitation upon Number of Poultry or Rabbits. It is unlawful for any person in any event to keep or maintain more than a total number of twelve (12) poultry or rabbits upon any single lot, parcel or piece of land within the city. (1941 Code § 1334, Ord. 1088 § 1, (1976))

 

9.08.030 Disturbance of peace.
     It is unlawful to keep, maintain or permit within the city any animal or fowl which by any sound or cry disturbs the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood. (1941 Code § 1335)

 

9.08.050 Prohibited animals.
     It is unlawful to keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained within the city any horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat or exotic animal.

     “Exotic animal” means any of the following:

     (a)   Following members of the class reptilia: order ophidia (such as, but not limited to, racers, boas, water snakes and pythons) over six (6) feet in length, and order loricata (such as, but not limited to, alligator, caymans and crocodiles) over two (2) feet in length;

     (b)   Following members of the class aves: order falconiformes (such as, but not limited to hawks, eagles and vultures which are not kept pursuant to federal or state permit), and subdivision ratitae (such as, but not limited to, ostriches, rheas, cassowaries and emus);

     (c)   Following members of the class mammalia: order carnivora, expressly excepting the domestic dog (canis familaris) and the domestic cat (felis catus) but including, but not limited to, the family felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars), the family canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes and jackals), and order marsupialia (such as kangaroos and common opossums (didelphis marsupialia)), and order chiroptera (bats), and order edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos), and order proboscidea (elephants), and order primata (including, but not limited to, monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas), and order ungulata (including, but not limited to, antelope, deer, bison and camels);

     (d)   Any species of animal when kept, maintained or harbored in such numbers or in such a manner as to constitute the likelihood of danger to the animals themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings;

     (e)   Any species of animal which is venomous to human beings whether its venom is transmitted by bite, sting, touch or other means, except bees. (1941 Code § 1337, Ord. 1088 § 3, (1976))

 

9.08.060 Nuisances.
     The keeping or maintaining of any animal or bees otherwise than as provided in this chapter shall constitute a nuisance. (1941 Code § 1338, Ord. 1088 § 4, (1976))

 

9.08.070 Exemptions.
     The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to the following:

     (a)   Owners who use animals for diagnostic purposes or research, and who have a valid permit issued by a governmental agency and whose animals are kept on the premises specified in the permit;

     (b)   Owners who use animals for teaching purposes in recognized educational institutions and whose animals are kept on the premises of the institution or other authorized place;

     (c)   Owners of establishments which treat or board animals on the premises and which are owned or operated by veterinarians licensed by the state of California;

     (d)   Owners of establishments licensed to keep animals for the purpose of resale whose animals are kept on the premises of such establishment or other authorized place. (Ord. 1088 § 5, (1976))

 

9.08.080 Feeding prohibited on city property and property of others.
     (a)   Except at feeding stations that are expressly authorized by the city manager or the manager’s designee, it is unlawful for any person to do the following on any city property or city right-of-way:

     (1)   To feed any bird or animal that is not legally owned by that person; or

     (2)   To place any feed of any kind that is intended for consumption by any animal or bird of any kind or to attract any animal or bird of any kind.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person to feed or to place any feed of any kind that is intended for consumption by any animal or bird of any kind or to attract any animal or bird of any kind on any property owned or controlled by another person without the express permission of the owner or person in control of the property.

     (c)   For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:

     (1)   “Feed” means any material, including, but not limited to,, birdseed, bird feed, corn, bread pieces, food scraps, domestic animal food, or any similar substance that can be utilized for consumption by animals or birds to provide nourishment.

     (2)   “To feed” means to spread, cast, lay, deposit, or dump feed. (Ord. 1701 § 2, (2002))

Chapter 9.16 ANIMALS AS NOVELTIES
9.16.010 Sale of animals as novelties.
     It is unlawful for any person to display, sell, offer for sale or barter any live rabbit, baby chick, duckling or other fowl, fish, turtle, snake, lizard, chameleon or other reptile, bird, cat, dog, guinea pig, rodent or other animal, as novelties, whether or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated. (1941 Code § 1335.1, Ord. 649, (1957))

 

9.16.020 Business licensees exempt.
     This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the display in proper facilities or the sale of any animal, fish, reptile or bird by any person carrying on any business in which animals, fish, reptiles or birds are the stock in trade when such person is possessed of a valid business license under the provisions of Title 6 of the Burlingame Ordinance Code, as such provisions now exist or as they may be hereafter amended. (1941 Code § 1335.1, Ord. 649, (1957))

 

9.16.030 Giving away animal, fish, reptile or bird.
     It is unlawful for any person required to procure a business license under the provisions of Title 6 of the Burlingame Ordinance Code, as such provisions now exist or as they may be hereafter amended, to give away any animal, fish, reptile or bird unless such person is possessed of a valid business license to carry on the business of a pet shop, kennel, aviary or fish hatchery. (1941 Code § 1335.1, Ord. 649, (1957))

Title 10 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Chapter 10.04 HANDBILLS, DODGERS AND BILLPOSTING
Chapter 10.08 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE ALARM
Chapter 10.10 ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 10.12 TRESPASS BY PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Chapter 10.14 TRESPASS IN ALLEYS AND EASEMENTS
Chapter 10.20 LIQUOR
Chapter 10.22 GAMBLING DEVICES
Chapter 10.24 CURFEW FOR MINORS
Chapter 10.25 DAYTIME CURFEW FOR MINORS
Chapter 10.28 PROPERTY DAMAGE
Chapter 10.30 GRAFFITI CONTROL
Chapter 10.32 OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS BY OBJECTS
Chapter 10.34 OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS BY PERSONS
Chapter 10.36 OBSTRUCTING WATERWAYS AND DRAINS
Chapter 10.37 OBSTRUCTION OF ACCESS TO BUSINESSES
Chapter 10.40 RADIO INTERFERENCE, LOUDSPEAKERS, ETC.
Chapter 10.48 FIREARMS, AIR GUNS, SLINGSHOTS AND FIREWORKS
Chapter 10.55 REGULATIONS FOR PARK AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
Chapter 10.58 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Chapter 10.60 PROHIBITION OF NUDITY IN PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 10.65 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA—SALE TO MINORS
Chapter 10.66 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA—DISPLAY
Chapter 10.68 PROHIBITED DISPLAYS ON COVERS OF PUBLICATIONS IN BUSINESSES
Chapter 10.70 RESPONSE TO UNRULY GATHERINGS
Chapter 10.72 SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS, EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED, OR SIDESHOWS

Chapter 10.04 HANDBILLS, DODGERS AND BILLPOSTING
10.04.010 Billposting unlawful—Public notices and permitted banners excepted.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or cause to be placed along or about any street, lane, avenue, alley, court or highway within the city, by posting or causing to be posted, affixing or causing to be affixed, lettering or writing or causing to be lettered or written, onto any tree, pole, post, hydrant, pipe, tank, stand, curb, sidewalk, structure or public building or other thing, any bill, placard, poster, hanger card or sign, or other thing, or advertising; excepting, however, notices of public improvement or public work or other legal notices required or permitted by law, and excepting, also, temporary banners stretched across the public street, for which a permit has been issued by the city council. Any such bill, placard, poster, hanger card or sign or other printed matter or advertising shall be a public nuisance. (1941 Code § 1457)

 

10.04.020 Private property excepted.
     Section 10.04.010 of this code shall only apply to that part of the public street, lane, avenue, alley, court or highway extending from property line to property line, and in no case to private property. (1941 Code § 1458)

 

10.04.030 Distribution of dodgers.
     It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or distribute or cause to be thrown, deposited or distributed, in or on any street, alley, gutter, highway, park, vacant lot or other place in the city, or in any vehicle parked or standing upon any such place, any dodger or other similarly written or printed matter. (1941 Code § 1459)

 

10.04.040 Permission required to post or distribute on private property.
     It is unlawful to post, stick, stamp, paint, place or otherwise affix, any notice, placard, bill, poster or advertisement to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curbing, hydrant, shade tree or box tree, fence enclosure or builds or upon any telegraph, telephone, electric lighting or electric railway pole, or motor vehicle in the city, without first obtaining the permission of the owner, agent or occupant thereof, or to distribute or cause to be distributed or thrown upon any street, square or sidewalk, or, without first obtaining the permission of the owner, agent or occupant thereof, upon any private premises, in the city, any handbill, dodger, circular or any other advertisement. (1941 Code § 1460)

Chapter 10.08 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE ALARM
10.08.010 Prohibited uses.
     No person shall use, or cause to be permitted to be used, or engage in the business of providing, any alarm, telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public primary telephone trunk line of the police or fire department of the city, and then reproduces any prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency. (Ord. 1105 § 1, (1977))

Chapter 10.10 ALARM SYSTEMS
10.10.010 Installation.
     All alarm systems sold, leased, contracted for or otherwise maintained and operated by any person within the city shall be installed in accordance with all applicable standards and requirements of the building codes and other applicable established standards as required by the city. All alarm systems shall be equipped with an uninterruptible power supply or installed in such a manner that the failure or interruption of normal electrical utility power shall not activate the alarm system. Such power supply shall be capable of at least four (4) hours of operation. Required fire alarm systems shall have battery back up sufficient to provide twenty-four (24)-hour stand-by and five (5)-minute continuous alarm capacity. All alarm systems installed within the city may be inspected by police, fire, or building inspection representatives during usual business hours. (Ord. 1120 § 1, (1978); Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993); Ord. No. 1480, (1993))

 

10.10.020 Audible alarm standards for cessation of audible alarms.
     (a)   Any and all audible alarm systems shall be installed or activated to automatically cease transmitting the audible signal within ten (10) minutes, provided that required fire alarm systems must sound continuously until the arrival of the fire department. Only a fire department representative may reset such an alarm.

     (b)   Upon request of a city police officer, a user or his or her designated representative shall respond within one hour to the premises whereon the alarm system is located. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.030 Repair.
     After any false alarm caused by a mechanical malfunction of the alarm system, the user shall cause the alarm system to be repaired so as to eliminate such malfunction before reactivating the alarm. A person shall not reactivate such alarm until such repairs have been made. In buildings with a required fire alarm, a fire watch may be required until repairs have been made. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.040 Alarm telephone devices.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used any electrical or mechanical device or attachment to a telephone that automatically reports a taped or otherwise recorded message to report a police or fire emergency to the police or fire department. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.050 Audible alarms similar to sirens prohibited.
     It is unlawful to install on the exterior or interior of a building an intrusion detective device or alarm which upon activation emits a sound exceeding eighty (80) decibels (when measured from outside the premises), which is similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.060 Alarm systems which constitute a hazard to responding public safety officers.
     No person shall operate or permit an alarm system to be operated which, due to the nature of its construction, installation and/or location, constitutes an unreasonable hazard to life and limb of responding public safety officers, as determined by the chief of police or fire chief. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.070 Notice of repair.
     The alarm business, alarm agent, user, or permittee shall notify the police dispatcher of the city prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance adjustment or installation which might activate a false alarm on a particular alarm system. No subsequent recording of a “false alarm” for the purpose of charge for a police response shall occur if the police dispatcher has been appropriately notified of the repair period. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.080 Notice of false alarm.
     Users of any alarm system who set off a false alarm shall inform the police dispatcher of the error as soon as the user has knowledge of such false alarm. Permittee may avoid charges for a false alarm if the police dispatcher is notified prior to the actual dispatching of police units. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.090 False alarm charges.
     The operator of a business or occupant of a residential premises shall pay such charges as may be assessed by the city for false alarms. Such charges and permit fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.100 Permit.
     It shall be unlawful for any alarm system to be installed, possessed, operated, used, serviced or maintained without a valid, unrevoked and unexpired permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or for an alarm business or alarm agent to make operable, service, maintain or repair an alarm system for a user unless said user has obtained a valid, unrevoked and unexpired permit from the city. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.110 Applications—Forms.
     Applications for all permits required hereunder shall be filed with the police department and shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city council. The department shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate permit applicants. The applicant for any permit shall include but not be limited to the name, address and telephone number of the person who will render service or repairs during any hour of the day or night. The application may be made by a user or an alarm business or agent for the user. If approved, the permit shall be issued in the name of the user only. (Ord. 1120 § 1, (1978); Ord. 1267 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.120 Application—Investigation and denial.
     (a)   Processing—Grounds for Denial. An application for a permit shall be processed in a timely manner. The permit may be denied by the chief of police on the following grounds:

     (1)   The alarm system is deficient in that it does not comply with standards adopted pursuant to this chapter and/or results in excessive false alarms as defined by said standards; or

     (2)   The applicant, his or her employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with any city agency; or

     (3)   That the applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation; permits shall be issued to the user; or

     (4)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

     (b)   Procedure. The chief of police shall inform the applicant in writing of the denial stating the reasons for such denial. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.130 Duration of permit.
     Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be renewed annually after issuance. Applications for renewals of permits shall be processed in the same manner as applications for the initial permit. Initial issuance of a permit or transfer of a permit shall be valid until the annual renewal period which shall be July 1 of each subsequent year. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.140 Grounds for revocation.
     Permits for required fire alarms shall not be revoked. The following shall constitute grounds for revocation of all other alarm permits:

     (a)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;

     (b)   When an alarm system is deficient in that it actuates excessive false alarms, as defined in the rules and regulations prescribed by the city council;

     (c)   When the applicant or permittee, or his or her employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record required to be filed with any city agency;

     (d)   If, immediately following an alarm activation, the permittee or his or her designated representative fails to respond within one hour to a request for access to the protected premises, upon request to do so by a city police officer, or dispatcher who deems a response necessary to ensure the security of the premises or persons where the system is installed;

     (e)   Failure to pay fees for responses to false alarms within thirty (30) days of billing. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.150 Denial or revocation of permit.
     In the case of denial or revocation of a permit, the chief of police shall notify the permittee in writing of the reasons for such denial or revocation. The applicant or permittee shall have ten (10) days from and after the service of said notice to offer evidence to the chief showing why the permit should not be revoked. The chief may grant the permit or withdraw the revocation if satisfactory and sufficient evidence is presented. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.160 Suspension of responses.
     In addition to those measures or in lieu of those measures outlined above, the chief of police may, at his or her discretion, order:

     (a)   Except where the sole violation is the failure to obtain a permit, non-response to the permittee alarm if in the chief’s judgment the response to a routinely false alarm call is outweighed by the danger to the public or city employees.

     (b)   Response, but continued assessment of response charges.

     (c)   Prosecution for violation either by complaint to city attorney or citation for operating an alarm without a valid permit. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.170 Alarm businesses.
     (a)   No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on an alarm business within the city without filing with the police department a copy of a valid, unrevoked and unexpired state alarm company operator license therefor in accordance with the provisions of Sections 7590 et seq., of the Business and Professions Code and any subsequent amendments thereto.

     (b)   In the event said license(s) is/are suspended, revoked, or otherwise rendered invalid by the issuing authority, the alarm business shall notify the police department in writing of such state action within three (3) days thereof.

     (c)   Every person engaged in, conducting, or operating an alarm business within the city shall post on the premises where the alarm business is located a copy of a valid state alarm company operator’s license.

     (d)   No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on an alarm business within the city without a valid business license issued pursuant to this code.

     (e)   Each alarm business, alarm agent, or user shall keep an accurate record of inspection or repair of any installed alarm system and shall display such record to the chief of police when required to do so.

     (f)    Each alarm business, alarm agent or user who installs, services, possesses, maintains, operates or uses an alarm system has the sole responsibility for instruction of all appropriate persons in the proper use and operation of such system, as frequently as necessary, especially those factors which can cause false alarms. Such appropriate persons shall include but not be limited to agents, employees, family members, or customers. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

 

10.10.180 Notice of change.
     Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by this chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the department within ten (10) days after such change. The applicant or permittee is solely responsible for the correctness of the information submitted to the police department. (Ord. 1480 § 1, (1993))

Chapter 10.12 TRESPASS BY PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
10.12.010 Entering premises without permission unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any agent, solicitor or peddler to enter upon any premises of any person, firm or corporation within the city, upon which is conspicuously displayed a sign or notice that no peddler, agent or solicitor is allowed upon the premises, unless however, permission for such entry is first obtained from or granted by the owner, lessee, agent or occupant of said premises. (1941 Code § 1493)

Chapter 10.14 TRESPASS IN ALLEYS AND EASEMENTS
10.14.010 Trespassing in alleys and easements in residential districts.
     It is unlawful for any person to be present in or upon a public or private alley or utility easement in a residential district between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. without permission of the owner or occupant of the adjacent property or unless such person is an authorized representative of a public utility or public agency.

     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code, any violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1332 § 1, (1986))

Chapter 10.20 LIQUOR
10.20.010 Consumption of alcoholic beverages upon public property or private property without permission.
     (a)   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage:

     (1)   On any street, sidewalk, lawn, alley, park or other public place, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) hereof;

     (2)   While on private property open to public view without the express permission of the owner, his or her agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof.

     (b)   Beer or wine may be consumed upon public places as a part of a specific event or occasion when such consumption is specifically approved by the city council and subject to the following conditions:

     (1)   Beer or wine may only be dispensed upon such public places by organizations having approval to do so from the city council.

     (2)   Beer or wine may only be dispensed by such organizations in paper or plastic cups or containers of similar materials.

     (3)   Consumption of such beer shall only be allowed within the areas specified by the city council.

     (4)   All other laws shall be complied with, including the prohibition of sales of alcoholic beverages by bars, restaurants and stores for consumption upon such public places.

     (c)   Alcoholic beverages may be served and consumed upon a public place specifically defined in a city encroachment permit for such service and consumption in direct connection with the operation of a bona fide public eating place as defined in the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act subject to the following conditions:

     (1)   The service and consumption conforms to the terms of the encroachment permit and permit regulations; and

     (2)   The service and consumption is specifically allowed for the public place under a current on-sale license for the bona fide public eating place issued by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Department. (1941 Code § 1278, Ord. 382, (1942); Ord. 1165 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1360 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1453 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1465 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1579, (1997))

 

10.20.020 Presence of persons under 21 years on certain premises; posting of notice.
     No owner or operator of a premises operating under an on-sale license issued for public premises, as defined in Section 23039 of the Business and Professions Code, or of any business required by state or local regulation or permit to prohibit persons under the age of 21 years from its premises during all or certain hours shall permit such a person not having lawful business therein to enter and remain on said premises during such hours. No person under the age of 21 years shall enter or remain upon such premises without lawful business therein during such hours. The owner or operator of such a premises shall post a sign at every entrance stating that persons under the age of 21 are so prohibited. If such prohibition applies only during certain hours such signs shall clearly so state. (Ord. 1556 § 1, (1996))

Chapter 10.22 GAMBLING DEVICES
10.22.010 Possession of gambling device unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession or under his or her control, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagee or otherwise, or to permit to be placed, maintained or kept, in any room, space, enclosure or building, owned, leased or occupied by him, or which is under his or her management or control, any slot or card machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device, upon the result or action of which money or other valuable thing is staked or hazarded, and which is operated, or played, by placing or depositing therein any coins, checks, slugs, balls or other articles or device, or in any other manner and by means whereon, or as a result of the operation of which any merchandise, money, representative or articles of value, checks or tokens, redeemable in, or exchangeable for money, or any other thing of value, is won or lost, or taken from, or obtained from such machine when the result of action or operation of such machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical devices dependent upon hazard or chance. (1941 Code § 1430)

Chapter 10.24 CURFEW FOR MINORS
10.24.010 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

     (a)   “Emergency” means an unforeseen circumstance or circumstances or the resulting situation that calls for immediate action to prevent serious injury, loss of life, or serious property damage. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, or vehicle accident.

     (b)   “Guardian” means:

     (1)   A person who is the guardian of the person of a minor pursuant to a court order; or

     (2)   A public or private entity with whom a minor has been placed by a court order; or

     (3)   A person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

     (c)   “Minor” means a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.

     (d)   “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor.

     (e)   “Public place” means:

     (1)   Any out-of-door area to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds; and

     (2)   The out-of-doors common areas, such as entry ways and parking lots, of businesses to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to,, any place of amusement, entertainment, or recreation. (1941 Code § 1279(a), Ord. 399, (1943); Ord. 1606 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1607 § 2, (1999))

 

10.24.020 Curfew hours.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to be in any public place within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as provided in Section 10.24.030 below.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in any public place within the city between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as provided in Section 10.24.030 below. (1941 Code § 1279(b), Ord. 399, (1943); Ord. 1606 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1607 § 2, (1999))

 

10.24.030 Exemptions.
     A minor shall not be in violation of Section 10.24.020 if at the time that the minor was detained by peace officer, the minor was:

     (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian; or

     (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without unnecessary detour or stop; or

     (c)   Driving or riding in a motor vehicle or publicly owned transportation; or

     (d)   Engaged in lawful volunteer or paid employment activity, or going to or returning home from a lawful volunteer or paid employment activity, without unnecessary detour or stop; or

     (e)   Acting in response to an emergency; or

     (f)    On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence that is immediately adjacent to the minor’s residence; or

     (g)   Attending or going to or returning home, without unnecessary detour or stop, from a school, religious, cultural, sports, amusement, entertainment, or recreation activity, or any organized rally, demonstration, meeting, or similar activity; or

     (h)   Waiting at a train or bus station or stop for transportation; or

     (i)    Emancipated in accordance with California law. (1941 Code § 1279(c), Ord. 399, (1943); Ord. 533, (1953); Ord. 1606 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1607 § 2, (1999))

 

10.24.040 Enforcement procedures.
     (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude minors from being in a public place for the purpose of exercising the rights guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or by the California Constitution, including the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, right of assembly, freedom of association, right to petition, and right to privacy as applied by decisional law to minors of a particular age.

     (b)   Before taking enforcement action under this chapter, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.

     (c)   A peace officer may take enforcement action under this chapter only when the peace officer has probable cause to believe that neither subsection (a) above nor any exemption under Section 10.24.030 applies to the offender’s reasons for being present in the public place. (1941 Code § 1279(d), Ord. 399, (1943); Ord. 1606 § 2, (1999) Ord. 1607 § 2, (1999))

Chapter 10.25 DAYTIME CURFEW FOR MINORS
10.25.010 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

     (a)   “Emergency” means an unforeseen circumstance or circumstances or the resulting situation that calls for immediate action to prevent serious injury, loss of life, or serious property damage. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, or vehicle accident.

     (b)   “Guardian” means:

     (1)   A person who is the guardian of the person of a minor pursuant to a court order; or

     (2)   A public or private entity with whom a minor has been placed by a court order; or

     (3)   A person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

     (c)   “Minor” means a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.

     (d)   “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor.

     (e)   “Public place” means:

     (1)   Any out-of-door area to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds; and

     (2)   The out-of-doors common areas, such as entry ways and parking lots, of businesses to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to,, any place of amusement, entertainment, or recreation.

     (f)    “School” means an elementary school, junior high school, four (4)-year high school, senior high school, opportunity school, continuation high school, regional occupational center, or technical high school that is either a public school as created under the Education Code or a private full-time day school operating pursuant to Education Code Section 48222. (Ord. 1624 § 2, (2000))

 

10.25.020 Curfew hours.
     It is unlawful for any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to be in any public place within the city between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except as provided in 10.25.030 below. (Ord. 1624 § 2, (2000))

 

10.25.030 Exemptions.
     A minor shall not be in violation of Section 10.25.020 if at the time that the minor was detained by a peace officer, the minor was:

     (a)   Not obligated to be in the school at which the minor may be enrolled because the school is on holiday or vacation period; or

     (b)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian; or

     (c)   Attending or going to or returning home, without unnecessary detour or stop, from a school, religious, cultural, sports, amusement, entertainment, or recreation activity, or any organized rally, demonstration, meeting, or similar activity; or

     (d)   Driving or riding in a motor vehicle or publicly owned transportation; or

     (e)   Engaged in lawful volunteer or paid employment activity, or going to or returning home from a lawful volunteer or paid employment activity, without unnecessary detour or stop; or

     (f)    Acting in response to an emergency; or

     (g)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence that is immediately adjacent to the minor’s residence; or

     (h)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without unnecessary detour or stop; or

     (i)    Waiting at a train or bus station or stop for transportation; or

     (j)    Emancipated in accordance with California law; or

     (k)   In possession of written permission or a permit from the school in which the minor is enrolled to leave the school campus, or a written leave of absence to be away from the school; or

     (l)    On a lunch period for which the school at which the minor may be enrolled authorizes absence from campus. (Ord. 1624 § 2, (2000))

 

10.25.040 Enforcement procedures.
     (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude minors from being in a public place for the purpose of exercising the rights guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or by the California Constitution, including the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, right of assembly, freedom of association, right to petition, and right to privacy as applied by decisional law to minors of a particular age.

     (b)   Before taking enforcement action under this chapter, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.

     (c)   A peace officer may take enforcement action under this chapter only when the peace officer has probable cause to believe that neither subsection (a) above nor any exemption under Section 10.25.030 applies to the offender’s reasons for being present in the public place. (Ord. 1624 § 2, (2000))

Chapter 10.28 PROPERTY DAMAGE
10.28.010 Damaging garden or orchard.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into or upon any enclosed or unenclosed vegetable garden or orchard, or land under cultivation, without the consent of the owner or tenant thereof, or to cut down, injure, damage, destroy, eat or carry away from any portion of any such garden or orchard or land under cultivation, any crop, tree, shrub, plant, grass, seed, soil, fertilizer, water supply, tool, implement, fence or any protective device, or anything useful for the development, cultivation, maintenance and use of the said garden or orchard, or land under cultivation. (1941 Code § 1276.1, Ord. 394, (1943))

 

10.28.020 Defacing public buildings—Destroying trees or plants—Reward for information leading to conviction.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to mar or deface any public building or structure belonging to the city; or to take, destroy, dig up or carry away, without first having obtained permission from the park superintendent, or without authority of the city council, any plants, shrubs or flowers in any public park, court, street or square within the city.

     Any person furnishing the city council any information that will lead to the arrest and conviction of any person violating this section will be rewarded for so doing in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (1941 Code § 1276)

 

10.28.030 Urinating, expectorating or defecating in public place or view.
     It is unlawful for any person to urinate, expectorate or defecate on any public property, or upon any private property open to the public or in open view from public property. (1941 Code § 1277, Ord. 1233 § 1, (1982); Ord. 1542 § 1, (1996))

 

10.28.040 Fires on pavement.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to kindle any fire upon any paved street in the city or throw or deposit any burning material of any description thereon. (1941 Code § 1367)

 

10.28.050 Lime, mortar or plaster on streets.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to mix or cause to be mixed any lime, mortar or plaster upon any asphaltum street in the city or cause or permit any lime, mortar or plaster to be placed upon or come in contact with any street. (1941 Code § 1368)

 

10.28.060 Tacks, glass, nails, oil or grease on streets.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or suffer to be placed or deposited upon any street in the city any glass, tacks or nails, or, on any asphaltum or paved streets in the city, any oil or grease, or any oily or greasy substance or material, and no person operating or having under his or her charge or control any automobile, motor car, motorcycle or other vehicle shall permit to escape, flow or drip therefrom upon any asphaltum street in the city, any oil or grease, or oily or greasy substance. (1941 Code 1369)

 

10.28.070 Operation of vehicle without oil pan.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, drive or use upon any asphaltum street in the city any automobile, motor car, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle unless said automobile, motor car, motorcycle or other motor vehicle shall be equipped with a drip pan or other suitable contrivance which will prevent the dripping or flowing of oil from said automobile, motor car, motorcycle or other vehicle upon the surface of said asphaltum street. (1941 Code § 1370)

 

10.28.080 Unlawful to move building over streets without permit.
     It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move or cause to be moved through the streets of the city, any building or structure, without first having obtained a permit from the building inspector so to do. The building inspector shall have full power in the granting or denying of permits. (1941 Code § 1240)

 

*      Editor’s Note: For permit — See Section 18.07.030 of this code.

 

10.28.090 Traction engines, etc.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon the streets of the city any traction engine, road engine, hauling engine, trailer, road roller, automobile truck, motor or other vehicle the faces of the wheels of which are fitted with flanges, ribs, clamps, cleats, lugs or spikes. This applies to all rings or flanges upon guiding or steering wheels of any such vehicles. In case of traction engines, road engines or hauling engines which are equipped or provided with flanges, ribs, clamps, cleats, lugs or spikes, such vehicles shall be permitted to pass over said streets provided that cleats are fastened upon all wheels of such vehicles, not less than two and one half (2-1/2) inches wide and not more than one and one half inches high, and so placed that not less than two (2) cleats on each wheel shall touch the ground at all times, and the width shall be the same on all parts of said vehicles. (1941 Code § 1241)

 

10.28.100 Drags.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon, over or across any street of the city any sled, drag or other object which is not carried entirely upon wheels. (1941 Code § 1242)

 

10.28.110 Petroleum carrying vehicle leaking contents.
     It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle carrying naphtha, kerosene or any other product of petroleum upon or over any street of the city, unless such vehicle is so constructed as to prevent the leakage of its contents upon the pavement. (1941 Code § 1243)

 

10.28.120 Liability for damage to streets.
     The owner, driver, operator or mover of any vehicle on any street in the city shall be responsible for all damages which said street may sustain as a result of a violation of any provisions of this chapter, and the amount thereof may be recovered in an action by the city. (1941 Code § 1244)

Chapter 10.30 GRAFFITI CONTROL
10.30.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and private property and to provide regulations designed to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti in the city of Burlingame. The increase of graffiti on both public and private buildings, structures and places is creating a condition of blight within the city which results in a deterioration of property and business values for adjacent and surrounding properties, all to the detriment of the city. The city council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance which must be abated so as to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. (Ord. 1433 § 1, (1991))

 

10.30.020 Graffiti defined.
     For the purpose of this chapter, “graffiti” shall mean the unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures and places. (Ord. 1433 § 1, (1991))

 

10.30.030 Graffiti prohibited.
     (a)   No person shall place graffiti or other writing upon any public or privately owned permanent structure or personal property located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city of Burlingame.

     (b)   No person owning or otherwise in control of any real or personal property within the city shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any structure or any personal property located on such real property or upon his or her personal property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public place or private property, for a period in excess of that described in this chapter for notice and removal of graffiti. (Ord. 1433 § 1, (1991))

 

10.30.040 Notice.
     Whenever the city attorney or his or her designee determines that graffiti exists on any permanent structure in the city of Burlingame and is visible from the street or other public or private property, he or she shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti or the property will be subject to abatement by the city. (Ord. 1433 § 1, (1991))

 

10.30.050 Service of notice.
     The notice to abate graffiti shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner’s name and address appears on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls of the county of San Mateo. In addition if there is a tenant of the premises, the notice shall also be served on said tenant. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. If there is no person occupying said property, the notice shall be posted thereon. The notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the following manners:

     (a)   By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property;

     (b)   By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said person. (Ord. 1433 § 1, (1991))

 

10.30.060 Removal by city.
     Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice to abate by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the city attorney or his or her designated representative approves, the city attorney is authorized to cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city. Any paint used to obliterate graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). (Ord. 1433 § 1, (1991))

 

10.30.070 Liability for city’s cost of abatement.
     The owner shall reimburse the city for the actual cost of the removal of the graffiti. The costs to be reimbursed include labor, material preparation of specifications and contracts and inspection. Notice of the costs of abatement shall be given to the property owner by the city attorney, in the same manner as provided for giving notice in Section 10.30.060 hereof. The property owner may appeal said costs to the city manager by filing a written appeal within fifteen (15) days of the service of said notice. He or she may appeal the city manager’s determination by written appeal to the city council within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the city manager’s decision. The decision of the city council shall be final. Unless said costs are paid within thirty (30) days of notice or in the case of an appeal, the determination of the appeal, a notice of lien shall be recorded in the office of the San Mateo county recorder and shall constitute a lien on the property. (Ord. 1433 § 1, (1991))

Chapter 10.32 OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS BY OBJECTS
10.32.010 Sidewalk defined.
     For the purpose of this chapter, “sidewalk” means all space or area between the property line of any lot and the outer curbline along the area used for street purposes, including any curbing, bulkheads, retaining walls or other works put for the protection of the sidewalk or of any parking strip. (1941 Code § 1351, Ord. 1175 § 1, (1980))

 

10.32.020 Obstruction of free passage unlawful.
     It is unlawful to place or cause to be placed upon any public way, street or sidewalk, or for the person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to suffer to remain upon the sidewalk next to such premises, anything which shall obstruct the free passage over any portion of such street or sidewalk. (1941 Code § 1350, Ord. 1175 § 2, (1980))

 

10.32.030 Exceptions.
     Section 10.32.020 shall not apply:

     (a)   To lighting fixtures or water hydrants erected by permission of the city council, or ornamental trees planted along the outer line of the sidewalk and within the curb and barriers for the protection of the same, and other trees maintained by the permission of the city council;

     (b)   To materials used in the construction or repair of any building during the existence of and subject to the terms of any permit issued by the building inspector;

     (c)   To receipt, delivery or removal of goods, wares or merchandise between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on the following morning; or

     (d)   To merchandise displays, ornamental plantings, trash receptacles, privately maintained bicycle racks or other objects (excluding signs of any kind) for which an encroachment permit has been obtained pursuant to Chapter 12.10 of this code. (1941 Code § 1360, Ord. 1175 § 3, (1980))

Chapter 10.34 OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS BY PERSONS
10.34.010 Prohibited.
     No person shall:

     (a)   Wilfully and maliciously stand, sit, lie or sleep in or under any street, sidewalk, passageway or other public place in such a manner as to obstruct, hinder or delay the free passage or use in the customary manner of such street, sidewalk, passageway or other public place;

     (b)   Wilfully and maliciously stand, sit lie or sleep in or upon any doorway or way of ingress or egress of any building or other structure. (Ord. 1313 § 2, (1986))

Chapter 10.36 OBSTRUCTING WATERWAYS AND DRAINS
10.36.010 Obstructing waterway.
     It shall be unlawful to deposit, erect or maintain in any natural or artificial waterway or course, or creek or drain open or covered, carrying off the stormwaters or sanitary sewerage within the city anything which may obstruct the free flow of water therein. (1941 Code § 1361)

 

10.36.020 Obstructing gutters.
     It is unlawful to obstruct any gutter, so as to prevent the free flow of water therein. Driveways from the street to private premises shall be so constructed as not to interfere with the free flow of water in the gutters of the street. (1941 Code § 1362)

 

10.36.030 Sanchez Lagoon and Channel.
     (a)   Sanchez Lagoon is that area of wetlands, creek and banks between Bayshore Freeway on the south, Sanchez Creek on the west, Anza Airport Park No. 6 and the Burlingame landfill on the north, and Anza Airport Park No. 2 on the east. Sanchez Channel is that waterway connecting Sanchez Lagoon and San Francisco Bay.

     (b)   It is unlawful to use Sanchez Lagoon and Sanchez Channel except in accordance with all local, state and federal laws.

     (c)   No person shall enter in or upon the banks or waters of Sanchez Lagoon west of the Anza Boulevard Bridge for any purpose whatsoever, except in cases of emergency to protect life and/or property.

     (d)   No person shall launch a motorized watercraft from the banks of Sanchez Lagoon or Sanchez Channel or operate a motorized watercraft upon the waters of Sanchez Lagoon or Sanchez Channel, except in cases of emergency to protect life and/or property. (Ord. 1392 § 2, (1989))

Chapter 10.37 OBSTRUCTION OF ACCESS TO BUSINESSES
10.37.010 Obstruction of access to businesses.
     (a)   No person shall wilfully and maliciously block, obstruct or otherwise impede access to or exit from any building, place or facility at which a lawful business is conducted.

     (b)   No person shall wilfully and maliciously block, obstruct or interfere with the movement of any persons on any street, sidewalk, driveway or other area which is open to the public and is adjacent to a lawful business.

     (c)   No person shall wilfully and maliciously remain on any portion of the premises of a lawful business which is open to the public, after being requested to leave by the person in charge of the premises or by a peace officer. (Ord. 1406 § 1, (1990))

 

10.37.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this chapter:

     (a)   “Business” shall mean any person, firm, association, partnership, business trust, corporation, company or any other organization which lawfully provides or makes available goods or services to members of the public, including entities organized for profit, nonprofit or charitable entities, or governmental entities.

     (b)   “Maliciously,” when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, means an intent to do an unlawful act, with knowledge of its unlawfulness; or, in the alternative, to vex, annoy or injure another person.

     (c)   “Wilfully,” when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, means a purpose or willingness to commit the act, or to make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate the law, or to injure another, or to acquire any advantage. (Ord. 1406 § 1, (1990))

Chapter 10.40 RADIO INTERFERENCE, LOUDSPEAKERS, ETC.
10.40.005 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:

     (a)   “Emergency” means an essential activity necessary to restore, preserve, protect or save lives or property from imminent danger of loss or harm or to restore essential services.

     (b)   “Holiday” means those days set forth in Section 13.04.100 of this code.

     (c)   “Leaf blower” means any portable machine used to blow leaves, dirt and other debris off sidewalks, driveways, lawns or other surfaces.

     (d)   “Local ambient” means the lowest sound level repeating itself during a fifteen (15) minute period as measured with a precision sound level meter, using slow response and “A” weighting. The minimum sound level shall be determined with the noise source at issue silent, and in the same location as the measurement of the noise level of the source or sources at issue. If a significant portion of the local ambient is produced by one or more individual identifiable sources which would otherwise be operating continuously during the fifteen (15) minute measurement period and contributing significantly to the ambient sound level, determination of the local ambient shall be accomplished with these separate identifiable noise sources silent.

     (e)   “Noise level” means the maximum continuous sound level or repetitive peak sound level, produced by a source or group of sources as measured with a precision sound level meter. In order to measure a noise level, the controls of the precision sound level meter should be arranged to the setting appropriate to the type of noise being measured.

     (f)    “Precision sound level meter” means a device for measuring sound level in decibel units within the performance specifications in the American National Standards Institute Standard S1.4, “Specification for Sound Level Meters.”

     (g)   “Residential district” means a district that is zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 pursuant to Title 25, but does not include a district that is zoned C-R.

     (h)   “Sound level,” expressed in decibels (dB), means a logarithmic indication of the ratio between the acoustic energy present at a given location and the lowest amount of acoustic energy audible to sensitive human ears and weighted by frequency to account for characteristics of human hearing, as given in the American National Standards Institute Standard S1.1, “Acoustic Terminology,” paragraph 2.9, or successor reference. All references to dB in this chapter utilize the A-level weighting scale, abbreviated dBA, measured as set forth in this section. (Ord. 1681 § 2, (2002))

 

10.40.010 Interference with radio reception.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or cause to be operated any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of any kind whatsoever within the city, the operation of which shall cause reasonably preventable electrical interference with radio reception. (1941 Code § 1340)

 

10.40.020 Loudspeakers disturbing peace.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or operate or cause to be used or operated any mechanical device, machine, apparatus or instrument for intensification or amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise, in any public or private place in such a manner that the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed, or that persons owning, using or occupying the property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed. (1941 Code § 1341)

 

10.40.030 Broadcasting stations.
     It is unlawful to operate any broadcasting station used for commercial purposes and gain in any other district in the city than in the commercial or industrial zones or districts. (1941 Code § 1342)

 

10.40.035 General noise regulations.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any person wilfully to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

     The standards which shall be considered in determining when a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     (a)   The level of the noise;

     (b)   The intensity of the noise;

     (c)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

     (d)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

     (e)   The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;

     (f)    The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

     (g)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

     (h)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

     (i)    The time of the day or night the noise occurs;

     (j)    The duration of the noise;

     (k)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and

     (l)    Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Ord. 1060 § 1, (1976))

 

10.40.037 Powered equipment.
     (a)   No person shall operate any lawnmower, lawn edger, riding tractor or any other mechanical or electrical machinery, equipment or device which creates a loud, raucous or impulsive sound, within any residential district except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, or 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday and holidays.

     (b)   Sweeping of city parking lots or city streets and emergency work or repairs by public agencies or utilities shall be exempt from these regulations. (Ord. 1333 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1508 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1681 § 3, (2002))

 

10.40.038 Leaf blowers.
     (a)   On and after July 1, 2012, leaf blowers operated within the city of Burlingame shall display a label which certifies that it operates at a noise level of sixty-five (65) dBA or less. Any leaf blower which bears such a certification label shall be presumed to comply with any noise level limit of this chapter provided that it is operated with all the mufflers and full extension tubes supplied by the manufacturer for that leaf blower. It is unlawful to operate a leaf blower within the city which does not bear such a label or which exceeds the 65 dBA level.

     (b)   On and after July 1, 2012, leaf blowers operated within the city of Burlingame shall only be operated during the times, on the days and in the areas as follows:

     (1)   Area A. Peninsula and Barroilet Drives north to Sanchez and Toyon Drives. Permitted only on Tuesday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

     (2)   Area B. Sanchez and Toyon Drives north to Adeline and Cambridge Avenues. Permitted only on Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

     (3)   Area C. Adeline and Cambridge Avenues north to Burlingame city limits. Permitted only on Thursday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

     A diagram displaying these times, days and locations is attached to the ordinance codified this section.

     It is unlawful to operate a leaf blower during a time, on a day or in an area which is not in conformance with this subsection.

     (c)   Exemptions and Exceptions. The restrictions of subsection (b) shall not apply in the following circumstances:

     (1)   Personnel maintaining nonresidential properties east of the Cal-Train tracks and north of Toyon Drive and all properties east of Highway 101 between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. every day except Sunday.

     (2)   Residents operating leaf blowers that produce a noise level of sixty-five (65) dBA or less between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Saturday and 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Sunday.

     (3)   Use of leaf blowers that produce a noise level of sixty-five (65) dBA or less will be allowed to operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Tuesday and Friday in the following areas:

     (A)  Parcels zoned R-3 and R-4 located in Areas A and B as described in subsection (b) above;

     (B)   Publicly owned parks and landscaped areas as well as public and private schools, under four (4) acres in size.

     (4)   When a designated day for a particular area to use leaf blowers occurs on a holiday, that area shall be allowed to use leaf blowers on the next designated weekday for the use of leaf blowers. For example:

     (A)  If the holiday were to fall on a Tuesday, Area A would not be allowed to blow on Tuesday of that week but would be allowed to blow on Thursday of that week.

     (B)   If the holiday were to fall on a Friday, Area B would not be allowed to blow on Friday of that week but would be allowed to blow on Tuesday of the following week.

     (C)   If the holiday were to fall on a Thursday, Area C would not be allowed to blow on Thursday of that week but would be allowed to blow on Friday of that week.

     (d)   In all areas of the city of Burlingame, no person shall operate any leaf blower which does not bear an affixed manufacturer’s label indicating the model number of the leaf blower and designating a noise level not in excess of sixty-five (65) dBA when measured from a distance of fifty (50) feet utilizing American National Standard Institute Methodology.

     (e)   Notwithstanding other provisions in this section and in addition to the hours of operation permitted in this chapter, authorized city employees may operate leaf blowers as part of their tree trimming or removal activities between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Saturday and holidays, and 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Sunday, provided the leaf blower complies with the noise levels established by subsection (d) above.

     (f)    Notwithstanding other provisions in this section, leaf blowers may be operated on properties greater than four (4) acres in size between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Saturday and holidays, and 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Sunday, provided the leaf blower complies with the noise levels established by subsection (d) above.

     (g)   Persons operating leaf blowers are encouraged to ensure that leaves, dirt and other debris are not blown onto adjoining private or public properties. All leaves, dirt and other debris gathered by the leaf blower should be deposited in appropriate recycling containers.

     (h)   Emergencies. During a period of emergency as determined by the city manager, the enforcement of this section may temporarily be suspended.

     (i)    Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1871 § 3, (2012))

 

10.40.039 Loading and unloading limited.
     (a)   Standard. It is unlawful to unload, load, open, close, or handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, or similar objects in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a property line into property located in a residential district between the following hours:

     (1)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on a Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 7:00 a.m. of the following day; and

     (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on a Friday and 8:00 a.m. on the following Saturday; and

     (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on a Saturday and 8:00 a.m. on the following Sunday; and

     (4)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on a day before a holiday and 8:00 a.m. on the holiday.

     (b)   Exceptions. Subsection (a) does not apply to the following so long as the delivery does not cause any louder noise disturbance than necessary:

     (1)   An emergency delivery necessary to the health and safety of the occupants of the property to which the delivery is made; or

     (2)   Deliveries of medical equipment or consumable medical supplies that are required for usage during the following twenty-four (24) hours; or

     (3)   Deliveries of fresh produce to grocery stores or food establishments that are required for usage or sale during the following twenty-four (24) hours; or

     (4)   Deliveries made at a time required by a permit approved pursuant to Title 25 and made in conformance with that permit approval.

     (5)   Collection of solid waste by a city franchisee pursuant to Chapter 8.16 and in conformance with the terms of the franchisee’s franchise from the city.

     (c)   Variance.

     (1)   Any person may apply for a variance to subsection (a) by applying in writing to the director of public works. Applications shall be in writing upon such forms, and accompanied by such data, as may be prescribed by the director, so as to assure the full presentation of the facts involved. An application fee shall be required as established by resolution. The application shall contain a description of the property on which the loading or unloading is to occur and the relief sought. The application shall be signed by the applicant and the property owner.

     (2)   The director may grant an application for a variance if the director finds all of the following:

     (A)  The variance is required because there is no other time of day in which the loading or unloading can occur due to the nature of the delivery and the nature of the use of the property to which the delivery is being made; and

     (B)   The increase in ambient L10 noise level shall not be more than five (5) dBA above existing; and

     (C)   The proposed loading and unloading will not unreasonably awaken any residents.

     (3)   If the director determines to grant the variance application, the director shall condition the approval with those conditions that the director believes are necessary to ensure that the restrictions of subsection (c)(1) above are met including noise monitoring programs, and in any event, shall specify the exact time periods, location, and mode of loading and unloading during which the deliveries may occur. Upon approval, the director shall mail notice of approval of the variance to owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property to which the deliveries are to be made.

The property owners shall be informed of their right of appeal.

     (4)   Appeals from the decision of the director may be made to the planning commission within seven (7) days after the public notice of the action of the director is mailed. Any member of the planning commission or council may request a review of a variance under this section by making such request to the director within seven (7) days of the date of mailing of the public notice. Upon receipt of an appeal, or a request for review by a commissioner or council member, the director shall forward the records on the matter to the planning commission at the earliest available date and cause notice of such hearing to be given as set forth in Chapter 25.16. The planning commission shall consider the matter in the same manner as the standards set for the director. The decision of the director shall be final seven (7) days after the mailing of the public notice of the director’s action, if no appeal is filed by any person or if no council member or commissioner requests review of the decision within that time. Any decision of the planning commission under this subsection is subject to appeal under the same process and within the same time periods as set forth in Chapter 25.16. (Ord. 1677 § 2, (2002); Ord. 1681 § 5, (2002))

 

10.40.040 Violation deemed nuisance.
     Any person, firm or corporation who operates or maintains any machine, device, apparatus or instrument mentioned in, and which is in violation of the provisions of, this chapter shall be deemed to be committing and maintaining a nuisance. (1941 Code § 1343)

Chapter 10.48 FIREARMS, AIR GUNS, SLINGSHOTS AND FIREWORKS
10.48.010 Firing or possession of firearms or guns.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession within the city, or fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged within the city, any firearm, cannon, fireworks (as classified in accordance with Title 19, California Code of Regulations, Division 1, Chapter 6), gun, pistol, revolver, anvil, firecracker or explosive of similar nature, rifle, air rifle, air gun, BB gun or pellet gun.

     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having the care, custody or control of any minor to permit such minor to have in his or her possession within this city, or to fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged, within this city, any firearm, cannon, fireworks (as classified in accordance with Title 19, California Code of Regulations, Division 1, Chapter 6), gun, pistol, revolver, anvil, firecracker or explosive of similar nature, rifle, air rifle, air gun, BB gun or pellet gun, all referred to in Section 10.48.020 as firearms.

     Safe storage of firearms in a residence required: except when carried on the person, during use for cleaning and maintenance, or during use for lawful self defense, no person shall keep a firearm, as defined in California Penal Code Section 16520, in any residence unless the firearm is stored in a locked container or disabled with a trigger lock or similar mechanism appearing on the California Department of Justice’s roster of approved firearm safety devices. Violations of this safe storage requirement shall be enforced under Chapter 1.14 of this code. A suspected violation of this safe storage requirement shall not, on its own, constitute probable cause for entry into a residence by city personnel. (1941 Code § 1305, Ord. 603, (1955); Ord. 1891 § 1, (2013); Ord. 1968 § 1, (2019))

 

10.48.020 Exceptions to prohibited firing or possession of firearms or guns.
     The provisions of Section 10.48.010 as to the use of any firearms or fireworks mentioned therein shall not apply to any of the following cases:

     (a)   To police, peace officers or persons in military service in the discharge of their duties and using reasonable care;

     (b)   To persons using firearms in necessary self defense;

     (c)   To the possession of such firearms for keeping at the place of residence or business of the person otherwise in lawful possession thereof, or while traveling to or from a legal firing, shooting or target range or hunting ground;

     (d)   To the discharging or firing of such firearms or causing them to be discharged or fired, at a legal firing, shooting or target range or hunting ground;

     (e)   To cannon or anvils discharged upon occasions of public parades, processions or other public gatherings, after a permit is first obtained from the council pursuant to Section 10.44.030 of this code.

     All acts done under the provisions of subsection (e) shall be performed in a careful manner, and the permit granted by the council shall not exempt the permittee from any liability for damage done under such permit to person or property;

     (f)    Public displays of fireworks after prior approval by the city council and issuance of a fire permit by the fire department. (1941 Code § 1306, Ord. 603, (1955); Ord. 1891 § 1, (2013))

 

10.48.030 Slingshots.
     It is unlawful for any person to make use of or have in his or her possession any slingshot or other instrument or device by which missiles of any kind or description are hurled or projected; or in any manner use the same to the danger or annoyance of any person or injury of any property. (1941 § 1307, Ord. 603, (1955); Ord. 1891 § 1, (2013))

 

10.48.040 Shooting gallery excepted.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prohibit any person from shooting in a licensed shooting gallery. (1941 Code § 1308, Ord. 603, (1955); Ord. 1891 § 1, (2013))

 

10.48.050 Projectile weapons—Sale to minors.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or loan to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any device or instrument capable of launching a non-metallic projectile by or from such a device or instrument with a muzzle or exit velocity of one hundred (100) feet per second or faster by any means other than combustion.

     (b)   This section does not apply to the transfer of such a device or instrument to a minor by the minor’s parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 1712 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1891 § 1, (2013))

 

10.48.060 Fireworks—Seizure.
     Fire department or police department representatives may seize, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this code. (Ord. 1891 § 1, (2013))

Chapter 10.55 REGULATIONS FOR PARK AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
10.55.005 Definitions.
     For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     (a)   “Director” or “director of parks and recreation” means the city director of parks and recreation or the director’s authorized designee.

     (b)   “Park” or “recreation area” means any property, grounds, or facilities under the supervision of the department of parks and recreation. This includes, but is not limited to, city parks, pools, recreation centers, golf center, playgrounds, fields, open spaces, and all parking lots and structures involved in these facilities, and school facilities when scheduled or programmed by the city. (Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

 

10.55.010 Trespassing prohibited.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to trespass upon the grounds and facilities of any park or recreational area of the city which are restricted to the exclusive use of such persons as may be permitted thereon by the rules and regulations governing the use thereof by the general public or as may be engaged in the recreational programs of the city, and the employees assigned thereto.

     (b)   The city manager or the director of parks and recreation is authorized to have excluded from any park any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations. Any person thus excluded who fails to leave the park forthwith, or who thereafter enters therein or thereupon, except with the consent of the city manager or director of parks and recreation, is guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction as determined pursuant to this code. (Ord. 918 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

 

10.55.015 Hours.
     Except as provided in Section 10.55.020, the parks, recreational areas and all facilities located therein, including the parking lots serving the parks and recreational areas, shall be closed to the public between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning.

In addition to all city owned facilities, the provisions of this section shall also apply to that area known as Wooley Park, located between 150 Anza Boulevard and the entrance to Anza Lagoon, except it shall not apply to the adjacent parking lot or to persons traversing the bayfront pathway between that parking lot and the bridge at Anza Lagoon. (Ord. 918 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1205 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1515 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

 

10.55.020 Exceptions.
     The hours established by Section 10.55.015 hereof shall not apply to:

     (a)   The parking lots serving and immediate area of any municipal recreation building during the time the building is being used with permission and for one hour after the closing thereof;

     (b)   Any recreation program conducted or authorized by the parks and recreation department and for one hour after the completion thereof. (Ord. 918 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

 

10.55.025 Use of parks and recreational areas.
     It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to use, cross or remain in any park or recreational area and the parking lots adjacent thereto except during the hours such park or recreational area and parking lot is open to the public as provided in Sections 10.55.015 and 10.55.020. (Ord. 918 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

 

10.55.028 General rules and regulations.
     It is unlawful for any person, group, or organization to do any of the following in any city park or recreational area without the express permission of the director of parks and recreation, or the director’s authorized designee:

     (a)   Open, expose or interfere with any water or gas pipe, hydrant, stopcock, sewer, basin or other construction, or any natural or artificial drainage;

     (b)   Remove turf, soil, grass, rock, sand or gravel, tree, shrub or wood or portion thereof;

 

     (c)   Make or kindle a fire for any purpose, except in places provided therefor or in a portable barbecue in an area designated for such purpose;

     (d)   Play or practice golf or archery or fly or operate motor-driven models, except in areas specifically designated and posted for such purposes;

     (e)   Take into, exhibit or use any firearm, air gun, slingshot, firecracker, torpedo, rocket or weapon of any sort, whether manufactured or improvised. This prohibition includes the use of any item or utensil in such a manner as to approximate a weapon or to cast fear into another;

     (f)    Cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench, path, walk or other structure, apparatus or property, or mark or write thereon;

     (g)   Practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession without a permit therefor endorsed by the director of parks and recreation;

     (h)   Sell or offer for sale, any merchandise, article or thing, whatsoever, without a permit therefor endorsed by the director of parks and recreation;

     (i)    Use or attempt to use or interfere with the use of any table, space or facility which at the time is reserved for any other person or group;

     (j)    Enter any area which is posted by the city as being closed to the public;

     (k)   Operate or park any vehicle except upon areas designated or as may be permitted by the director of parks;

     (l)    Place litter or debris elsewhere than in container designed to receive such litter or debris;

     (m)  Play any game of chance or carry on betting of any kind;

     (n)   Fish, wade, swim or bathe except in the places designated therefor;

     (o)   Set up or use a volleyball net so as to exceed a maximum of two such nets in a park at any time;

     (p)   Have in his or her possession or control any exotic animal, as defined by Section 9.08.050 of this code, regardless of size, or to release any such animal in a park or recreational area;

     (q)   Operate any of the following equipment, without express written permit from the director of parks and recreation:

     (1)   Generator for producing electrical voltage, or

     (2)   Sound amplification equipment, or

     (3)   Any radio or sound reproduction equipment which causes any noise that disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or other users of the park or facility, or

     (4)   Inflatable play equipment, such as astro-jumps and similar items, or

     (5)   Batting machines, except on designated lighted ballfields between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays and between 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays, and on designated unlighted ballfields between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and dusk on Mondays through Saturdays and between 10:00 a.m. and dusk on Sundays. However, for Ray Park on Sundays, batting machines are only permitted on the designated ballfields between 11:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.;

     (r)    Gather in groups of fifteen (15) persons or more without specific written permission from the director of parks and recreation in the following locations:

     (1)   Cuernavaca Park at any time, or

     (2)   Village Park on weekdays between 10:00 a.m., and 3:00 p.m., or

     (3)   Pershing Park on weekdays between 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.;

     (s)    Engage in any activity involving batted balls in any park or recreational area, except on a designated ballfield at Bayside Park, Cuernavaca Park, Ray Park, or Washington Park;

     (t)    Possess, serve or sell alcoholic beverages at any park or recreational area, except by the city’s authorized golf center operator at the Burlingame Golf Center; or

     (u)   Allow dogs in or around any playground as designated by the surface material at the playground equipment in Cuernavaca Park, Pershing Park, Ray Park, Trenton Park, Victoria Park, Village Park, or Washington Park, or as designated by the fenced area surrounding the City’s tot lots at Alpine Park, “J” Lot, Laguna Playground and Paloma Playground. (Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

 

10.55.030 Additional rules and regulations.
     In addition to the general rules and regulations contained in this chapter, the director of parks and recreation may propose and submit to the parks and recreation commission for approval, rules and regulations governing the administration, operation, use and maintenance of each park and recreational area, provided that such rules and regulations are consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The approval of such rules and regulations shall be acted on at a duly noticed public meeting of the commission, and council shall be provided notice by the director of parks and recreation of the upcoming commission agenda item. If the commission declines to approve or modifies proposed rules or regulations, the director of parks and recreation may seek review by the council by notifying the city clerk in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the commission’s action. Additionally, any member of the city council who wishes to do so may call up the commission’s action for review by notifying the city clerk in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the commission’s action. If no such review has been initiated, the rules and regulations as approved by the commission shall go into effect on the eleventh (11th) day following the commission’s action. (Ord. 1962 § 1, (2019))

 

10.55.035 Enforcement of rules and regulations.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person, group, or organization to violate any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to Sections 10.55.030 of this chapter.

     (b)   In addition to the other remedies provides by this code and state law, the city manager or the director of parks and recreation may suspend the privilege of a person, group, or organization that violates the provisions of this chapter or the terms and conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter to obtain any further permit for use of any park or recreational area for such time as the manager or director determines is an appropriate suspension. Any person, group, or organization whose privilege is suspended under this subsection may appeal the suspension to the city council by filing a written appeal together with an appeal fee with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the written notice of suspension. The city council will then hear the appeal within a reasonable period of time and render a decision on the suspension. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 918 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1380 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1493 § 1; (1993); Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

 

10.55.040 Special events and group use.
     The city manager and the director of parks and recreation shall provide a permit process for group reservations of park areas and recreational areas, special events, and circumstances not covered by this chapter or the rules and regulations. In so doing the city manager or director shall ensure that the parks and recreational areas are available and provided for the comfort and convenience of all. (Ord. 918 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

 

10.55.045 Closing parks and recreational areas.
     The city manager or the director of parks and recreation may close any park or recreational area and remove all persons therefrom when in his judgment such closing will best preserve the public peace, prevent damage to public property or quell riots, mobs or violence. The city manager or the director may also cause any and all persons whose presence on the premises is disruptive to the normal and safe use and enjoyment thereof by the greatest number of people to be removed. (Ord. 918 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1741 § 2, (2004))

Chapter 10.58 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
10.58.010 Legislative purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of either the State or Federal Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize in any way the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.015 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     (a)   Adult-oriented businesses. “Adult-oriented businesses” or “Adult-oriented business” means any one of the following, or combination thereof:

     (i)    Adult arcade. “Adult arcade” means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

     (ii)   Adult bookstore. “Adult bookstore” means an establishment that has thirty (30) percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, disks, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas; or

     (iii)  Adult cabaret. “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment that:

     (A)  Regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or

     (B)   Regularly features persons who appear semi-nude; or

     (C)   Shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic or graphic reproductions thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

     (iv)  Adult hotel/motel. “Adult hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration that:

     (A)  Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and

     (B)   Rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six (6) hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period; or

     (v)   Adult motion picture theater. “Adult motion picture theater” means a business establishment where for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

     (vi)  Adult theater. “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment that for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or

     (vii) Modeling studio. “Modeling studio” means a business that provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display “specified anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available “specified sexual activities.”

     (b)   Adult material. “Adult material” means books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, disks, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

     (c)   Adult-oriented business operator or operator. “Adult-oriented business operator” or “operator” means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.

     (d)   Adult-oriented business performer or performer. “Adult-oriented business performer” or “performer” means a person who, with or without compensation, publicly performs specified sexual activities or publicly displays specified anatomical parts in adult-oriented businesses.

     (e)   Applicant. “Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an Adult-Oriented Business.

     (f)    Bar. “Bar” means any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.

     (g)   Chief of police. “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city or the chief’s authorized representative.

     (h)   Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon. “Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by the phrase. For example, when the phrase refers to films that are “distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas.

     (i)    Entertainer. “Entertainer” means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business. The term “entertainer” also includes all adult-oriented business performers.

     (j)    Figure model. The term “figure model” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.

     (k)   Health officer. “Health officer” means the chief of police of the city or his or her duly authorized representative.

     (l)    Nudity or a state of nudity. “Nudity” or a “state of nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.

     (m)  Operate an adult-oriented business. “Operate an adult-oriented business” means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business.

     (n)   Person. “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character.

     (o)   Regularly features. “Regularly features” with respect to an adult theater, adult motion picture theater, or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two (2) or more occasions within a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more occasions within a sixty (60) day period; or four (4) or more occasions within a one hundred eighty (180) day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

     (p)   Semi-nude. “Semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

     (q)   Specified anatomical areas. “Specified anatomical areas” means any of the following:

     (i)    Less than completely and opaquely covered human (A) genitals or pubic region; (B) buttocks; or (C) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

     (ii)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

     (iii)  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection (i) or (ii) above.

     (r)    Specified sexual activities. “Specified sexual activities” means any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

     (i)    The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; or

     (ii)   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or

     (iii)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

     (iv)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subdivision (i), (ii), or (iii) of this subsection. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.020 Permits required.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect an adult-oriented business regulatory permit (“business permit”) from the city as required by this chapter.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect an adult-oriented business performer permit (“performer permit”) from the city as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.025 Adult-oriented business regulatory permit application submittal.
     Any person who proposes to maintain, operate, or conduct an adult-oriented business in the city shall file an original and two (2) copies of an application with the chief of police upon a form provided by the city and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be refundable. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.030 Application contents.
     (a)   Adult-oriented business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with Section 10.58.045. All applications shall include the following information:

     (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age.

     (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

     (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

     (b)   If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, a duly authorized officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application.

     (c)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

     (d)   A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which the business permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and/or lessors of the adult-oriented business site.

     (e)   The address to which notice of action on the application and all further notices regarding the application or permit are to be mailed.

     (f)    The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by Section 10.58.020 to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit.

     (g)   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.

     (h)   A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to the application that depicts the geographic location of the adult-oriented business with the following:

     (1)   The building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business; and

     (2)   The property lines of any other adult-oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which the business permit is being requested; and

     (3)   The property lines of any school, athletic field, residential zone, or residential use within one thousand (1,000) feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which the business permit is being requested.

     (i)    A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business, including the location of the lighting systems required by Section 10.58.070 below.

     (j)    If the chief of police determines that the application is incomplete, the chief of police shall promptly notify the applicant of such a fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten (10) days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten (10) days, of the time for the chief of police to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a business permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

     (k)   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of federal, state, or city permits, licenses, or other approvals does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business regulatory permit under this chapter. (Ord. 1727 § 3 (2004); Ord. 1757 § 2, (2005))

 

10.58.035 Investigation and action on application.
     (a)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the chief of police shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

     (b)   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed application, the chief of police shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

     (1)   The chief of police shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

     (2)   If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

     (3)   If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

     (4)   The application as granted or denied and the business permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

     (c)   The chief of police shall grant the application and issue the adult-oriented business regulatory permit if the chief finds:

     (1)   The proposed business meets the locational criteria of Chapter 25.76; and

     (2)   The applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 10.58.070 below; and

     (3)   The application is not otherwise denied pursuant to Section 10.58.040 below. The permittee shall post the business permit conspicuously in the adult-oriented business premises.

     (d)   If the chief of police grants the application or if the chief neither grants nor denies the application within thirty (30) days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 10.58.030), the applicant may begin operating the adult-oriented business for which the business permit was sought, subject to strict and continuous compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1727 § 3 (2004))

 

10.58.040 Permit denial.
     The chief of police shall deny the application if the chief finds any of the following:

     (a)   The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult-oriented business regulatory permit is required does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the city as set forth in this code, San Mateo County, or the state of California; or

     (b)   The applicant or the applicant’s employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business regulatory permit; or

     (c)   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; or

     (d)   The required application fee has not been paid; or

     (e)   The adult-oriented business does not comply with the locational standards of Chapter 25.76 of this code; or

     (f)    The adult-oriented business does not comply with the performance standards and requirements of these regulations. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.042 Permit expiration and renewal.
     (a)   Each adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the chief of police a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The written request for renewal shall update all information contained in the original application, such as additional performers.

     (b)   The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the business permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the business permit will not be stayed.

     (c)   Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. (1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.045 Transfer of adult-oriented business regulatory permits.
     (a)   A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business as stated in the permit approved by the chief of police.

     (b)   A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business regulatory permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the business permit from the chief of police stating that the transferee is now the permittee. To apply for such an amendment, the permittee and the transferee shall file an application for transfer in the form and containing the information described in Section 10.58.030 above together with the signature of the permittee and accompanied by a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The amendment application shall be processed and reviewed by the chief of police in accordance with Sections 10.58.030 to 10.58.040 as if the transferee were applying for an original business permit.

     (c)   No business permit may be transferred when the chief of police has notified the permittee in writing that the permit has been suspended or revoked.

     (d)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the business permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.048 Adult-oriented business performer permit required.
     (a)   No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business, without a valid adult-oriented business performer permit (“performer permit”) issued by the city.

     (b)   No operator shall employ or allow a performance at an adult-oriented business by any person as a performer or entertainer who is required to obtain a performer permit under this chapter unless that performer or entertainer has first obtained approval of a performer permit pursuant to this chapter.

     (c)   Any person who has been issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit pursuant to this chapter shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the adult-oriented business permit required by this chapter with the name of each performer required to obtain a performer permit pursuant to this chapter within thirty (30) days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes within this time period shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business regulatory permit, and if the failure is repeated, shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.050 Adult-oriented business performer permit process.
     (a)   Any person who wishes to be an adult-oriented business performer in the city shall file an original and two (2) copies of an application with the chief of police upon a form provided by the city and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be refundable.

     (b)   The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

     (1)   The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant; and

     (2)   Age, date and place of birth; and

     (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color; and

     (4)   Present residence address and telephone number; and

     (5)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:

     (i)    Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 243.4, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 311.10, 311.11, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), 653.22 and 653.23 of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered; or

     (ii)   The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California; and

     (6)   Whether such applicant is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If the applicant has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution; and

     (7)   Driver’s license number or other identification number; and

     (8)   Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; and

     (9)   The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.

     (c)   If the chief of police determines that the application is incomplete, the chief of police shall promptly notify the applicant of such a fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten (10) days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten (10) days, of the time for the chief of police to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a performer permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

     (d)   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of federal, state, or city permits, licenses, or other approvals does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business performer permit under this chapter. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.055 Investigation and action on application.
     (a)   Within ten (10) days after receipt of the properly completed application for a performer permit, the chief of police shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows:

     (1)   The chief of police shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

     (2)   If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

     (3)   If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business performer permit.

     (4)   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.

     (b)   The chief of police shall grant the application and issue the performer permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection (d) below.

     (c)   If the chief of police grants the application or if the Chief of police neither grants nor denies the application within five (5) business days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 10.58.050), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity at the business for which the performer permit was sought.

     (d)   The chief of police shall deny the application if the chief finds any of the following:

     (1)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application; or

     (2)   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; or

     (3)   The performer permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by State, County, or city law; or

     (4)   The applicant has been registered or licensed in any state or country as a prostitute during the last five (5) years; or

     (5)   The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in Section 10.58.050 above or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the State of California. However, a performer permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five (5) years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has successfully completed all terms and conditions of the offense’s probation or parole and is no longer on probation or parole. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.057 Expiration and renewal of performer permit.
     (a)   Each performer permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the chief of police a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The written request for renewal shall update all information contained in the original application.

     (b)   The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the performer permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the performer permit will not be stayed.

     (c)   Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.060 Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business regulatory permits and adult-oriented business performed permits.
     (a)   An adult-oriented business regulatory permit or performer permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

     (b)   On determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the chief of police shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the address of the permittee on file with the chief of police, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the chief of police, but at a minimum shall include the following:

     (1)   All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses.

     (2)   Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.

     (3)   Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness as determined by the chief of police.

     (c)   A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of the permit, or be subject to other appropriate regulatory action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of a business regulatory permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the permittee business:

     (1)   The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city or County of San Mateo; or

     (2)   The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the permittee adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented Business, or in the case of an adult-oriented business performer, the permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult-oriented business:

 

     (A)  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation; or

     (B)   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur; or

     (C)   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code; or

     (D)  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318 or Subdivision b of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; or

     (E)   Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4; or

     (E)   Any conduct prohibited by this chapter; or

     (3)   Failure to comply with any condition imposed on the permittee related to use of the business permit or performer permit by government action whether under this chapter or another provision of federal, state, county, or city law, ordinance, or regulation.

     (d)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the chief of police finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, the chief of police shall impose one of the following as measured by the chief against the severity, longevity, and repetition of the violations:

     (1)   A warning; or

     (2)   Imposition of conditions that directly relate to and correct the violations involved; or

     (3)   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six (6) months; or

     (4)   Revocation of the permit.

     The chief may combine a suspension with imposition of conditions as the chief may determine is appropriate. The chief’s decision is final unless timely appealed pursuant to section 10.58.065. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.065 Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation.
     (a)   Upon denial of an application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit or a performer permit, or after denial of renewal of such a permit, or after suspension or revocation of such a permit, the applicant or the permittee may seek review of this administrative action within fifteen (15) days after notice thereof by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal.

     (b)   To be effective, the notice of appeal shall briefly state the grounds relied upon for appeal.

     (c)   The city clerk shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the city manager within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal, giving the appellant not less than five (5) working days’ notice in writing of the time and place of hearing.

     (d)   The hearing before the city manager shall be conducted in the same manner as the hearing provide pursuant to section 10.58.060 above, and the city manager affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the chief of police. The findings and determination of the city manager made following this hearing shall be final and conclusive. Within five (5) working days after the hearing, the city manager shall give written notice of the manager’s findings and decision.

     (e)   If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review if sought by the applicant or permittee. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.070 Adult-oriented business development and performance standards.
     The following provisions apply to all adult-oriented businesses unless otherwise specified, and shall be deemed conditions of any approved adult-oriented business regulatory permit. Failure to comply with these requirements shall be grounds for revocation of an adult-oriented business permit:

     (a)   Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire code and building regulations and standards adopted by the city.

     (b)   No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

     (c)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system that provides an average horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light is maintained on the parking surface and walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.

     (d)   The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building.

     (e)   Except for those businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business shall be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on any particular day.

     (f)    The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18) years of age are precluded from entering the premises. This notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the chief of police or designee. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. The permittee may elect to restrict entry to persons of greater ages than eighteen (18) years, particularly if other laws or regulations require such a restriction, and shall legibly post the restrictions in accordance with this subsection.

     (g)   All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except rest rooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times.

     (h)   Any adult-oriented business that is also or includes an adult arcade, shall comply with the following provisions:

     (1)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager’s station; and

     (2)   The view area specified in this section shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted; and

     (3)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time; and

     (4)   The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two (2) such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two (2) such booths or rooms; and

     (5)   Customers, patrons, or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or to remain in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths; and

     (6)   The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions are grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult-oriented business Permit.

     (i)    All interior areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

 

Area

Foot-Candles

Bookstores and other retail establishments

20

Theaters and cabarets

5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles)

Arcades

10

Motels/Hotels

20 (in public areas)

Modeling studios

20

 

     (j)    The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male patrons, customers, visitors, and employees and for female patrons, customers, visitors, and employees. Male patrons, customers, visitors, and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest rooms designated for females, and female patrons, customers, visitors, and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest rooms for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance, and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any adult material. Rest rooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording, or reproduction equipment. The provisions of this subsection (k) shall not apply to an adult-oriented business that exclusively sells or rents adult material that is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and that does not provide rest room facilities to its patrons, customers, visitors, or the general public.

     (k)   The following additional requirements apply to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities. These provisions are not intended to conflict but only to supplement regulations or conditions applied by the State Alcohol Beverage Control Commission when such regulations or conditions are applied to the business:

     (1)   No entertainer shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten (10) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer.

     (2)   The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers that are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use.

     (3)   The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers that is separated by at least thirty (30) feet from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

     (4)   The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely and physically separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three (3) foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of and which actually results in preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

     (5)   No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection (5) shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

     (6)   Fixed rails at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection (l).

     (7)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.

     (8)   No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

     (l)    Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

     (1)   Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than twenty-five (25) persons, at least one additional security guard shall be on duty for each increment of twenty-five (25) persons.

     (2)   Security guards for other adult-oriented businesses may be required if it is determined by the chief of police that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in this section from occurring on the premises.

     (3)   Security guards shall be charged with and expressly authorized to prevent violations of law and enforce compliance by patrons, customers, and visitors of the requirements of this chapter and the business permit. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. Security guards shall promptly report any violation of law to the Burlingame Police Department. No security guard required pursuant to this section shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.075 Register and permit number of employees.
     Every permittee of an adult-oriented business that provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities shall maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their performer permit numbers. This register shall be available for inspection on the business premises at all times during regular business hours by any peace officer or the health officer. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.080 Display of permit and identification cards.
     (a)   Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours, the business permit issued to the business together with any conditions place on the permit pursuant to this chapter in a conspicuous place so that the permit may be readily seen by all persons upon entering the business.

     (b)   The chief of police shall provide each adult-oriented business performer required to have a performer permit pursuant to this chapter with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such performer. An adult-oriented business performer shall have such card available for inspection by a peace officer or the health officer at all times during which the person is on the premises of an adult-oriented business. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.085 Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of eighteen (18) years prohibited.
     (a)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ or provide any service for which it requires such permit to any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.

     (b)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age to enter or remain within the adult-oriented business. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.090 Inspection.
     An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, community development department, or other city departments or state or county agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult-oriented business, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or the business’s agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if permission for such lawful inspection of the premises is refused at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004); Ord. 1806 § 8, (2007))

 

10.58.095 Regulations nonexclusive.
     The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance with this chapter shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the location, operation, or conduct of businesses adopted by the city, County of San Mateo, State of California, or United States. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.100 Employment of persons without permits unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, permittee or other person in charge of or in control of an adult-oriented business to allow any person to perform any live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked and unsuspended adult-oriented business performer permit. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.105 Time limit for filing application for permit.
     All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued for the operation of an adult-oriented business and all persons required by this chapter to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit, must apply for and obtain such a permit within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so and continued operation of an adult-oriented business, or the continued performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business after such time without a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

 

10.58.110 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 1727 § 3, (2004))

Chapter 10.60 PROHIBITION OF NUDITY IN PUBLIC PLACES
10.60.010 Legislative authorization.
     This chapter is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this chapter which also are used in said Sections 318.5 and 318.6, are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 991 § 1, (1973))

 

10.60.020 Theater—Definition.
     As used in this chapter and in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code, “theater” means a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having a permanent stage with movable scenery upon which theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given, and permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage and for which a city license for a theater is in full force and effect. This definition does not supersede the provisions of Section 10.60.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 991 § 1, (1973))

 

10.60.030 Prohibition—All persons.
     Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:

     (a)   Exposes his or her private parts or buttocks or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer; or

     (b)   Permits, procures or assists any person to so expose him or herself, or to employ any such device. (Ord. 991 § 1, (1973))

 

10.60.040 Prohibition—Female.
     Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer:

     (a)   Exposes any portion of either breast at or below the areola thereof; or

     (b)   Employs any device or covering, which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast; or

     (c)   Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed. (Ord. 991 § 1, (1973))

 

10.60.050 Accessories.
     Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels or assists any person to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 991 § 1, (1973))

 

10.60.060 Exceptions.
     This chapter does not apply to:

     (a)   A theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performance;

     (b)   Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute.

     (c)   An adult-oriented business operating in conformance with Chapters 10.58 and 25.76 of this code. (Ord. 991 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1727 § 4, (2004))

Chapter 10.65 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA—SALE TO MINORS
10.65.010 Purpose.
     The sale of drugs and narcotics paraphernalia in business establishments, open to the public and frequented by minors, tends to induce acquisition and use by minors for smoking, injecting or consumption of controlled substances. Possession and use of controlled substances are prohibited or limited, by the Controlled Substances Act, California Health and Safety Code Sections 11000, et seq. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to prohibit the sale of such devices to minors, and, thereby, curb the use of illicit and harmful drugs and narcotics by minors in the interests of their mental and physical health. (Ord. 1169 § 1, (1980))

 

10.65.020 Sale to minors prohibited.
     No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any opium pipe, device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking, injecting or consuming any controlled substance, as specified in the California Health and Safety Code, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, shall offer to sell or give to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years such paraphernalia. (Ord. 1169 § 1, (1980))

 

10.65.030 Minors’ purchase prohibited.
     A person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not buy, offer to buy or accept as a gift any opium pipe, device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for unlawfully smoking or injecting or consuming any controlled substance, prohibited under the Controlled Substances Act, other than devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs. (Ord. 1169 § 1, (1980))

 

10.65.040 Sign prohibiting sale to minors.
     Each owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any opium pipe, device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking, injecting or consuming any controlled substance as specified in the California Health and Safety Code, shall prominently display a sign therein, in letters not less than two (2) inches in height, words to the effect that offering to sell or give to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any such paraphernalia, or offering to buy, buying or accepting as a gift by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years of any such paraphernalia, is prohibited. Such sign shall cite this chapter of the code as the basis for the prohibition. (Ord. 1169 § 1, (1980))

 

10.65.050 Violations—Nuisance.
     A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the criminal penalty provisions applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this code. (Ord. 1169 § 1, (1980))

Chapter 10.66 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA—DISPLAY
10.66.010 Purpose.
     The display of drugs and narcotics paraphernalia in business establishments, open to the public and frequented by minors, tends to induce acquisition and use by minors for smoking, injecting or consumption of controlled substances. Possession and use of controlled substances are prohibited or limited by the Controlled Substances Act, California Health and Safety Code, Section 11000, et seq. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to eliminate the exposure of minors to such devices and, thereby, curb the sale to and use of illicit and harmful drugs and narcotics to and by minors in the interest of their mental and physical health. (Ord. 1170 § 1, (1980))

 

10.66.020 Minors.
     No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking or injection, or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, as well as roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be, remain in, enter or visit such room unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 1170 § 1, (1980))

 

10.66.030 Minors—Excluded.
     A person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not be, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale, or displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, unless such person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 1170 § 1, (1980))

 

10.66.040 Sale and display rooms.
     A person shall not maintain in any place of business to which the public is invited the display for sale, or the offering to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, other than prescription drugs and devices, unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room shall be sign posted in letters not less than two (2) inches in height with words to the effect that narcotic paraphernalia are being offered for sale in such a room, and minors unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. (Ord. 1170 § 1, (1980))

 

10.66.050 Violations—Nuisance.
     A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the criminal penalty provisions applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this code. (Ord. 1170 § 1, (1980))

Chapter 10.68 PROHIBITED DISPLAYS ON COVERS OF PUBLICATIONS IN BUSINESSES
10.68.010 Definitions.
     The words and phrases used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:

     (a)   “Commercial establishment” means any place of business in which minors are permitted.

     (b)   “Explicit sexual depictions” means any picture, photograph, drawing, decoration or other illustration depicting:

     (1)   Stimulation of human genitals, or otherwise emphasizing the genitals;

     (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, fellatio, pederasty, homosexuality, sadomasochism or similar acts;

     (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions or female breasts.

     (c)   “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity.

     (d)   “Publication” means any book, magazine, pamphlet, video or audio cassette, or record, offered for sale in a commercial establishment. (Ord. 1290 § 1, (1984))

 

10.68.020 Display prohibited.
     No person shall display publications having covers with explicit sexual depictions in any commercial establishment except as provided herein. (Ord. 1290 § 1, (1984))

 

10.68.030 Establishments with “adult only” areas.
     Publications having covers with explicit sexual depictions may be displayed in a commercial establishment in an area set aside and clearly posted for adults only. “Adults only” areas shall be visible from the cash register or sales center of the store. No items frequently purchased by children shall be located in the vicinity of the “adults only” area, and the material with sexually explicit covers shall be displayed in such a manner that sexually explicit depictions are not readily visible to patrons in other areas of the store. Minors shall not be permitted to enter an “adults only” area. (Ord. 1290 § 1, (1984))

 

10.68.040 Opaque displays.
     Publications having covers with explicit sexual depictions may be displayed in an area open to the general public in a commercial establishment only if the covers are not visible. Such cover depictions shall be obscured by opaque display units or other methods which completely conceal any sexual depictions from public view. (Ord. 1290 § 1, (1984))

Chapter 10.70 RESPONSE TO UNRULY GATHERINGS
10.70.010 Authority and purpose.
     This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Sections 38771 through 38773.5 of the Government Code and pursuant to the police powers of the city of Burlingame. The purpose of this chapter is to identify activity which constitutes a public nuisance, to provide for the summary abatement of such a nuisance at the expense of persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining it, and to promote the public peace, health, safety and welfare by minimizing the frequency of return calls to unruly gatherings. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.020 Definitions.
     An “unruly gathering” is a party or other gathering which occurs on or adjacent to private property in the city (hereinafter “premises”) and which a police officer at the scene determines is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.030 Nuisance declared.
     It is hereby declared that unruly gatherings which create a threat to the public peace, health, safety or welfare constitute a public nuisance. No person, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity owning, leasing or occupying a premises in the city of Burlingame shall create, cause, commit, maintain or permit such a public nuisance to occur on said premises. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.040 Notification of liability for costs of second response.
     When the police department is called to the scene of an unruly gathering and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare due to the gathering, the police officer shall contact one of the following: the owner of the premises, the tenants of the premises, the person in lawful custody of the premises or the person responsible for committing, creating, causing, maintaining or permitting said gathering. The officer shall notify such person that the gathering constitutes a public nuisance and that such persons (or, if that person is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor person) shall be held jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for providing police personnel for a second or subsequent response to the same premises within twenty-four (24) hours due to a continuation of the same conduct. If, after a good faith effort, no such responsible party can be found, the warning may be given to any person in attendance at the unruly gathering.

     The police department shall develop a written warning document to provide information concerning this section and shall deliver a copy of such warning document to the person described herein during the first visit to the unruly gathering. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.050 Persons responsible for costs of second response.
     The costs incurred by the police department for a second or subsequent response to an unruly gathering when such conduct is continuing at the time of the second or subsequent response, shall be charged to and borne by the owner of the premises, the tenants of the premises, the person in lawful custody of the premises or the person or persons who created, committed, caused, maintained or permitted said unruly gathering (or, in the event that person is a minor, that person’s parents or guardians). (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.060 Second response deemed to be special security assignment.
     The first response and warning shall be deemed to be normal police service. Personnel utilized on a second or subsequent response shall be deemed to be on special security assignment. The costs incurred from such special assignment are declared to be beyond normal services provided by the city. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.070 Calculation of charges.
     The charge for providing such special security assignment during the second call shall be calculated by the police department utilizing the hourly pay rates for each member of the public safety forces, including fire department personnel when utilized, and shall be adjusted from time to time to reflect changes in such hourly rates. Said charge may include the cost of providing equipment to the scene of the unruly gathering and the cost of repairing or replacing equipment damaged at the scene. The total charges payable under this section shall be the cost of providing the services but not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus the cost of actual damages or injury to city property or personnel, if any, for a single response. Additional visits to the same gathering shall be separately charged. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.080 Recovery of costs.
     The person who created, caused, committed or maintained the nuisance, the person or persons in charge of the premises and the person or persons in charge of the unruly gathering, or if any such person is a minor, then the parent or guardians of such person, shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing the special security assignment. In addition, the costs of such special assignment may be made a lien against the property on which the nuisance was maintained and shall be a personal obligation against the property owner as herein set forth. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.090 Billing.
     When the city has incurred response costs as set forth in this chapter, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year from the date of the billing shall be charged to the person or persons liable therefor. Such person or persons shall be billed by mail and the bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay the bill may result in a lien on the property. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.100 Nonpayment.
     When the full amount due to the city for second or subsequent response costs as set forth in this chapter is not paid by the person or persons responsible therefor within thirty (30) days of the date of the billing for such costs, the police chief shall file with the city clerk a declaration showing the response costs incurred, the date costs were incurred and the location of the property to which the response was made. The recordation of such declaration with the county recorder shall constitute a lien on the property. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

 

10.70.111 Other remedies.
     The charges established by this section are cumulative in nature and shall not be construed to limit or replace any other remedies or penalties, civil or criminal, which may be available. (Ord. 1395 § 1, (1989))

Chapter 10.72 SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS, EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED, OR SIDESHOWS
10.72.010 Purpose.
     (a)   The city council finds and declares that motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed conducted on public streets and highways are illegal under California Vehicle Code Section 23109. Motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed are commonly known as street races or drag races. Streets within the city have been the site of illegal street racing over the past several years. Such street racing threatens the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creates a public nuisance, violates the rights of persons to peacefully use and enjoy the city and its facilities, parks, and walkways, and interferes with the right of business owners to enjoy the use of their property within the city. Illegal street racers accelerate to high speeds without regard to vehicular traffic, pedestrians, or vehicles parked or moving nearby. The racers drive quickly from street to street, race for several hours, and then move to other locations upon the arrival of the police. In addition, the Bay Area has witnessed a variation on speed contests called sideshows, where drivers of vehicles engage in reckless stunts and maneuvers on streets, sidewalks, and other public places in the presence of spectators. These sideshows constitute a public nuisance.

     (b)   Those who participate in this illegal activity can be very sophisticated, using their cell phones, police scanners, and other electronic devices to communicate with each other to avoid detection or arrest. They also use the Internet to provide information on where to race, and give advice on how to avoid detection and prosecution. Traffic accidents, property crimes, and calls for police service can increase dramatically. The mere presence of spectators at these events fuels the illegal street racing and sideshows and creates an environment in which these illegal activities can flourish.

     (c)   This chapter is adopted to prohibit spectators at illegal street races and sideshows with the aim of significantly curbing and inhibiting this criminal activity. The chapter gives proper notice to citizens as to what activities are lawful and what activities are unlawful. In discouraging spectators, the act of organizing and participating in illegal street races and sideshows will be discouraged. (Ord. 1775 § 2, (2006))

 

10.72.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     (a)   “Illegal motor vehicle speed contest” or “illegal exhibition of speed” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

     (b)   “Preparations for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow” include, but are not limited to, situations in which:

     (1)   A group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the event; or

     (2)   A group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; or

     (3)   A group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; or

     (4)   One or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting the event; or

     (5)   Two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow; or

     (6)   One or more drivers is revving his engine or spinning his tires in preparation for the event; or

     (7)   An individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter.

     (c)   “Sideshow” means a gathering, procession, or assemblage of vehicles on highways where vehicles in motion are used to exhibit stunts and maneuvers in the presence of spectators.

     (d)   “Spectator” means any individual who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow or at a location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. “Spectator” includes any individual at the location of the event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means. (Ord. 1775 § 2, (2006))

 

10.72.030 Spectator at illegal speed contest, exhibitions of speed, or sideshow—Violation.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any individual to be knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any individual to be knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, where preparations are being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed.

     (c)   It is unlawful for any individual to be knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, at a sideshow.

     (d)   It is unlawful for any individual to be knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, where preparations are being made for a sideshow.

     (e)   An individual is present at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed if that individual is within two hundred (200) feet of the location of the event, or within two hundred (200) feet of the location where preparations are being made for the event.

     (f)    Exemption. Nothing in this section prohibits law enforcement officers, a medical professional, or a firefighter from being present at illegal motor vehicle speed contests, exhibitions of speed, or sideshows in the course of their official duties. (Ord. 1775 § 2, (2006))

 

10.72.040 Relevant circumstances to prove a violation.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of Section 10.72.030 admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:        (a)          The time of day;

     (b)   The nature and description of the scene;

     (c)   The number of people at the scene;

     (d)   The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or group present at the scene;

     (e)   The number and description of motor vehicles at the scene;

     (f)    The activities in which the motor vehicles are engaged;

     (g)   Whether the individual charged drove, walked, or was transported to the scene;

     (h)   How long the individual charged was present at the scene of the event;

     (i)    Whether the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow;

     (j)    Whether the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow;

     (k)   Whether the individual charged has previously attended an illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow;

     (l)    Whether the individual charged previously was present at a location where preparations were being made for an illegal speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow, or where an exhibition of speed, illegal motor vehicle speed contest, or sideshow was in progress. (Ord. 1775 § 2, (2006))

 

10.72.050 Admissibility of prior acts.
     The list of circumstances set forth in Section 10.72.040 is not exclusive. Evidence of prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend an illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow, if the prior act or acts occurred within three (3) years of the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that a speed contest, exhibition of speed, or sideshow was taking place at the time of the presently charged offense. Prior acts are not limited to those that occurred within the city. (Ord. 1775 § 2, (2006))

Title 11 TREES AND VEGETATION
Chapter 11.04 STREET TREES
Chapter 11.06 URBAN REFORESTATION AND TREE PROTECTION
Chapter 11.08 WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT
Chapter 11.12 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS

Chapter 11.04 STREET TREES
11.04.010 Definitions.
     “Director” means the director of parks of the city of Burlingame.

     “Hedge” means any plant material or shrub when planted in a dense, continuous line or area, so as to form a thicket or barrier.

     “Objectionable trees” mean trees which by reason of decay, neglect or disease may become a hazard to persons or property; those which may impair the progress or vision of anyone traveling in a public street; those which by their nature drop fruit, seed pods or debris which create hazards to pedestrians or vehicular travel.

     “Person” means individuals, firms and corporations, and agents, employees and representatives thereof.

     “Plant” means all other plant material, nonwoody, annual or perennial in nature, not necessarily hardy.

     “Planting strip” means the portion of the street paralleling the curb or sidewalk intended for tree planting or landscaping.

     “Public areas” mean parks, playgrounds, areas around public buildings and all other public areas in the possession of or under the supervision, maintenance or control of the city of Burlingame.

     “Shrub” means any woody perennial plant normally low, several-stemmed, adaptable to shaping, trimming and pruning without injury.

     “Street” means all land lying between abutting properties dedicated for, or condemned for, or established by, use as a public thoroughfare. Street includes avenue, boulevard, road, highway, walk or lane but does not include freeway.

     “Street tree” means any woody perennial plant having a single main axis or stem commonly achieving ten (10) feet or more in height. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.020 Duties of director.
     It shall be the duty of the director to plant, trim, prune, spray and care for any trees, shrubs or plants and to remove any tree, shrub or plants which in his or her opinion are objectionable or hazardous in or upon any street, alley or public place in the city. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.030 Planting in streets or public areas.
     It is unlawful for anyone other than the director or his or her authorized representative to place or plant any tree, shrub or plant in any of the streets or public places in the city until the director shall have first approved the kind and variety to be planted, the location therefor, and granted a permit for planting the same. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.035 Actions by others.
     It is unlawful for any person to cut down, trim, prune, plant, remove, injure or destroy any tree, shrub or plant in or upon any street or public place in the city without a permit therefor from the director, who is hereby authorized to grant such a permit in his or her discretion.

     It is unlawful to fasten any sign, wire, rope or any device to any street tree; to permit any fire to burn where the heat thereof will injure any portion of the tree; to place or maintain any stone, cement, or other substance so that it will impede the free access of air and water to the roots of any street tree. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.040 Public nuisances defined.
     The following are defined and declared to be public nuisances:

     (a)   Any dead, dying, diseased or infested tree in any street or on any private property so near to any street as to constitute a danger to street trees, public utility services or streets or portions thereof, or to persons;

     (b)   Any tree or shrub on any private property of a type or species apt to destroy, impair or interfere with any street improvements, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewers, utility mains or services;

     (c)   Vines or climbing plants growing into or over any street tree or fire hydrant, pole or electrolier;

     (d)   Branches or foliage which interfere with visibility on, or free use of, or access to, any portion of any street improved for vehicular or pedestrian travel;

     (e)   Hedges or dense thorny shrubs on any planting strip or extending beyond a property line into any portion of the sidewalk or street;

     (f)    Shrubs, plants or hedges more than three (3) feet in height in that portion of a corner lot at the intersection of two (2) streets which is a triangle measured for fifteen (15) feet in each direction from the external corner of the lot. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.045 Abatement of public nuisances.
     (a)   Whenever any public nuisance as defined herein exists on private property, the director shall cause a written notice to be sent by United States mail or delivered personally to the owner of the property or the person in possession of the property. Such notice shall describe the condition, state the work necessary to remedy the condition, and the time within which the work must be performed.

     (b)   If, at the end of the time specified, the work has not been done, the director shall cause a report thereof to be made to the city council.

     (c)   The city council may adopt a resolution which shall preliminarily declare the condition to be a public nuisance, order the director to give notice of the passage of the resolution, and state therein that, unless the nuisance is abated without delay, the work of abatement will be done by the city authorities and chargeable as a lien against the private property. The resolution and notice shall fix the time and place for hearing any objections to the proposed abatement of the public nuisance or to the declaration that a public nuisance exists.

     (d)   The amount of the cost of abating the nuisance upon the property referred to or described in the resolution and notice shall constitute a special assessment against such property, and after it is confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such assessment, until paid. Such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties, and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessments. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.050 Trimming by public utility corporations.
     Any public utility corporation maintaining overhead wires may be given a permit by the director, valid for one year from date of issuance, to allow such public utility corporation to trim or brace any trees growing upon the street or which grow upon private property to the extent that they encroach upon the street. Permission to trim or brace trees by the public utility corporation shall be granted where it can be shown that the trees or portions thereof will interfere with the safety of the overhead wires or the transmission of electrical current or telephone messages. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.055 Paving of planting strips.
     (a)   In all residential districts where planting strips exist between sidewalk and curb, permission may be granted by the director, with the assent of the director of public works, for paving or covering by the adjoining property owner of all or part of the strip except for unpaved spaces with a minimum of four (4) square feet for the planting of a street tree. Such unpaved spaces shall be at approximate intervals of fifty feet. Where driveways are so located as to make an interval of fifty feet impractical, the director may designate an appropriate location.

     (b)   The director is hereby authorized to prepare regulations to apply to the issuance of permits for paving or covering planting strips such as, but not limited to: width of planting strip; previous practices on the block of which the subject property is a part; on-street vehicle parking; number of existing or proposed trees; location of driveways; location of public utility services; proximity to commercially zoned districts. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.060 Approval of plant varieties.
     The director is authorized to approve varieties of trees which may be planted in planting strips and no trees which do not receive such approval shall be planted. The director shall prepare a list of such trees and said list may be amended and revised from time to time. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.065 Street tree master plan.
     (a)   The director shall develop a comprehensive plan of official street trees for all streets of the city where planting areas are available and provided for trees. The plan may be revised from time to time and shall be reviewed each year.

     (b)   In accordance with the plan, the director shall proceed each year to plant trees or replace trees to the extent of such funds as may be allocated by the council for that purpose.

     (c)   Where the condition of a tree, or the unfitness of a tree, or the condition of other public improvements adjacent to a tree make replacement necessary or desirable, the director is authorized to remove such tree and replace it with one in accordance with the master tree plan. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

 

11.04.070 Responsibility of city for tree damaged sidewalks.
     Periodically, the director of public works shall prepare a list of particular trees which have caused a present and immediate danger to pedestrian travel by causing damage to the contiguous sidewalk or have interfered with drainage flow in gutters or created traffic hazards in adjacent streets. The list shall be delivered to the director for comment or revision. After agreement by the director of public works and the director upon such list, a request for necessary funds shall be made by the director of public works in his or her annual budget to the city council for the repair or replacement of the listed damaged public improvements, and such repairs or replacements shall be made to the extent of the funds approved in the annual budget. (Ord. 944 § 1, (1971))

 

11.04.080 Appeal from order of director.
     Any person aggrieved by any act of the director may appeal, in writing, to the city manager. The city manager shall hear the appellant, the director and any others, and shall decide the matter and make such order as he or she may find necessary.

     In the event that the appellant or any person is dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager, the matter may be appealed to the city council by a written request of the aggrieved party. The action of the city council after review shall be final and conclusive. (Ord 944 § 1, (1971))

Chapter 11.06 URBAN REFORESTATION AND TREE PROTECTION
11.06.010 Purpose and intent.
     The city of Burlingame is endowed and forested with a variety of healthy and valuable trees which must be protected and preserved. The preservation of these trees is essential to the health, welfare and quality of life of the citizens of the city because these trees preserve the scenic beauty of the city, maintain ecological balance, prevent erosion of top soil, counteract air pollution and oxygenate the air, absorb noise, maintain climatic and microclimatic balance, help block wind, and provide shade and color. For these same reasons, the requirement of at least one tree, exclusive of city-owned trees, on every residential lot in the city should be part of the permit process for any construction or remodeling.

     It is the intent of this chapter to establish conditions and regulations for the removal and replacement of existing trees and the installation of new trees in new construction and development consistent with these purposes and the reasonable economic enjoyment of private property. (Ord. 1057 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

 

11.06.020 Definitions.
     Terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:

     (a)   “Commission” means the Beautification Commission of the city of Burlingame.

     (b)   “Department” means the parks and recreation department of the city of Burlingame.

     (c)   “Development or redevelopment” means any work upon any property in the city of Burlingame which requires a subdivision, variance, use permit, building permit or other approval or which involves excavation, landscaping, or construction in the vicinity of a protected tree.

     (d)   “Director” means the director of parks and recreation of the city of Burlingame.

     (e)   “Landscape tree” means a generally recognized ornamental tree and shall exclude fruit, citrus, or nut-bearing trees.

     (f)    “Protected tree” means:

     (1)   Any tree with a circumference of forty-eight (48) inches or more when measured fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade; or

     (2)   A tree or stand of trees so designated by the city council based upon findings that it is unique and of importance to the public due to its unusual appearance, location, historical significance or other factor; or

     (3)   A stand of trees in which the director has determined each tree is dependent upon the others for survival.

     (g)   “Pruning” means the removal of more than one third of the crown or existing foliage of the tree or more than one third of the root system. Pruning done without a permit or which does not conform to the provisions of a permit shall be deemed a removal.

     (h)   “Removal” means cutting to the ground, extraction, killing by spraying, girdling, or any other means. (Ord. 1057 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1492 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

 

11.06.030 Nomination and listing of protected trees.
     Nomination for protected tree status under Section 11.06.020(f)(2) may be made by any citizen. The commission shall review such nominations and present its recommendations to the city council for designation.

     A listing of trees so designated, including the specific locations thereof, shall be kept by the department and shall be available for distribution to interested citizens.

     The city council may remove a designated tree from the list upon its own motion or upon request. Requests for such action may originate in the same manner as nominations for protected tree status. (Ord. 1057 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

 

11.06.040 Emergencies.
     In the event that an emergency condition arises whereby immediate action is necessary because of disease, or danger to life or property, a protected tree may be removed or altered by order of the director or, if the director is unavailable, a responsible member of the police, fire, parks and recreation, or public works department. In such event, a report shall be made to the commission describing the conditions and necessity of such an order. (Ord. 1057 §

1, (1975); Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

 

11.06.050 Prohibitions and protections.
     (a)   No protected tree shall be removed from any parcel without a permit except as provided in Section 11.06.040.

     (b)   The following conditions shall be observed during construction or development of property:

     (1)   Protected trees are to be protected by a fence which is to be maintained at all times;

     (2)   Protected trees that have been damaged or destroyed by construction shall be replaced or the city shall be reimbursed, as provided in Section 11.06.090;

     (3)   Chemicals or other construction materials shall not be stored within the drip line of protected trees;

     (4)   Drains shall be provided as required by the director whenever soil fill is placed around protected trees; and

     (5)   Signs, wires or similar devices shall not be attached to protected trees. (Ord. 1057 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

 

11.06.060 Notices and permits required for removal or work significantly affecting protected trees.
     (a)   Removal or Pruning. Owners, or their authorized representative, of protected trees on public or private property shall obtain a permit to remove or prune a protected tree. The application shall be on a form furnished by the department and shall state, among other things, the number and location of the tree(s) to be removed or pruned by type(s) and the reason for removal or pruning of each. The application shall also include a photograph with correct botanical identification of the subject tree or tree(s). An authorized representative of the department shall make an inspection of the tree(s) and shall file a written report and his or her recommendations to the director.

     (b)   Educational Conference before Work Commences. After receipt of an application, the director may require an educational conference to inform the owner of potential alternatives to the proposed removal or pruning.

     (c)   Removal or Pruning of Protected Trees on Undeveloped or Redeveloped Property. When an application for development or redevelopment of a property containing one or more protected trees is filed in any office or department of the city, the person making such an application shall file a site plan showing the location of buildings or structures or of proposed site disturbances, and the location of all trees. The director shall determine if all protected trees are shown. An authorized representative of the department shall make an inspection and shall file a report of his or her findings and recommendations to the director.

     Subject to the replacement provisions of Section 11.06.090, the director shall approve the removal of protected trees within the footprint of approved construction in the R-1 zone, which construction does not require a variance, conditional use permit, or special permit under Title 25 of this code. The notice and appeal provisions of Sections 11.06.070 and 11.06.080 shall not apply to such approvals.

     (d)   Review. In reviewing applications, the director shall give priority to those based on hazard or danger of disease. The director may refer any application to another department, committee, board or commission of the city for a report and recommendation, and may require the applicant to provide an arborist’s report. In reviewing each application, the director shall determine:

     (1)   The condition of the tree(s) with respect to disease; danger of falling; proximity to existing or proposed structures, yards, driveways and other trees; and interference with public utility services;

     (2)   The necessity to remove the tree(s) in order to construct any proposed improvements to allow economic enjoyment of the property;

     (3)   The topography of the land and the effect of the removal of the tree(s) on erosion; soil retention; and diversion or increased flow of surface waters;

     (4)   The number of trees existing in the neighborhood on improved property and the effect the removal would have on the established standard of the area and property value. Neighborhood is defined as the area within a 300-foot radius of the property containing the tree(s) in question;

     (5)   The number of trees the particular parcel can adequately support according to good arboricultural practices;

     (6)   The effect tree removal would have on wind protection, noise and privacy; and

     (7)   The economic consequences and obligations of requiring a tree to remain. (Ord. 1057 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1492 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998); Ord. 1603 § 9, (1998))

 

11.06.070 Decision by director.
     A decision shall be rendered by the director for each application. If an application is approved, it shall include replacement conditions in accordance with Section 11.06.090. The director shall give written notification of the decision to the applicant and all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the property containing the tree(s) in question, and include a copy of the city Urban Reforestation and Tree Protection Ordinance (Chapter 11.06). (Ord. 1057 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

 

11.06.080 Appeal.
     Any person may appeal the decision of the director to the commission by filing an appeal in writing with the director no later than 5:00 p.m. of the tenth calendar day after the decision. The director shall set the matter for review by the commission at its next regular meeting and provide notice by mail of the commission hearing to the appellant and applicant at least five (5) days prior thereto.

     The determination of the commission shall become final and conclusive in ten (10) days if no appeal is filed. Destruction, removal or other work on a protected tree shall not commence until after the ten (10)-day period has passed, or, if any appeal is filed, until the decision of the city council. During the period between the action of the commission and the end of the ten (10)-day appeal period, any person may appeal such action to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. During the same period the city council, on its own motion, may suspend the order of the commission for the purpose of reviewing the action of the commission. A permit shall be valid for six (6) months after the date it is issued. Under exceptional circumstances, the director may issue one six (6)-month extension. (Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

 

11.06.090 Tree requirements and reforestation.
     (a)   Whenever the development or redevelopment of a single family home, duplex, apartment house or condominium results in any increase in lot coverage or habitable space (as defined by Chapter 25 of this code), the property shall be required to meet the following requirements:

     (1)   One landscape tree for every One thousand (1,000) square feet of lot coverage or habitable space for single family homes or duplexes;

     (2)   One landscape tree for every two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot coverage for apartment houses or condominiums.

     Lot coverage and habitable space shall include both existing and new construction. The director shall determine the number of existing trees which are of an acceptable size, species and location to be counted toward this requirement. Any additional trees which are required shall meet the standards for replacement trees set forth in subsection (b) below.

     (b)   Permits for removal of protected tree(s) shall include replanting conditions with the following guidelines:

     (1)   Replacement shall be three (3) fifteen (15)-gallon size, one twenty-four (24)-inch box size, or one thirty-six (36)-inch box size landscape tree(s) for each tree removed as determined below.

     (2)   Any tree removed without a valid permit shall be replaced by two (2) 24-inch box size, or two (2) 36-inch box size landscape trees for each tree so removed as determined below.

     (3)   Replacement of a tree be waived by the director if a sufficient number of trees exists on the property to meet all other requirements of the Urban Reforestation and Tree Protection ordinance.

     (4)   Size and number of the replacement tree(s) shall be determined by the director and shall be based on the species, location and value of the tree(s) removed.

     (5)   If replacement trees, as designated in subsection (b)(1) or (2) above, as applicable, cannot be planted on the property, payment of equal value shall be made to the city. Such payments shall be deposited in the tree planting fund to be drawn upon for public tree planting. (Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1492 § 3, (1993); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

 

11.06.100 Penalty.
     In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, any person removing or pruning a tree in violation of this ordinance is liable to treble damages as set forth in Section 733 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California. Damages for this purpose shall be replacement value of the tree as determined by the International Society of Arboriculture Standards. (Ord. 1470 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1598 § 1, (1998))

Chapter 11.08 WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT
11.08.010 Weeds and rubbish deemed nuisance—Abatement.
     All weeds growing upon any private property or in any public street, lane, way or alley, within the city, and bearing seeds of a wingy or downy nature or which because of having attained such a large growth and being dry shall have become a fire menace or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous, and all rubbish, refuse or dirt on parkways, sidewalks or private property, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be abated by the owner of the property, who is hereby required to remove or destroy such weeds, rubbish, refuse or dirt from his or her property, and in the abutting one-half of the street in front, and the alley, if any, behind his or her property, and between the lot lines thereof extended. (1941 Code § 1399, Ord. 469, (1948))

 

11.08.020 Resolution declaring nuisance—Notice of abatement.
     Whenever any such weeds are growing or any rubbish, refuse or dirt exists upon any private property or in any street or alley within the city, the city council shall pass a resolution declaring the same to be a public nuisance, and order the city engineer to give notice of the passage of such resolution as herein provided, and stating therein that, unless such nuisance be abated without delay, the work of doing so will be done by the city authority and the expense thereof assessed upon the property from which the nuisance is removed. Such resolution shall fix the time and place for hearing any objections to the proposed destruction or removal. (1941 Code § 1399.1, Ord. 469, (1948))

 

11.08.030 Form of notice—Posting.
     Such notice shall be substantially as follows:

 

Notice To Destroy and Remove Weeds and Rubbish

        NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ____________________ , 20____ , pursuant to the provisions of the Ordinance Code, city of Burlingame, the city council of said city passed a resolution declaring that all weeds growing, or rubbish existing, upon any private property or in any public street or alley, of such character as to be a fire menace, or otherwise noxious or dangerous, constitute a public nuisance and must be abated by destruction or removal thereof.

        NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that property owners shall without delay destroy and remove all such weeds or rubbish from their property, and the abutting one half of the street in front, and alley, if any, behind, such property, and between the lot lines extended, or such weeds and rubbish will be destroyed and the nuisance removed by the city authority, in which case the cost of destruction or removal will be assessed upon the land from which, or from the front or rear of which, such weeds or rubbish shall have been destroyed or removed; and such cost will constitute a lien upon such land until paid, and will be collected upon the next tax roll upon which general municipal taxes are collected.

        All property owners having any objection to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds or rubbish are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the council of said city, to be held at the chambers in the city hall in said city on _____________________ , 20____ , at __________ o’clock, p.m., when and where objections will be heard and given due consideration.

        Dated _______________ , 20____

_______________________________

City Engineer of the City of Burlingame.

 

     Such notice shall be conspicuously posted in front of the property on which or in front or behind which, the nuisance exists, at least ten (10) days prior to the time fixed by the council for hearing objections, and shall also be posted not less than three hundred (300) feet in distance apart throughout the city. (1941 Code § 1399.2, Ord. 469, (1948); Ord. 1345 § 1, (1987))

 

11.08.040 Hearing—Action by council.
     At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider any and all objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds or rubbish, and may continue the hearing from time to time.

     Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the council, by motion shall allow or overrule any or all objections, if any, after which the council shall thereupon be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work of destruction or removal of such weeds or rubbish. The action of the council at the conclusion of such hearing shall be final and conclusive. (1941 Code § 1399.3, Ord. 469, (1948))

 

11.08.050 Order to abate nuisance—Abatement by property owner.
     After final action shall have been taken by the council in the disposition of all objections, or in case no objections shall have been received, the city council shall by resolution order the city engineer to abate or cause to be abated, such nuisance, by having the weeds or rubbish referred to destroyed or removed, and the city engineer and his or her assistants, employees, contracting agents or other representatives are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose.

     Any property owner shall have the right to destroy or remove such weeds or rubbish himself or herself, or have the same destroyed or removed at his or her own expense, provided that such weeds or rubbish shall have been removed prior to the arrival of the city engineer or his or her representatives to remove them. However, it shall be unlawful for any property owner or other person to burn any such weeds or rubbish without first having obtained written permission so to do from the chief of the fire department. (1941 Code § 1399.4, Ord. 469, (1948))

 

11.08.060 Account and report of cost.
     The city engineer shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance upon each separate lot or parcel of land, and the abutting one half of the street in front and the alley, if any, in the rear thereof and embody such account in a report and assessment list to the city council, which shall be filed with the clerk. Such report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description to be assessed against each separate lot or parcel of land therefor respectively. (1941 Code 1399.5, Ord. 469, (1948))

 

11.08.070 Notice of hearing on report and assessment list.
     The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list at or near the entrance to the city hall, together with a notice of the filing thereof and of the time and place when and where it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and confirmation, therein notifying property owners that they may appear at such time and place, and object to any matter contained therein. A like notice shall also be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published within the city of Burlingame. The posting and first publication of said notice shall be made and completed at least ten (10) days before the time such report shall have been submitted to the city council. Such notice, as so posted and published shall be substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF HEARING ON REPORT AND
ASSESSMENT FOR WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT

        NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the _________ day of___________________ , 20____
the city engineer of the City of Burlingame filed with the city clerk of said city a report and assessment on the abatement of weeds and rubbish within said city a copy of which is posted near the entrance to the Burlingame City Hall.

        NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on Monday, the _________ day of ______________ , 20 ____ , at the hour of _______ o’clock p.m. in the council chambers in the city hall of said city, said report and assessment list will be presented to the city council of said city for consideration and confirmation, and all persons interested, having any objections to said report and assessment list, or to any matter or thing contained therein, may appear at said time and place to be heard.

        Dated ____________ , 20 ____

_____________________________

City Clerk of the City of Burlingame.

 

(1941 Code § 1399.6, Ord. 469, (1948); Ord. 1345 § 2, (1987))

 

11.08.080 Hearing and confirmation of assessments—Lien against property.
     At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering such report, the city council shall hear the same together with any objections which may be filed by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating the nuisance mentioned in this chapter, and the city engineer shall attend such meeting with his or her record thereof, and at such hearing, the city council may make such modifications in the proposed assessments therefor it may deem just and proper, after which, such report and assessment list shall be confirmed by resolution.

     The amount of the cost of abating the nuisance upon the property referred to in the report of the city engineer and as finally concluded by resolution of the city council shall constitute a special assessment against each respective lot or parcel of land, and after thus made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such assessments, until paid. (1941 Code, § 1399.7, Ord. 469, (1948))

 

11.08.090 Collection on tax roll.
     A certified copy of the report shall be filed with the county controller on or before August 10th. Thereafter, such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties, and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes are made applicable to such special assessments. (1941 Code § 1399.8, Ord. 469, (1948); Ord. 1345 § 3, (1987))

Chapter 11.12 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS
11.12.010 Height of trees, hedges, walls, at intersections.
     It is unlawful to construct, grow, maintain or permit to exist upon or adjacent to any lot or parcel of real property in the city at a place within a distance of fifteen(15) feet from that point of the intersection of any streets, lanes, avenues, roads or highways, any tree, hedge, brush or shrub, or fence, wall or like structure, over three (3) feet in height measured from the level of the street, lane, avenue, road or highway in front of or to the side or rear of such real property, whichever is nearest to the structure or plant in question; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any tree within such distance the lowest branches or foliage of which are not less than seven (7) feet above the level of such street, lane, avenue, road, or highway in front of or to the side or rear of said real property, whichever is nearest to said tree, or to any tree or sapling the leaves, branches or foliage of which do not obstruct the clear view by the driver of any vehicle or traffic approaching from any direction the intersection of any streets, lanes, avenues, roads or highways. (1941 Code § 1403, Ord. 1075 § 1, (1976))

 

*      Editor’s Note: For zoning regulation of hedges and fences on corner lots, see Section 25.78.040 of this code.

Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 12.04 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAYS
Chapter 12.05 SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OF DOWNTOWN BURLINGAME AVENUE
Chapter 12.08 EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 12.10 ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
Chapter 12.12 SIDEWALK AND PARKWAY MAINTENANCE
Chapter 12.16 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Chapter 12.17 STREET NUMBERING AND RENAMING
Chapter 12.20 PUBLIC TELEPHONES
Chapter 12.22 PROHIBITED DISPLAYS IN PUBLICATIONS
Chapter 12.23 NEWSRACKS

Chapter 12.04 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAYS
12.04.010 Permit required.
     No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb-cut, driveway or street on the public streets without first obtaining a permit for such work from the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1380, Ord. 641, (1957))

 

12.04.020 Application for permit—Information required.
     An application for a permit for such work shall be filed with the city engineer showing:

     (a)   Name and address of the owner or managing agent of the property abutting the proposed work area;

     (b)   Name and address of the person or firm doing the work;

     (c)   Location of the work area, including lot, block and subdivision;

     (d)   Attached plans or drawings showing details of the proposed alteration;

     (e)   Such other information as the city engineer shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit shall issue. (1941 Code § 1380.1, Ord. 641, (1957))

 

12.04.030 Fees.
     Fees for sidewalk, driveway and curb installation and abandonment shall be those provided from time to time by resolution of the city council. The city council shall also establish by resolution such other fees, charges and procedures as may be necessary for maintenance and installation of sidewalks, driveways and curbs. (1941 Code § 1380.2, Ord. 641, (1957); Ord. 890 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1127 § 1, (1978))

 

12.04.040 Exemptions.
     Fees as outlined above in this chapter will not be charged when sidewalks, curbs and driveways are a part of public improvements constructed under any special assessment district proceeding or are a part of a land subdivision where such work is required under a subdivision agreement to which the city of Burlingame is a party.

     No permit or fee shall be required of any person holding a franchise to use the city streets granted by the city council of the city of Burlingame pursuant to the provisions of the Franchise Act of 1937. (1941 Code § 1380.3, Ord. 641, (1957))

 

12.04.050 Standard specifications and designs.
     The city engineer shall prepare and keep on file in his or her office standard specifications for materials and quantities of materials and shall also prepare and keep on file in his or her office details of required designs for curbs, gutters, sidewalks and streets and all curb-cuts, driveways and sidewalks shall meet these specifications and designs. (1941 Code § 1381, Ord. 641, (1957))

 

12.04.060 Location and width of driveways.
     (a)   Distance from Other Driveway or from Curb Return. No driveway shall be constructed or reconstructed which is less than twenty-two (22) feet from another driveway, except that this requirement may be waived by the city engineer in the event that an existing driveway is so located that this requirement would create a hardship or where a single curb-cut is made to provide driveways for contiguous lots or parcels of land.

     No driveway shall be constructed or reconstructed which is less than five (5) feet from any point on a curb return. “Curb return” is defined as the curved section of curb used at street intersections in joining the curbs of the intersecting streets.

     (b)   Limitation of Width of Driveways. The total width of any or all driveways in districts classified by this code as residential, commercial or industrial shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the lot, except that when driveways are constructed on a lot with street frontage on more than one city street, the total width of the driveways shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total street frontage of the lot.

     (c)   Permits. The city engineer, if the health safety and general welfare of the public will not be unreasonably impaired, may grant a permit for the construction of driveways, having widths in excess of these hereinabove provided for in this section as follows:

     (1)   In districts classified for multiple-dwellings he or she may grant a special permit for a driveway or driveways exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the street frontage where such excess can be shown to be essential and necessary but such driveway or driveways may not exceed seventy (70) percent of the street frontage.

     (2)   In commercial districts he or she may grant a special permit for a driveway not exceeding seventy (70) percent of the street frontage including the frontage on each street in the case of a corner lot or in the case of lots fronting on two (2) streets, in order to give access to areas used for the off-street parking of vehicles, for off-street loading zones or for gasoline service stations.

     (3)   In industrial districts he or she may grant a special permit for a driveway or driveways not exceeding seventy (70) percent of the entire street frontage where off-street parking facilities or loading ramps are installed between the property line and the building.

     (4)   In districts classified for single family or two (2) family dwellings, he or she may grant a special permit for:

     (A)  A driveway width of up to sixteen (16) feet for two (2) covered parking stalls where lot frontage is less than sixty-four (64) feet;

     (B)   A driveway width of up to twelve (12) feet for one covered parking stall where lot frontage is less than forty-eight (48) feet. (1941 Code § 1382, Ord. 641, (1957); Ord. 644, (1957); Ord. 890 § 2, (1968); Ord. 1047 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1603 § 10, (1998))

 

12.04.065 Abandoned driveways.
     No driveway curb-cuts shall be allowed to remain once the driveway use is abandoned. The city engineer shall require the adjacent property owner to restore the full height curb and gutter across the driveway opening and restore the sidewalk to its normal grade. The city engineer shall use the provisions of Chapter 12.12 of this title, when necessary, to insure compliance with this provision. (Ord. 1074 § 1, (1976))

 

12.04.070 Variances by planning commission.
     When a variance, conditional use permit or special permit is granted by the planning commission and additional driveways or parking areas are required by the commission, then the commission may increase the allowable driveway percentage as a condition for the permitted use. (1941 Code § 1383, Ord. 641, (1957); Ord. 1603 § 11, (1998))

 

12.04.080 State highways.
     No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb-cut, driveway or surface of any state highway as the phrase “state highway” is defined in the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California without first obtaining a permit for such work from the state highway engineer in addition to the permit required by this chapter. (1941 Code § 1384, Ord. 641, (1957))

Chapter 12.05 SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OF DOWNTOWN BURLINGAME AVENUE
12.05.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to preserve, maintain, and to protect improvements made by the city and its Downtown Burlingame Avenue property owners as part of the Downtown Burlingame Avenue Streetscape Project. More importantly, the purpose of this chapter is to insure any work done within the public right-of-way in Downtown Burlingame Avenue is restored completely and to the satisfaction of the city in accordance with the Downtown Burlingame Avenue special conditions, provisions, specifications, and details. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

 

12.05.020 Scope.
     This chapter includes special conditions, provisions, specifications, and details necessary to ensure compliance with city council direction to preserve, maintain, and protect the city’s Downtown Burlingame Avenue Streetscape improvements. The requirements include, but are not limited to, a five (5) year construction moratorium, special conditions and provisions for restoration if work is approved for emergency repairs, to preserve public health and safety, or under special circumstances as determined by the department of public works, and minimizing as best as possible any impacts to Downtown Burlingame Avenue. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

 

12.05.030 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

     (a)   “Downtown Burlingame Avenue” is the entire length of Burlingame Avenue from El Camino Real to California Drive and extensions along side streets such as El Camino Real, Primrose Road, Park Road, Lorton Avenue, Hatch Lane, and California Drive, and as shown on the map attached to this ordinance.

     (b)   “Downtown Burlingame Avenue Streetscape Improvements” completed as part of the Downtown Burlingame Avenue Streetscape Project, include, but are not limited to, new widened sidewalks with their associated pattern-laid pavers; pavers in the parking areas, crosswalks and intersections; concrete bands; curb and gutter; asphalt concrete roadway; trees; tree grates; landscaping; planter pots; hanging baskets; decorative tree lights; benches; kiosks; gateway monuments; bike racks; retractable bollards; news racks; trash receptacles; smart parking meters; historic markers; decorative streetlights; electrical conduits; upgrades of the city’s traffic signal; and utility upgrades to the city’s potable water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage systems and all associated appurtenances.

     (c)   “Public works department” means the city of Burlingame public works department.

     (d)   “Moratorium” is a temporary prohibition of any construction or work in the public right-of-way of Downtown Burlingame Avenue within the timeframe identified herein.

     (e)   “Downtown Burlingame Avenue special conditions, provisions, specifications, and details” is a set of documents providing requirements with which any construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration or grading, opening, excavation in any sidewalk concrete and pavers, curb and gutter, planter, parking area concrete and pavers, roadway; crosswalk, or intersection, or operation of construction equipment, within the area identified in this chapter, must comply. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

 

12.05.040 Construction moratorium.
     Effective thirty (30) days from the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a five (5) year construction moratorium is implemented for Downtown Burlingame Avenue. The construction moratorium will end on March 1, 2020. No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade, open or cause to be opened, or make any excavation in any sidewalk concrete and pavers; curb and gutter; planter; parking area concrete and pavers; roadway; crosswalk; or intersection; or to operate construction equipment within Downtown Burlingame Avenue during the construction moratorium, except as permitted under the exceptions set forth herein. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

 

12.05.050 Construction allowed for purposes of emergency repairs, to protect the public health and safety, or special circumstances as determined by the public works department.
     Any person, firm or corporation desiring to request permission to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade, open or cause to be opened, or make any excavation in any sidewalk concrete and pavers; curb and gutter; planter; parking area concrete and pavers; roadway; crosswalk; or intersection; or to operate construction equipment within Downtown Burlingame Avenue shall make a written request to the public works department setting forth the purpose and extent of such work to be performed or caused to be performed by such person. Following the review of request, the public works department may grant special permission if the proposed work is deemed necessary for emergencies, public health and safety, and special circumstances. Such a written request shall include:

     (a)   Drawings showing location of work area, details of proposed work, and restoration of public right-of-way per Downtown Burlingame Avenue special conditions, provisions, specifications, and details.

     (b)   Such other information as the public works department shall find necessary to the determination of whether permission shall be granted.

     Permission for construction work shall be granted or denied within the discretion of the director of public works or designee, which determination shall be final. In the case of an emergency or immediate and serious threat to the public health and safety, a property owner or business tenant may make only such repairs or take such actions as necessary to avoid serious and substantial harm to property or risk to persons without following the application procedure identified here. Further repairs or work beyond that necessary to contain or stabilize an emergency situation must be approved through the process identified in this section. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

 

12.05.060 Permit and fee.
     Any person, firm or corporation submitting a written request to the public works department for permission to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade, open or cause to be opened, or make any sidewalk concrete and pavers; curb and gutter; planter; parking area concrete and pavers; roadway; crosswalk; or intersection; or to operate construction equipment within Downtown Burlingame Avenue shall provide a minimum plan review deposit at the time of the request. The actual cost charged for the plan review shall be based on actual city staff time and material spent in, assessing and evaluating the request, plan review, preliminary site visit(s), meeting(s), and any other such work directly related and necessary to the processing of the request. The city may request additional deposits based on the size and scope of the proposed work. Any remaining deposit funds shall be either applied towards an application for an encroachment permit, if required and the applicant chooses to go forward with such permit, or refunded to the applicant.

     The public works department may grant the request to perform work in whole or in part, subject to the Downtown Burlingame Avenue special conditions, provisions, specifications, and details and conditions as the public works department may determine are necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the public. If the requested work is approved, the applicant shall file with the public works department an application for an encroachment permit prior to starting work. Applicable permit fees and bonds will be based on fees approved by the city council. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

 

12.05.070 Downtown Burlingame Avenue special conditions, provisions, specifications, and details.
     The public works department shall prepare the Downtown Burlingame Avenue special conditions, provisions, specifications, and details for construction method and materials. These materials shall be available for review upon request at the public works department. The public works department may modify these conditions, provisions, specifications, and details as deemed necessary. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

 

12.05.080 Restoration of public right-of-way.
     All construction work, openings, excavations, and damage caused by construction to the city infrastructure shall be restored in compliance with the Downtown Burlingame Avenue special conditions, provisions, specifications, and details and to the satisfaction of the public works department. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

 

12.05.090 Exercise of franchise.
     No person, firm or corporation shall exercise any franchise or privilege to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade, open or cause to be opened, or make any excavation in, any sidewalk concrete and pavers; curb and gutter; planter; parking area concrete and pavers; roadway, crosswalk; or intersection for the purpose of laying or maintaining any pipes for the transmission of gas, water, heat, steam, high speed internet or wireless access, or other substances without having obtained permission from the public works department in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1908 § 2, (2015))

Chapter 12.08 EXCAVATIONS
12.08.010 Permit required.
     No person, firm or corporation shall open or cause to be opened, or make any excavation in, any street, lane, alley, court or highway within the city, for the purpose of laying or connecting pipe, pipes or conduits therein, or for any other purpose, without first having obtained written permission from the city engineer therefore. (1941 Code § 1373)

 

12.08.020 Application and fee.
     Any person, firm or corporation desiring such permission shall make a written application to the city engineer setting forth the purpose and extent of such work to be performed or caused to be performed by such person. Accompanying such application shall be such fee or deposit as shall be provided from time to time by resolution of the city council as security for performance of the work. (1941 Code § 1374, Ord. 1127 § 2, (1978))

 

12.08.030 Inspection of work—Barriers.
     All work to be done under this chapter shall at all times be open to the inspection of the city engineer, and such suitable safeguards shall be placed around said work as will best insure public protection. (1941 Code § 1375)

 

12.08.040 Distance open at one time limited.
     Not more than one hundred (100) yards of any street, lane, alley, court or highway in the city shall be opened or remain open at any one time during the progress of the work to be done under this chapter. (1941 Code § 1376)

 

12.08.050 Restoration of street.
     All openings or excavations made in the street, lane, alley, court or highway shall, upon the completion of the work, be forthwith refilled, and such street, lane, alley, court or highway shall be restored as nearly as possible to its former condition of base and surface by the party or parties doing the work under this division and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1377)

 

12.08.060 Iron or steel pipes.
     Whenever any public street, lane, alley, court or highway in the city is about to be improved by the paving thereof and pipe, pipes or conduits are to be lowered or replaced, such pipe, pipes or conduits so lowered or replaced shall be of such materials as the city engineer may determine. (1941 Code § 1378, Ord. 1049 § 8, (1975))

 

12.08.070 Exercise of franchise to lay pipes or conduits.
     No person, firm or corporation shall exercise any franchise or privilege to lay or maintain any pipes or conduits in or under any street of the city for the transmission of gas, water, heat, steam or other substance without having obtained a grant therefor from the city in accordance with law. (1941 Code § 1379)

Chapter 12.10 ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
12.10.010 Policy.
     It is the policy of the city of Burlingame that established street and sidewalk rights-of-way of the city shall be used for public purposes, and that midblock rights-of-way, being substandard in width, should not become developed as streets, and that permission to encroach thereon shall be given only when exceptional or unusual circumstances are presented, or when there is no reasonably foreseeable requirement for city use of the right-of-way. (Ord. 1053 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1171 § 1, (1980))

 

12.10.020 Paving or structures—Permit required.
     No person without first obtaining a permit shall construct or place an encroachment within, on, over or under a right-of-way of the city. Encroachment shall include any paving, tower, pole, pipe, fence, building or any other structure or object of any kind. This chapter shall apply if a permit other than a building permit is not otherwise required by this code. (Ord. 1053 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1171 § 2, (1980))

 

12.10.025 Midblock vehicle access—Permit required.
     No person without first obtaining a permit shall allow vehicle access to or from adjacent property over or across an alley or other similar midblock right-of-way. (Ord. 1171 § 3, (1980))

 

12.10.030 Permit—Application.
     Any person, firm or corporation desiring such a permit shall make a written application to the city engineer setting forth the purpose and extent of the work to be performed or caused to be performed by such person. Accompanying such application shall be deposited with the city engineer such fee as shall be provided from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1053 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1127 § 3, (1978))

 

12.10.040 Permit—Issuance—Revocation.
     (a)   The city engineer will grant the request for an encroachment permit in whole or in part, subject to such conditions as the engineer may determine are necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the public.

     (b)   Any privately owned figure allowed in the public right-of-way in Subarea A of the Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area shall conform at a minimum to the following criteria:

     (1)   The applicant shall be either the owner or a tenant of the private property immediately adjacent to the sidewalk area on which the figure is to be located and the application shall be signed by both the tenant owning the figure and the property owner from whom the adjacent site is leased;

     (2)   The figure shall be made only of wood, stone or metal;

     (3)   The figure shall not be lit from the inside or outside, contain any wiring, motorized or moving parts or make any sound, and no balloons, banners, streamers or similar items shall be attached to the figure;

     (4)   The items listed in Section 25.76.020(3) Adult Entertainment shall not be depicted in any figure;

     (5)   The figure shall contain no letters, words, or characters;

     (6)   The figure shall be no taller than six and one half (6-1/2) feet as measured from the adjacent level of the sidewalk and no wider than three (3) feet at any point;

     (7)   The placement shall not interfere with or cause damage to existing public improvements;

     (8)   The figure shall be structurally stable with respect to tipping, wind load, sharp objects or other potential hazards so that it is and determined to be safe for the public;

     (9)   The figure shall be maintained by the private owner who shall be responsible for inspecting and immediately repairing any damage to the figure;

     (10) The owner of the figure shall assume all liability for any theft, injuries and property damage caused by or to the figure;

     (11) The figure shall be placed at least ten (10) feet from the outside edge of any pedestrian crosswalk, unless the figure is attached to the wall of a structure and does not extend more than two (2) feet into the public right-of-way;

     (12) The figure shall be placed against the wall of a structure or permanent city planter box and located so that there is a minimum of five (5) feet of clearance on the adjacent sidewalk for unobstructed pedestrian movement;

     (13) The figure shall not be permanently attached to the public right-of-way or any improvement in the public right-of-way;

     (14) The figure shall be securely attached to a private structure or shall be removed daily from the public right-of-way and shall not be put in place before 8:00 a.m. and shall be removed before 6:00 p.m.; and

     (15) Upon notice of the city engineer, the figure shall be removed from the public right-of-way for the duration of any sidewalk and infrastructure cleaning and repair work, civic events, street fairs or other activities which cause the street to be closed.

     (c)   An encroachment permit for a privately owned figure in the public right-of-way may be revoked by the city engineer for failure to comply with any of the criteria listed in subsection (b) of this section within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of a warning notice. If the owner fails to comply with the criteria within the forty-eight (48) hour period, the city may remove the figure and permanently dispose of it at the owner’s expense;

     (d)   If a figure has become a threat to the public’s health and safety it shall be removed immediately at the owner’s expense.

     (e)   Any encroachment permit issued under this chapter shall be revocable by the city upon written notice. (Ord. 1053 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1587 § 3, (1998))

 

12.10.050 Permit—Decision—Appeal.
     Any decision of the city engineer concerning an encroachment permit may be appealed by the applicant to the city council. Such appeal shall be made in writing within five (5) days after written notice of the decision of the city engineer is sent to the applicant. Additionally, all decisions of the city engineer shall be reported to city council and shall not be final until the conclusion of the city council meeting at which such report is received. (Ord. 1053 § 1, (1975))

 

12.10.060 Appeal—Hearing.
     In the event that an appeal is taken, the matter shall be referred to the city council for hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing the city council shall make its order approving, modifying or reversing the action of the city engineer. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. All permits shall be recorded with the San Mateo county recorder. (Ord. 1053 § 1, (1975))

 

12.10.070 Investigative fees and administrative penalty.
     (a)   Whenever construction, work, or placement for which a permit is required by this chapter has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, any application for approval of the construction, work, or placement shall be accompanied by:

     (1)   The permit fees adopted pursuant to Section 12.10.030 above; and

     (2)   An investigation fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00); and

     (3)   An administrative penalty equal to the permit fees calculated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.

     (b)   Any person assessed an investigation fee and administrative penalty may file an appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after written notice to such person of the assessment. A hearing upon such appeal shall thereafter be held by the city council; its decision thereon shall be final. Nothing in this section shall relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable laws and regulations, or from any other fees or penalties prescribed by law. (Ord. 1634 § 2, (2000))

Chapter 12.12 SIDEWALK AND PARKWAY MAINTENANCE
12.12.010 Maintenance by property owners.
     The owners of properties adjacent to or fronting on any portion of an improved street or place, or a street whose area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street line is maintained as a park or parking strip, shall have a duty to maintain and shall maintain any sidewalk in such condition that the sidewalk will not endanger persons or property and in such condition that the sidewalk will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of those works or areas except as to those conditions created or maintained in, on, along or in connection with such sidewalk by any person other than the owner, under and by virtue of any permit or right granted to him or her by law or by the city authorities in charge thereof, and such persons shall be in a like duty in relation thereto. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010))

 

12.12.020 Notice to repair—Duty to repair.
     When any portion of any sidewalk is defective, out of repair or pending reconstruction and/or in condition to endanger persons or property, or to interfere with the public convenience in the use thereof, the director of public works or designee shall notify the owner or person in possession of the property abutting or fronting on that defective or out of repair portion of the sidewalk, to repair the sidewalk in the manner provided in this chapter and as approved by the public works director or designee in accordance with public works standards. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.030 Notice to repair—Service.
     The public works director or designee may notify the affected property owner of the need to repair sidewalk in accordance with the Streets and Highway Code. Notice to repair may be given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or to the person in possession of the property abutting or fronting on that portion of the sidewalk so out of repair or by mailing a written notice to the person in possession of such property, or to the owner thereof at the last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll or to the name and address of the person owning such property as shown in the records of the San Mateo County Recorder’s Office. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.040 Repairs performed by owner.
     Upon receiving a notice to repair, the property owner, within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the notice to repair, shall: (1) obtain an encroachment permit from the public works department; (2) commence performance of the work, and diligently and without interruption prosecute the work to completion; (3) be responsible for the full cost of the repair. If the property owner fails to timely obtain an encroachment permit and to commence and diligently prosecute the work without interruption, the director of public works shall make such repair, and the cost of that repair shall be a lien on the property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.050 Repairs performed by city.
     Notwithstanding the above provisions of this chapter, the city council may authorize the director of public works or designee to identify sidewalk repairs and implement a sidewalk repair program to address pedestrian safety concerns and to address compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act as part of the Capital Improvement Program. The focus of the work performed by the public works department shall consist of sidewalk repairs to address pedestrian safety concerns in the public pedestrian path of travel, and Americans with Disabilities Act improvements, and excludes all private driveway approaches and private walkways. Continuation of the sidewalk repair program by the public works director is contingent upon availability of funding, and may terminate at any time as determined by the city council. The implementation of the sidewalk repair program by the public works director does not relieve the adjoining private property owners of their responsibility for maintenance of sidewalks as specified in Section 5600 of the Streets and Highway Code, and in Section 12.12.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018)

 

12.12.060 Costs—Assessment—Lien when.
     For any repair for which notice was given under Section 12.12.040 of this chapter and the costs of repair were borne by the city, the city council shall conduct a public hearing at which the director of public works shall submit the notice and costs associated with the repair, and the property owner against whom such repairs may be charged shall have the opportunity to appear, dispute the charges, and submit argument or evidence in support of the property owner’s position. The affected property owner shall be provided notice at the address as provided in Section 12.12.030 via certified mail or hand delivery and registered mail at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the meeting at which the item is to be heard. If, following the public hearing, the city council determines the charges to be proper, the city council shall assess the cost of repair against the parcel of property fronting upon the sidewalk upon which such repair was made. Such cost so assessed, if not paid within thirty (30) days of mailing the invoice, shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel of property, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof. Such lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest thereon are paid, or until it is discharged of record. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.070 Filing of notice of lien with county recorder.
     The director of public works may file in the office of the county recorder a certificate substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

 

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by the Improvement Act of 1911, I did, on the ____ day of ________, 20___, cause the sidewalk, curb, or park or parking strip, bulkheads, retaining walls or other works (as the case may be) in front of the real property hereinafter described, to be repaired and improved, and the City Council of the City of Burlingame did, on the _____ day of ________, 20___, by Resolution No. ____ assess the cost of such repair upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the said City of Burlingame does hereby claim a lien on said real property in the sum of ________ DOLLARS ($______), and the same shall be a lien upon said real property, with interest at the rate of 7 percent per annum, from the said _____ day of ____________, 20___, has been paid in full and discharged of record. The real property hereinbefore mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain piece or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Burlingame, the County of San Mateo, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to wit:

 

(DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY)

Dated this ___ day of _________, 20____.

______________________

Director of Public Works

 

(Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.080 Effect of recordation of lien notice.
     (a)   From and after the date of the recording of the notice of lien, all persons shall be deemed to have had notice of the contents thereof. The notice of lien may include claims against one or more separate parcels of property, whether contiguous or not, together with the amount due, respectively, from each such parcel.

     (b)   The statute of limitations shall not run against the right of the city to enforce the payment of the lien.

     (c)   If any such lien is not paid, the city may file and maintain an action to foreclose such lien in the same manner and under the same procedure, so far as applicable, as that under which delinquent bonds are foreclosed under Division 6 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.090 Collection of lien with regular taxes.
     As an alternative method of collecting the amount of the lien, the city council, after confirmation of the report of the director of public works, may order the notice of lien to be delivered to the county auditor. The county auditor shall enter the amount thereof on the county assessment book opposite the description of the particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property. The notice of lien shall be delivered to the county auditor before the date fixed by law for the delivery of the assessment book to the county board of equalization. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.100 Time and manner of collection—Penalties—Foreclosure procedure.
     Thereafter, the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of city taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment taxes. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.110 Proof of service of notice.
     Proof of the posting or mailing of any notice, order, or determination provided for in this chapter may be made by the affidavit of the person posting or mailing such document annexed to a copy thereof. The affidavit shall specify the date when or at which the document was posted or mailed, as the case may be. The director of public works shall keep the affidavits of posting or mailing. No error in the name or address shall affect in any manner the validity of the procedure or any lien imposed hereunder. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

 

12.12.120 Legality of charge.
     No charge, or any act relating to such charge, or the collection of the same hereunder shall be illegal on account of informality or because the same was not completed within the time required by law. (Ord. 1858 § 2, (2010) ; Ord. 1949 § 1, (2018))

Chapter 12.16 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
12.16.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

     (a)   “Cable television company,” sometimes referred to as “cable communications company,” means a holder of a cable television franchise issued by the city.

     (b)   “Cable television underground facilities” means electronic cable and any appurtenances thereto which distribute CATV related signals, e.g., audio-visual, digital and voice.

     (c)   “City” means the city of Burlingame, a municipal corporation of the state of California.

     (d)   “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

     (e)   “Council” means the city council of the city of Burlingame.

     (f)    “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

     (g)   “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, cable antenna television or similar or associated service.

     (h)   “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.16.025 of this chapter.

     (i)    “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric communication, except for cable television (CATV) carried communications, or similar or associated service by means of electrical material or devices. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1180 § 1, (1980))

 

12.16.020 Public hearings by council.
     The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.025 Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution.
     If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation with a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.030 Unlawful acts.
     Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.16.025 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.16.060 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.035 Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without authority of the council, in order to provide emergency service. The city engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain and use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.040 Other exceptions.
     This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.025 hereof shall not, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, apply to the following types of facilities:

     (1)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     (2)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

     (3)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated structures are not prohibited;

     (4)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;

     (5)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location of the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

     (6)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

     (7)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

     (8)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in construction with construction projects. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.050 Notice to property owners and utility companies and CATV companies.
     Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.025 hereof, the city clerk shall notify all affected utility and CATV companies and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify the affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, CATV or similar or associated services, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such services from the lines of the supplying utility, utilities or CATV companies at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility, utilities or CATV companies on file with the commission or city.

     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.025, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities or CATV companies. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1180 § 2, (1980))

 

12.16.055 Responsibility of utility companies.
     If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.025, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.060 Responsibility of property owners.
     (a)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.16.055 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.025, the director of public works shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice.

     (b)   The notice to provide the required underground facility may be given either by personal service or by mail. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

     (c)   The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property.

     (d)   If upon the expiration of the thirty (30)-day period the required underground facilities have not been provided, the director of public works will forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communication services are being furnished thereto, the director of public works may, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility and/or CATV service to the property. Upon completion of the work, the director of public works shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten (10) working days thereafter.

     (e)   The city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

     (f)    Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

     (g)   If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after it is confirmed by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to file with the county controller a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid. The amount of the assessment shall be added to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) percent per year. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968); Ord. 1110 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1180 §§ 3, 4, (1980))

 

12.16.070 Responsibility of city.
     City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.025. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.075 New developments and subdivisions.
     (a)   For new developments and subdivisions the builder, developer or subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter, and he or she shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities, and the franchised CATV operators, for the underground installation and for relocation of any existing overhead facilities. The builder, developer or subdivider will be responsible for performing all trenching and backfilling, including furnishing of any imported backfill material required, for underground installation of distribution and service lateral conduit and substructures to receive utility and CATV services, and necessary installation of CATV vaults, pedestals and other appropriate appurtenances.

     (b)   The affected utility and CATV companies shall provide plans and specifications to the builder, developer or subdivider and shall inspect the facilities required hereunder, and certify to the city prior to final approval of the development or subdivision that the facilities required herein are properly installed. The city shall have the right to review and require its approval of the maps and specifications provided by the utility and CATV companies.

     (c)   The builder, developer or subdivider is expected to subcontract with the utility and CATV companies or other competent sources for prewiring of development or subdivision structures. (Ord. 1180 § 5, (1980))

 

12.16.076 Underground installation.
     In those areas and portions of the city heretofore designated by council as underground utility districts and where certain utility service transmission and/or distribution facilities are presently underground, other utility and CATV distribution and/or transmission facilities hereafter located in those areas and portions of the city will be installed underground. The utility or CATV company providing the required underground facilities shall be responsible for the performance of all necessary trenching and backfilling of main line and service trenches, including furnishing of any imported backfill material required. (Ord. 1180 § 6, (1980))

 

12.16.080 Extension of time.
     In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.025 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.085 Prior designation.
     The area particularly described as follows: California Drive from Burlingame Avenue to Peninsula Avenue, and Howard Avenue between California Drive and Lorton Avenue; previously designated an “Underground Utility District” by Ordinance 803, adopted April 20, 1964, is declared an “Underground Utility District” in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

 

12.16.090 Penalty for violation.
     It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 880 § 1, (1968))

Chapter 12.17 STREET NUMBERING AND RENAMING
12.17.010 System of building numbering established.
     A system for the numbering of buildings and structures in this city is established and shall be maintained in and for the city. (Ord. 907 § 1, (1970))

 

12.17.020 Starting points and base lines.
     The base line for all numbering shall be Barroilhet Avenue, Peninsula Avenue, Humboldt Avenue, the easterly leg of Airport Boulevard as it extends northerly, and an extension of a line northerly along Airport Boulevard to the city limit line. Numbering shall increase in a westerly and northerly direction from the base line. (Ord. 907 § 1, (1970))

 

12.17.030 Allocation of numbers.
     One hundred (100) numbers shall be allotted to each normal block and shall be evenly divided in units of street frontage. In the event that a street is not intersected at regular intervals by other streets and is not therefore a normal block, numbers shall be allotted in the same manner as if it were intersected at such regular intervals. Numbers on the right side of the street from the point of beginning shall be even numbers, and the numbers on the left side shall be odd numbers. (Ord. 907 § 1, (1970))

 

12.17.040 Maintenance of record maps by the city engineer.
     It shall be the duty of the city engineer to prepare and maintain a map or maps showing all premises, the fronts of all structures thereon and the entrances thereto required to be numbered, the number assigned to each entrance, and sufficient numbers to be reserved for lots or parcels not built upon. (Ord. 907 § 1, (1970))

 

12.17.050 Use and maintenance of numbers.
     (a)   No owner, tenant or occupant may place, maintain or allow to remain on a property any number other than such numbers as herein assigned and/or required, or permit any building or structure having an entrance from a public street to remain unnumbered. A street number shall be assigned and recorded by the city engineer before it may be used as the designation for a property.

     (b)   It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or occupant of any building or structure to place at each street entrance thereto the proper number for each entrance as assigned by the city engineer. Such number shall be so placed and shall be of such material, color and dimensions as to be readily observed and easily read from the street by persons approaching such entrance.

     (c)   No person shall paint or otherwise place address numbers upon streets, gutters or curbs without prior written approval of the owner of the property served by the number. Such written approval shall create no obligation to pay for such work unless specifically set forth therein. (Ord. 907 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1343 § 1, (1987))

 

12.17.060 Limitation on numbers.
     Only one number may be allotted to each single-family dwelling and one number to each dwelling unit in a duplex. Apartments and multiple dwellings shall be allotted one street number and may use any convenient internal numbering system. In commercial and industrial zones, numbers may be assigned each entrance facing on the street. (Ord. 907 § 1, 1970))

 

12.17.070 Changes from existing numbers.
     Whenever, by reason of new buildings being erected or new entrances being added to existing buildings, it becomes necessary to change allocated numbers on a block, the city engineer may request such change or changes. When such a change is proposed, the city engineer shall notify all property owners affected at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the proposed change. Comments of the building official and the fire chief shall be requested. If it appears that the change or changes are essential, the changed numbers shall be recorded on the map. The change may be effected at that time or at a future date to be determined. (Ord. 907 § 1, (1970))

 

12.17.080 Street name change procedure.
     When a request for a change in the name of a public street previously recorded is made by any city department or by a property owner, the request shall be referred to the city council which shall set the matter for public hearing. The request shall include a name or a choice of names proposed to be substituted for the existing name.

     Notification of the hearing shall be mailed by the city clerk to all property owners of record on the street. In addition, requests for comments shall be made to the planning commission, fire chief and postmaster, and any others whose advice is desired by the city council. The hearing shall be set for the second succeeding regular meeting.

     At that time, or at such further time to which the matter may be continued, the council shall make its decision and its decision shall be final. (Ord. 907 § 1, (1970))

 

12.17.085 Notification to board of supervisors.
     Any action taken by the city council to change the name of any public street shall be done by resolution. Upon adoption, a certified copy of any such resolution shall be forwarded to the board of supervisors of San Mateo county by the city clerk. (Ord. 907 § 1, (1970))

Chapter 12.20 PUBLIC TELEPHONES
12.20.010 Public telephones.
     The city manager is authorized to issue permits from time to time to the serving telephone company for the installation and maintenance of public telephones on the public sidewalks of the city of Burlingame. The city manager shall approve the number and location of such public telephones so as to best serve the public interest. Such permits shall include the following provisions:

     (a)   The permittee shall maintain the public telephones and any associated booths in good repair and safe and sightly condition at permittee’s expense and to the satisfaction of city manager;

     (b)   The permittee shall save the city of Burlingame harmless from any and all losses, claims or judgments for damages to any person or property arising from the installation or maintenance of the public telephones;

     (c)   The permit shall be revocable on thirty (30) days’ prior notice to the permittee from the city manager, in which event the permittee shall at its own expense remove the public telephone or telephones installed pursuant to the permit and shall restore the sidewalk as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such installation. (Ord. 905 § 2, (1970))

 

12.20.020 Insurance requirements.
     The city engineer may require any person applying for a building or encroachment permit to provide such liability insurance, guarantees, endorsements, bonds or other security, as may be appropriate to the permit. (Ord. 1337 § 1, (1987))

Chapter 12.22 PROHIBITED DISPLAYS IN PUBLICATIONS
12.22.010 Prohibited displays.
     No person shall sell, offer for sale or keep or maintain any publication in any newsrack on any public right-of-way in such a manner as to expose to the public view any of the following:

     (a)   Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

     (b)   Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

     (c)   Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.

     “Explicit sexual acts,” as used in this section, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulations, bestiality, sadism, masochism or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genital, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. (Ord. 1288 § 1, (1984))

Chapter 12.23 NEWSRACKS
12.23.010 Purpose—Scope.
     The purpose and scope of the regulations in this chapter are as follows:

     (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks located in public places within the city of Burlingame; provided, that certain provisions, as specified, shall apply only to newsracks located on public property.

     (b)   It is in the public interest to establish regulations that balance the right to distribute information through newsracks with the right of persons to reasonably access and use public property.

     (c)   The public health, safety, welfare and convenience require that: interference with vehicular, bicycle, wheelchair or pedestrian traffic be avoided; obstruction of sight distance and views of traffic signs and street-crossing pedestrians be eliminated; damage done to sidewalks or streets be minimized and repaired; the good appearance of public property be maintained; trees and other landscaping be allowed to grow without disturbance; access to emergency and other public facilities be maintained; and ingress and egress from, and the enjoyment of store window displays on, properties adjoining public property be protected.

     (d)   Newsracks placed and maintained on public property, absent some reasonable regulation, may unreasonably interfere with the use of such property, and may present hazards to persons or property.

     (e)   The regulations on the time, place and manner of the placement, location and maintenance of newsracks set forth in this chapter are carefully tailored to ensure that the purposes stated in this section are implemented while still providing ample opportunities for the distribution of news to the public. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be given the meaning set out in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

     (a)   “Abandoned newsrack” means any newsrack which remains empty for ten (10) business days; provided, that a newsrack remaining empty due to labor strike or any temporary and extraordinary interruption of distribution or publication by the newspaper or other publication sold or distributed from that newsrack shall not be deemed abandoned.

     (b)   “Director of public works” means the director of public works or designee.

     (c)   “Harmful matter” means and is defined as in California Penal Code Section 313, as may from time to time be amended.

     (d)   “Minor” means any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age.

     (e)   “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale or distribution of newspapers, periodicals or other publications.

     (f)    “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity.

     (g)   “Public place(s)” means and includes any public property owned or controlled by the city of Burlingame or any other public agency, or any outdoor private property which is open to the public.

     (h)   “Public property” means any public right-of-way or any property owned or controlled by the city of Burlingame, including, without limitation, streets, sidewalks, alleys, and rights-of-way.

     (i)    “Special newsrack area” means any area of the city of Burlingame so designated by the city council upon findings that the special circumstances of the area require special design, placement and other standards for newsracks.

     (j)    “Special newsrack container” means a specially designed permanently affixed container provided by the vendor, within which shall be the exclusive location for the placement of newsracks in a special newsrack area. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.030 Permit required.
     It is unlawful to install, place, maintain or cause to be placed, installed or maintained a newsrack on, or projecting on, any public property without first receiving a permit therefor from the director of public works and unless such newsrack is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that, except for newsracks proposed to be located within a special newsrack area, a newsrack located on public property as of November 7, 2013 may continue to remain in such location, under the following conditions:

     (a)   The newsrack is in compliance with the requirements for the installation and maintenance of newsracks contained in this chapter; and

     (b)   A permit application for such newsrack has been filed as of that date with the director of public works by the duly authorized representative of both the publisher and, if applicable, any independent distributor authorized to service the publisher’s newsrack; and

     (c)   A permit pursuant to such application has not been denied with respect to any such newsrack.

     If no permit application has been filed by that date by the duly authorized representative of both the publisher and, if applicable, any independent distributor authorized to service the publisher’s newsrack, or such permit is denied, such newsrack shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Holders of permits for existing newsracks shall be required to re-register such newsracks with the city by July 1, 2014, and each year thereafter, on a form provided by the city. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.040 Obtaining a permit.
     (a)   Exclusive Requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive requirements for newsrack encroachments onto public property in the city.

     (b)   Application. Application for a newsrack permit for each location sought shall be submitted to the director of public works on a form prescribed by the director of public works, which shall include, without limitation:

     (1)   The name, street and mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant, which shall be the duly authorized representative of both the publisher and, if applicable, any independent distributor authorized to service the publisher’s newsrack for which the permit is sought;

     (2)   The name, street and mailing address and telephone number of the distributor or other responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant’s newsrack(s);

     (3)   A description of the exact proposed location (including a map or site plan, drawn to scale, with adequate locational information to verify conformance with this chapter) and the proposed means of affixing the proposed newsrack;

     (4)   A description of the proposed newsrack, including its dimensions, the number of publication spaces it will contain, and whether it contains a coin-operated mechanism;

     (5)   The name and frequency of publication of each publication proposed to be contained in the newsrack;

     (6)   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless, the city and its representatives from all claims, demands, loss, fines or liability to the extent arising out of or in connection with the installation, use or maintenance of any newsrack on public property by or on behalf of any such person, except such injury or harm as may be caused solely and exclusively by the negligence of the city or its authorized representatives; and

     (7)   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees, upon removal of a newsrack, to repair any damage to the public property caused by the newsrack or its removal.

     (c)   Issuance of Permit. A permit shall be issued within fifteen (15) working days from the date of filing the application with the director of public works if the application is properly completed and the type of newsrack and location proposed for each newsrack meet the standards set forth in this chapter. A single permit shall be issued for each newsrack location applied for by an applicant which meet the standards of this chapter. An applicant may submit more than one application, in order to apply for additional locations. A permit shall not be transferable.

     (d)   Period of Permit Validity. Permits shall remain valid if re-registered with the city by June 30th of each year, on a form provided by the director of public works. Failing to re-register or explicit cancellation by a permit holder will void the permit and it will be ineffective thereafter. Unregistered newsracks may be treated as abandoned under Section 12.23.130 or other applicable enforcement mechanism.

     (e)   Issuance of Permit Sticker. Each permittee shall be issued a pre-printed sticker for each permitted newsrack, which shall be affixed to the lower right corner of the front of each newsrack.

     (f)    Denial of Permit. If a newsrack permit is disapproved, in whole or in part, the director of public works shall notify the applicant within fifteen (15) working days from the date of filing a complete application with the director of public works, explaining the reasons for the denial of the permit. The applicant shall have ten (10) calendar days within which to appeal the decision to the city manager in accordance with the appeal provisions set forth in subsection (g) of this section.

     (g)   Appeal of Permit Denial. After receiving a notice of appeal, the city manager or the designee of the city manager shall conduct a hearing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the applicant’s appeal, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant, and shall be posted in the official posting locations of the city. The hearing shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. The city manager or designee shall render a written decision within twenty (20) days after the date of the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be final.

     (h)   Amendment to Permit. In the event of a change in any of the information contained in the application, the permittee shall submit such change in writing to the director of public works. A permittee may install and maintain additional newsracks by an amendment to the permit. The rules and procedures of this section shall also apply to the review and approval of any such amendment. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.050 Standards for maintenance and display of newsracks.
     (a)   Every person placing or maintaining a newsrack on public property shall comply with the following requirements:

     (1)   Every newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition, and in good repair at all times. For example, without limitation, every newsrack shall be reasonably free of dirt and grease, be reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling or cracked paint, be reasonably free of rust and corrosion, have no broken or cracked plastic or glass parts, and have no broken structural parts.

     (2)   Every newsrack shall be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and secure condition.

     (3)   Every newsrack shall be made of solid material on all sides, so as to contain the material inside the newsrack in a manner as to prevent it from blowing away or otherwise becoming litter. No wire or other open form of newsrack shall be permitted.

     (4)   Every newsrack shall be kept free of graffiti.

     (5)   Every newsrack that sits on legs shall be kept free of dirt and litter under the newsrack.

     (6)   Every newsrack shall be painted or covered with a protective coating, so as to keep it free from rust, and shall be cleaned and repainted on a regular basis.

     (7)   Every coin-operated newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return device that is maintained in good repair and working order.

     (8)   Every coin-operated newsrack shall display information on how to secure a refund in the event of coin return malfunction. Such information shall be placed in a visible location on the front or top of the newsrack, and shall be legible.

     (9)   Other than the display of the publication contained therein, no newsrack shall display or be affixed with any words or pictures except for the identifying information, and the coin return information, if applicable, required by subsection (e) of Section 12.23.040 and subsections (a)(8) and (b), respectfully, of this section; provided that, except as provided in Section 12.23.080 (Special newsrack areas), each side of a newsrack may display, in characters no more than four (4) inches high, the name and/or logo of the publication contained in the newsrack, and the front of each newsrack may be affixed with a single sign or decal, no larger than three (3) inches by ten (10) inches, containing only information relating to the display, sale or distribution of the publication contained in the newsrack. If the newsrack contains a built-in sign holder, the newsrack may be affixed with a sign that fits within that holder, not to exceed eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches.

     (10) Old or out-of-date material removed from any newsrack by any person who owns, maintains, or stocks the newsrack shall be recycled or disposed of in a lawful manner. Such material shall not be disposed of in any trash receptacle owned or rented by others, without the express written consent of the owner or renter of such receptacle. Such material shall be disposed of in a manner that does not cause the material to become litter.

     (b)   Every newsrack located in a public place shall be affixed with identifying information, which shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the newsrack owner and of the distributor of the publication(s) contained therein. Such information shall be placed in a visible location on the front or top of the newsrack, and shall be legible. The size of the identifying information shall be no larger than three (3) inches by five (5) inches. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.060 Size and design standards.
     Except as provided in Section 12.23.080 (Special newsrack areas), no newsrack shall be placed, installed or maintained on any public property except in compliance with the following standards:

     (a)   No newsrack shall be more than fifty (50) inches high (including the pedestal in the case of modular newsracks) measured from the ground to the top surface of the newsrack, nor more than two (2) feet deep, nor more than twenty-four (24) inches wide.

     (b)   The highest operable part of the coin slot, if provided, and all controls, dispensers and other operable components of a newsrack shall be no higher than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground, and no lower than fifteen (15) inches above the ground.

     (c)   The design of a newsrack shall not create a danger to the persons using the newsrack in a reasonably foreseeable manner. All newsracks shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations including, without limitation, the Americans with Disabilities Act and other laws and regulations relating to barrier-free design. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.070 Standards for placement and location of newsracks.
     (a)   Except as otherwise set forth in Section 12.23.080 (Special newsrack areas), no newsrack shall be placed, installed or maintained on any public property when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property. No newsrack shall be placed, installed or maintained on any public property except in compliance with the following standards:

     (1)   Newsracks shall be placed only on a sidewalk, in one of the following locations:

     (A)  Near a curb, in which case, the back of the newsrack shall be placed no less than eighteen (18) inches (twelve (12) inches along El Camino Real) nor more than twenty-four (24) inches from the face of the curb; or

     (B)   Adjacent to the wall of a building, in which case, the back of the newsrack shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six (6) inches from the wall.

     (2)   Every newsrack shall be placed so as to open toward the sidewalk.

     (3)   Every newsrack shall be affixed to the sidewalk or to another newsrack, in a manner approved by the permit therefor; provided, no newsrack shall be chained to another newsrack. Newsracks shall not be chained or otherwise attached to any bus shelter, bench, street light, utility pole or device or sign pole, or to any tree, shrub or other plant, nor situated upon any landscaped area.

     (4)   No newsrack shall be placed, installed or maintained:

     (A)  Within ten (10) feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk as measured from the curb return;

     (B)   Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, call box, or other emergency facility; bus bench; or utility pole or box;

     (C)   At any location where the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet (five (5) feet along El Camino Real);

     (D)  Within five (5) feet of any driveway;

     (E)   Within five (5) feet of any red curb of a bus stop zone;

     (F)   Within five (5) feet of the curb return of any wheelchair curb ramp not in a marked crosswalk;

     (G)  In such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of any commercial window display or access to or from any building;

     (H)  In such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of any bicycle rack;

     (I)    In such a manner as to block or cover any portion of an underground utility vault, manhole, or other sidewalk underground access location.

     (5)   Any newsrack placed on El Camino Real must be approved by CalTrans in addition to the approvals required under this section, unless CalTrans waives such approval right.

     (b)   Newsracks may be placed or joined together; however, no group of newsracks placed along a curb shall extend for a distance of more than ten (10) feet (i.e., the combined width of five (5) newsracks); and no group of newsracks shall be closer than four (4) feet to another group of newsracks along a curb.

     (c)   The director of public works may allow a permittee to place a newsrack in a location in variance of the standards otherwise required by this section if the director of public works finds that such variance will not be detrimental to the public safety and that, due to the existing physical constraints at that location, imposition of the standards would make placement impossible and would cause a hardship to the permittee and its patrons. The written findings and the variance shall be made part of the permit. Prior to considering whether or not to grant a variance, the director of public works shall provide written notice of the requested variance to the owner(s) of the real property adjacent to or abutting the proposed newsrack location.

     (d)   If sufficient space does not exist to accommodate all newsracks sought to be placed at one location without violating the standards set forth in this chapter, the director of public works shall give priority as to that location to publications on a historical “first come first served” basis to permit applicants as follows:

     (1)   First priority shall be publications that are published two (2) or more times a week;

     (2)   Second priority shall be given to publications that are published once per week;

     (3)   Third priority shall be given to publications that are published less than once per week but more than once per month;

     (4)   Fourth priority shall be given to publications that are published monthly or less frequently than monthly.

     In the event the director of public works is required to utilize the priority system described in subsections (d)(1) through (4), he or she shall permit only one rack per publication or distributor in a single location.

     (e)   The provisions of this section shall apply as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to new installations or applications. These provisions shall not require removal or modification of permitted, existing newsracks in existence prior to November 7, 2013, until June 30, 2015. At such time, any pre-existing newsracks or publication placements within them must be brought into compliance with this section in order to continue as a valid, permitted newsrack within the city. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.080 Special newsrack areas.
     (a)   The city council hereby finds that special circumstances require special design, placement and other standards for newsracks located in the certain areas of the city and such areas are hereby designated as “special newsrack areas.” Newsracks and publication placements therein existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are allowed to remain in their current configuration. When a publication or distributor controlling such existing newsracks seeks to substantially change or modify such newsracks or submit a new application in connection with them, the existing newsracks must be brought into compliance with this section. Regardless of the preceding, all existing newsracks within the designated special newsrack areas must be brought into compliance with the requirements of this section by July 1, 2020. The following areas are hereby designated as special newsrack areas:

     (1)   The Burlingame Avenue Downtown Commercial Area and the Broadway Commercial Area.

     (A)  The city council hereby designates the “Burlingame Avenue Downtown Commercial Area,” bounded by and including both sides of the following streets: California Drive to El Camino Real and Howard Avenue to Chapin Avenue between El Camino Real and Primrose Road and Bellevue Avenue between Primrose Road and California Drive, inclusive of that portion of Primrose Road running between Chapin Avenue and Bellevue Avenue, as a special newsrack area. The city council hereby designates the “Broadway Commercial Area,” including both sides of the following streets: Broadway between California Drive and El Camino Real and California Drive from Lincoln Avenue to Carmelita Avenue, as a special newsrack area.

     (B)   The council finds that the Burlingame Avenue Downtown Commercial Area and the Broadway Commercial Area have become very congested, with street furniture and other sidewalk encroachments, automobiles and other means of travel competing with pedestrians for the public space; and that special standards for the design and location of newsracks, in conjunction with a program for the furnishing and installation of street furniture, and the enforcement of existing regulations for other encroachments in these commercial areas, will help to create a sense of order out of chaos and provide a friendly environment for those who come to the area.

     (b)   Notwithstanding any contrary provisions in this chapter, the following special standards shall apply to newsracks and the placement of publications in newsracks within any special newsrack area so designated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section:

     (1)   No newsrack shall be located in a special newsrack area except within a special newsrack container. All newsracks in a special newsrack container shall meet the following specifications:

     (A)  Every newsrack shall be a modular design, 49-16 or TK-97 style (as manufactured by “Sho-Rack”) or the equivalent, as determined by the director of public works.

     (B)   All newsracks installed in a designated special newsrack area shall be black in the Burlingame Avenue Downtown Commercial Area and green in the Broadway Commercial Area.

     (C)   The name and/or logo otherwise permitted pursuant to subsection (a)(9) of Section 12.23.050 may be placed only on the front face of the box, inclusive of the window area, and shall be limited to the dimension of three (3) inches vertically by ten (10) inches horizontally.

     (D)  Permittees of double high racks may be required to provide devices commonly known as “spacers” for the newsracks adjacent to each double high rack, to ensure that all newsracks in a single location group of racks are the same height. Permittees who use newsracks of a brand other than Sho-Rack may be required to furnish spacers to achieve height uniformity.

     (2)   Placement of Newsracks Within a Special Newsrack Area. No newsrack shall be located in a special newsrack area unless a permit has been obtained in accordance with this section and with Sections 12.23.040 and 12.23.070. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.090 Blinder racks required.
     (a)   Newsracks located in public places, other than public places from which minors are excluded, and which display to the public view harmful matter, shall be equipped with devices commonly known as blinder racks in front of the material so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to public view.

     (b)   Newsracks located in public places, other than public places from which minors are excluded, and which display to the public view material depicting or describing specified sexual activities, as defined in subdivision (1) of this subsection, or which contain material depicting or describing specified anatomical areas, as defined in subdivision (2) of this subsection, where such picture, or illustration, or statement has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront, shall be equipped with blinder racks in front of the material so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to public view.

     (1)   “Specified sexual activities” means:

     (A)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;

     (B)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or

     (C)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.

     (2)   “Specified anatomical areas” means:

     (A)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast at or below the areola thereof; or

     (B)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.100 Violation—Enforcement.
     (a)   It shall be illegal to place, install, or maintain any newsrack or any material in a newsrack in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter.

     (b)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code.

     (c)   The provisions contained in this chapter shall be subject to the code enforcement authority of the city as provided in Title 1 of this code. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.110 Nuisance.
     Any newsrack or any material in a newsrack placed, installed or maintained in violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.120 Removal and hearing.
     In addition to the enforcement remedies available to the city, which are set forth in Title 1 and in Sections 12.23.100 and 12.23.110 of this chapter, any newsrack placed, installed or maintained in violation of this chapter may be removed by the city, subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in this section.

     (a)   Notice of Violation. Before removal of any newsrack, the city shall notify the owner or distributor of the violation. Written notification by first class mail to the address or addresses shown on the offending newsrack shall constitute adequate notice. The city may, but need not, affix an additional notice tag onto the offending newsrack. If no identification is shown on the newsrack, posting of the notice on the newsrack alone shall be sufficient. The notice shall state the nature of the violation, shall specify actions necessary to correct the violation, and shall give the owner or distributor ten (10) business days from the date appearing on the notice to either remedy the violation or to request a meeting before the community development director or designee of the community development director. The date on the notice shall be no earlier than the date on which the notice is mailed or affixed to the newsrack, as the case may be.

     (b)   Meeting and Decision. Any owner or distributor notified under subsection (a) may request meeting with the community development director or designee by making a written request therefor within ten (10) business days from the date appearing on the notice. The meeting shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. The community development director or designee shall give his or her decision within ten (10) business days after the date of the meeting. Any action by the city to remove the newsrack shall be stayed pending the written decision of the community development director or designee following the meeting.

     (c)   Removal and Impoundment. The city may remove and impound a newsrack or newsracks in accordance with this section following the written decision of the community development director or designee upholding the determination of a violation, or if the owner or distributor has neither requested a meeting nor remedied the violation within ten (10) business days from the date on the notice. An impounded newsrack shall be retained by the city for a period of at least ninety (90) calendar days following the removal, and may be recovered by the permittee upon payment of a fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule. An impounded newsrack and its contents may be disposed of by the city after ninety (90) calendar days.

     (d)   Summary Abatement. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b), prior notice and an opportunity to be heard shall not be required prior to removal of any newsrack that is installed or maintained in such a place or manner as to pose an immediate or clear and present danger to persons, vehicles or property or any newsrack that is placed in any location without a permit. In such case, the city shall proceed in the following manner:

     (1)   Within the next working day following removal, the city shall notify by telephone the permittee or, in the case of an unpermitted newsrack, the owner of the newsrack or a person whose name is shown on the required identification. Within three (3) business days, the city shall send written confirmation of the telephoned notice. The written confirmation shall contain the reasons for the removal and information supporting the removal, and shall inform the recipient of the right to request, in writing or in person, a post-removal meeting within four (4) business days of the date of such written notice and the person to whom such request shall be made.

     (2)   Upon timely request, the city shall provide a meeting within forty-eight (48) hours of the request, unless the requesting party agrees to a later date. The proceeding shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. The city designee hearing the matter shall give his or her decision in writing to the requesting party within forty-eight (48) hours after such meeting. If the city hearing officer finds that the removal was proper, he or she shall notify the requesting party to pay any applicable penalties and costs and recover the newsrack. If the city hearing officer finds that the removal was improper and that placement of the newsrack was lawful, he or she shall order that the newsrack be released and reinstalled without charge.

     (3)   If the owner of an unpermitted rack cannot be determined and the rack does not contain the required identification, no notice of the removal shall be required. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

 

12.23.130 Abandoned newsracks.
     An abandoned newsrack may be removed by the city and impounded, pursuant to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in Section 12.23.120. The city may dispose of the newsrack if the permittee does not claim the newsrack and pay any required fees within ninety (90) days of its removal. (Ord. 1887 § 1, (2013))

Title 13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 13.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 13.08 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Chapter 13.12 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
Chapter 13.16 DRIVING RULES
Chapter 13.18 PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
Chapter 13.20 INTERSECTION STOPS, THROUGH HIGHWAYS AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS
Chapter 13.24 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 13.28 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
Chapter 13.32 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 13.36 PARKING LIMITATIONS
Chapter 13.38 STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING
Chapter 13.40 PARKING METERS
Chapter 13.44 DRIVING OR PARKING ON PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT
Chapter 13.48 TRAINS BLOCKING STREETS
Chapter 13.52 BICYCLES
Chapter 13.54 SKATEBOARD, ROLLER BLADES, IN LINE SKATES, ROLLER SKATES AND COASTERS
Chapter 13.60 TRUCK TRAFFIC
Chapter 13.62 INTERSTATE TRUCKS
Chapter 13.65 ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Chapter 13.70 REGULATION OF VEHICULAR TRAFFIC ON PRIVATE ROADS
Chapter 13.75 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT

Chapter 13.04 DEFINITIONS
13.04.010 Definitions of words and phrases.
     The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.020 Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be used.
     Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.030 Central traffic district.
     “Central traffic district” includes all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows:

     (1)   Burlingame Avenue Central District.

     Burlingame Avenue from El Camino Real to California Drive;

     Chapin Avenue from El Camino Real to Primrose Road;

     Donnelly Avenue;

     Howard Avenue from El Camino Real to West Lane;

     South Lane;

     Primrose Road from Bellevue Avenue to two hundred fifty (250) feet easterly of Howard Avenue;

     Park Road from Burlingame Avenue to three hundred fifty (350) feet easterly of Howard Avenue;

     Lorton Avenue from Bellevue Avenue to one hundred feet (100) easterly of Howard Avenue;

     Highland Avenue from California Drive to one hundred five (105) feet easterly of Howard Avenue;

     California Drive from one hundred (100) feet westerly of Bellevue Avenue to three hundred twenty-six (326) feet easterly of Howard Avenue;

     West Lane.

     (2)   All of Broadway between the most northeasterly right-of-way line of El Camino Real and the most northeasterly line of Rollins Road; and all those portions of Capuchino Avenue, Paloma Avenue, Laguna Avenue, Chula Vista Avenue, Carolan Avenue and Rollins Road within two hundred (200) feet of the centerline of Broadway. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.040 Coach.
     “Coach” means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. (Ord 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.050 Commercial, business or residence districts.
     “Commercial, business or residence districts” includes those certain districts, zones of the city as defined and delimited in Title 25 of this code. Business district shall include commercial district. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.060 Council.
     “Council” means the city council of the city of Burlingame. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.070 Curb.
     “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked as curbing, construction or not so marked; the word “curb” as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.080 Divisional island.
     “Divisional island” means a delineated or raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.085 Dump truck.
     “Dump truck” means a motor vehicle which has been altered or designed and equipped for transporting and dumping loose materials. (Ord. 1425 § 1, (1990))

 

13.04.090 Freight.
     “Freight” means property, goods or merchandise carried for hire or picked up or delivered as a part of the commercial use of a vehicle by the owner or operator thereof. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.100 Holidays.
     For purposes of this title, “holidays” are:

     (a)   January 1;

     (b)   The third Monday in January;

     (c)   The third Monday in February;

     (d)   The last Monday in May;

     (e)   July 4;

     (f)    The first Monday in September;

     (g)   The second Monday in October;

     (h)   November 11;

     (i)    The fourth Thursday in November; and

     (j)    December 25.

     Whenever a holiday defined above falls on a Sunday, the Monday following is also a holiday. Whenever a holiday defined above falls on a Saturday, the Friday preceding is also a holiday. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978); Ord. 1430 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1640 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1794 § 2, (2006))

 

13.04.110 Loading zone.
     “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or freight. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.120 Official time standard.
     Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.125 Parking lots or facilities, city, municipal or public
     “City parking lot,” “city parking facility,” “municipal parking lot,” “municipal parking facility,” “public parking lot,” or “public parking facility” means an off-street area or structure that is owned, leased by, operated by, or operated on behalf of the city for the purpose of parking by the general public, with or without compensation. A parking lot or parking facility in the city that is controlled by a public agency other than the city shall be treated as a private off-street parking facility under this title. (Ord. 1688 § 2, (2002))

 

13.04.130 Parking meter.
     “Parking meter” means a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb, sidewalk or pavement immediately adjacent to a parking space for the purpose of controlling the period of time of occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. (Ord. 1136 §1, (1978))

 

13.04.140 Passenger loading zone.
     “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.150 Police officer.
     “Police officer” means every member of the police department of this city, or any person authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrest for violations of traffic regulations. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.160 Stop.
     “Stop” means complete cessation of movement. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

 

13.04.165 Tow truck.
     “Tow truck” means a tow car as defined by Section 615 of the Vehicle Code, and shall include an automobile dismantlers’ tow vehicle. (Ord. 1425 § 2, (1990))

 

13.04.170 Vehicle Code.
     “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Ord. 1136 § 1, (1978))

Chapter 13.08 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
13.08.010 Authority of police and fire department officials.
     Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978))

 

13.08.015 Authority of parking enforcement officers.
     Parking enforcement officers and such other persons as may be authorized by the chief of police, including employees of other public agencies, shall have the authority to issue notices to appear for the violation of any section of this title or the Vehicle Code governing the standing or parking of vehicles. (Ord. 1142 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1532 § 1, (1995))

 

13.08.020 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
     No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city engineer. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978))

 

13.08.030 Obedience to police or authorized officers.
     No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978))

 

13.08.040 Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles or animals.
     Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978))

 

13.08.050 Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.
     No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officers or other officers or employees of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing marks used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978))

 

13.08.060 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
     The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state or any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978))

 

13.08.070 Exemption of certain vehicles.
     (a)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

     (b)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his or her willful disregard of the safety of others.

     (c)   The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily engaged in city business or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Postal Service while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978))

 

13.08.080 Report of damage to certain property.
     (a)   The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city.

     (b)   Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning, and of the person operating or in charge of, such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

     (c)   The operator of any vehicle or person in charge of any animal involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he or she is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he or she shall make a report as required in subdivision (a) within twenty-four (24) hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978))

 

13.08.090 When vehicles may be removed from streets and public parking lots or facilities.
     Any police officer may remove or cause to be removed:

     (a)   Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street, highway, or public parking lot or facility for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours;

     (b)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street, highway, or public parking lot or facility when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city or upon any designated fire lane and signs are posted giving notice of such removal. Signs upon fire lanes on private property shall be prepared and posted at the owner’s expense;

     (c)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street, highway, or public parking lot or facility where the use of such street, highway, or public parking lot or facility or a portion thereof is necessary for cleaning, repair or construction of the street, highway, or public parking lot or facility, or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicles would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement, provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. (Ord. 1136 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1268 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1688 § 3, (2002))

 

13.08.100 Authority of police in crowds.
     At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have gathered, nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent any police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or sidewalk, and said police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of vehicles in any

Chapter 13.12 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
13.12.010 Authority to install traffic-control devices, signs and markings.
     (a)   The city engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices, signs and markings when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title. He or she shall also install and maintain traffic signals as directed by the council.

     (b)   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the city engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

     (c)   The city engineer may also place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, such additional traffic-control devices, signs and markings as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. He or she shall be custodian of all records regarding traffic-control, including special surveys. (Ord. 1136 § 3, (1978))

 

13.12.020 Traffic-control signs required for enforcement purposes.
     No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 1136 § 3, (1978))

 

13.12.030 Obedience to traffic-control devices, signs and markings.
     The operator of any vehicle shall obey authorized signs, markings and traffic-control devices placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 1136 § 3, (1978))

 

13.12.040 Traffic-control devices—Hours of operation.
     The city engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Ord. 1136 § 3, (1978))

 

13.12.050 Unauthorized painting of curbs.
     No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface. (Ord. 1136 § 3, (1978))

Chapter 13.16 DRIVING RULES
13.16.010 Authority to place restricted turn signals.
     The city engineer is authorized to determine intersections, driveways, and other entrances to streets at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall cause to be placed proper signs at such intersections, driveways, or other entrances. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs may be removed during the hours when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978); Ord. 1680 § 2, (2002))

 

13.16.020 Signal controlled intersections—Right turns.
     (a)   No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section.

     (b)   The city engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he or she determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.030 Driving through funeral procession.
     No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.040 Clinging to moving vehicle.
     No person shall attach himself or herself with his or her hands, or catch on, or hold on to with his or her hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.050 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
     No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.060 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
     No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk, excepting over permanently constructed driveways; when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk, written permission shall be previously obtained from the city engineer. Any protective device required by the city engineer shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.070 New pavement and markings.
     No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.080 Obedience to barriers and signs.
     No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed upon any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.090 No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.
     No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.100 Advertising vehicles.
     No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used primarily for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with sound amplifying or loud speaking device upon any street or alley at any times unless with the permission of the city council. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.110 Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
     The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Ord. 1136 § 4, (1978))

 

13.16.120 U-turn restrictions.
     No vehicle in the central traffic district shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction except at intersections; provided, however, that no such turn, or U-turn, shall be made at the intersection of the following streets:

     (a)   Burlingame Avenue and Primrose Road;

     (b)   Burlingame Avenue and Park Road;

     (c)   Burlingame Avenue and Lorton Avenue;

     (d)   Burlingame Avenue and California Drive;

     (e)   Broadway and Capuchino Avenue;

     (f)    Broadway and Paloma Avenue;

     (g)   Broadway and Laguna Avenue. (Ord. 1142 § 2, (1979))

 

13.16.125 Turns into parking spaces.
     No vehicle traveling on a two-way street in the central traffic district shall be turned or operated so as to enter a parking space upon the side of the street opposite from the vehicle’s original direction of travel. (Ord. 1342 § 1, (1987))

 

13.16.130 Excessive acceleration of motor vehicles.
     No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle within the city to so accelerate the same as to cause audible noise by tire friction on pavement or to cause the tires of said vehicle to leave skid marks upon the pavement, except when such acceleration is reasonably necessary to avoid a collision. (Ord. 1207 § 1, (1981))

Chapter 13.18 PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
13.18.010 City engineer to establish marked crosswalks.
     (a)   The city engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway at intersections, and at other locations, subject to the limitations contained in subsection (b) of this section, where he or she determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway.

     (b)   Crosswalks may be established within any block which is more than four (400) hundred feet in length. Such a crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable to midblock.

     (c)   The city engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any unmarked crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 1136 § 5, (1978))

 

13.18.020 When pedestrians must use crosswalks.
     No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in a central traffic district or in any business district. (Ord. 1136 § 5, (1978))

 

13.18.030 Pedestrians to obey special pedestrian traffic signals.
     Pedestrians shall obey the indication of special traffic signals installed for pedestrians only and shall disregard the indication of a vehicular traffic signal at any location where special pedestrian traffic signals are in place. (Ord. 1136 § 5, (1978))

Chapter 13.20 INTERSECTION STOPS, THROUGH HIGHWAYS AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS
13.20.010 Stop intersections.
     The operator of any vehicle entering any of the following designated intersections shall bring the vehicle being driven to a full stop:

     (a)   Adeline Drive approaching Alvarado Avenue;

             Adeline Drive approaching Balboa Avenue;

             Adeline Drive approaching Bernal Avenue;

             Adeline Drive approaching Cabrillo Avenue;

             Adeline Drive approaching Columbus Avenue;

             Adeline Drive approaching Poppy Drive;

             Adrian Court approaching Adrian Road;

             Albermarle Way approaching Ray Drive;

             Alturas Drive approaching Hillside Drive;

             Alvarado Avenue approaching Hillside Drive, while travelling south (northern end);

             Alvarado Avenue approaching Hillside Drive, while travelling south (southern end);

             Anita Road approaching Bayswater Avenue;

             Anita Road approaching Howard Avenue;

             Arguello Drive approaching Sebastian Drive;

             Arguello Drive approaching Toledo Avenue;

             Arundel Road approaching Bayswater Avenue;

             Arundel Road approaching Howard Avenue;

             South Ashton Drive approaching Trousdale Drive;

             Atwater Drive approaching Hunt Drive.

     (b)   Balboa Drive approaching Davis Drive;

             Balboa Way approaching Ray Drive;

             Barroilhet Avenue approaching Cypress Avenue;

             Bayswater Avenue approaching Anita Road;

             Bayswater Avenue approaching Arundel Road;

             Bayswater Avenue approaching Bloomfield Road;

             Bayswater Avenue approaching Dwight Road;

             Bayswater Avenue approaching Humboldt Road;

             Bayswater Avenue approaching Lorton Avenue;

             Bayswater Avenue approaching Park Road;

             Bellevue Avenue approaching Lorton Avenue;

             Bellevue Avenue approaching Primrose Road, including City Hall Circle;

             Bernal Drive approaching Devereux Drive;

             Bloomfield Road approaching Bayswater Avenue;

             Broadway approaching Vancouver Avenue;

             Broadway Avenue approaching Cortez;

             Burlingame Avenue approaching Anita Road;

             Burlingame Avenue approaching Bloomfield Road;

             Burlingame Avenue approaching Carolan Avenue and East Lane;

             Burlingame Avenue approaching Dwight Road;

             Burlingame Avenue approaching Lorton Avenue;

             Burlingame Avenue approaching Park Road.

     (c)   Carmelita Avenue approaching Cortez Avenue;

             Carmelita Avenue approaching Vancouver Avenue;

             Canyon Road approaching Easton Drive;

             Carolan Avenue approaching North Lane;

             Castenada Drive approaching Trousdale Drive and Martinez Drive;

             Chula Vista Avenue approaching Majilla Avenue;

             Clarice Lane approaching Quesada Way;

             Columbus Avenue approaching Easton Drive;

             Coronado Drive approaching Davis Drive;

             Cortez Avenue approaching Carmelita Avenue;

             Cortez Avenue approaching Hillside Drive;

             Cortez Avenue approaching Sherman Avenue;

             Cypress Avenue approaching Barriolhet Avenue.

     (d)   Davis Drive approaching Quesada Drive;

             Devereux Drive approaching Balboa Way;

             Douglas Avenue approaching Lorton Avenue;

             Douglas Avenue approaching Primrose Road.

     (e)   East Lane approaching Burlingame Avenue and Carolan Avenue while traveling west;

             East Lane approaching North Lane;

             Easton Drive approaching Canyon Road;

             Easton Drive approaching Cabrillo Avenue;

             Easton Drive approaching Columbus Avenue;

             Easton Drive approaching Cortez Avenue;

             Easton Drive approaching Montero Avenue;

             Easton Drive approaching Vancouver Avenue;

             Edgehill Drive approaching Paloma Drive;

             El Prado Road approaching Canyon Road;

             El Prado Road approaching Summit Drive;

             Escalante Drive approaching Rivera Drive.

     (f)    Fairfield Road approaching Edgehill Drive;

             Fairfield Road approaching Palm Drive;

             East Frontage Road of El Camino Real approaching Murchison Drive;

             East Frontage Road of El Camino Real approaching Trousdale Drive;

             West Frontage Road of El Camino Real approaching Murchison Drive;

             West Frontage Road of El Camino Real approaching Trousdale Drive;

             Frontera Way approaching Sebastian Drive;

             Frontera Way approaching Loyola Drive.

     (g)   [Reserved for future use].

     (h)   Hale Drive approaching Columbus Avenue;

             Highway Road approaching Mills Avenue;

             Highway Road approaching Oxford Road/Cambridge Road;

             Hillside Circle approaching Hillside Drive;

             Hillside Drive approaching Vancouver Avenue;

             Hillside Drive approaching Alvarado Avenue, while travelling west;

             Hillside Drive departing Alvarado Avenue, while travelling west;

             Hillside Drive approaching Cortez Avenue;

             Hillside Drive approaching Skyline Boulevard;

             Hillside Lane approaching Skyline Boulevard;

             Hinckley Road approaching Gilbreth Road;

             Howard Avenue approaching Anita Road;

             Howard Avenue approaching Arundel Avenue;

             Howard Avenue approaching Dwight Road;

             Howard Avenue approaching Humboldt Street;

             Howard Avenue approaching Lorton Avenue;

             Howard Avenue approaching Occidental Avenue;

             Howard Avenue approaching Primrose Road;

             Humboldt Street approaching Howard Avenue;

             Hunt Drive approaching Frontera Way;

             Hunt Drive approaching Rivera Drive;

             Hunt Drive approaching Trousdale Drive.

     (i)    [Reserved for future use].

     (j)    [Reserved for future use].

     (k)   [Reserved for future use].

     (l)    La Mesa Drive approaching Hillside Drive;

             Larkspur Drive approaching Linden Avenue;

             Lexington Way approaching Bloomfield;

             Loma Vista Drive approaching Skyline Boulevard;

             Private Road at the most northerly end of Loma Vista Drive approaching Loma Vista Drive;

             Lorton Avenue approaching Bayswater Avenue;

             Lorton Avenue approaching Burlingame Avenue;

             Los Altos Drive approaching Hillside Drive;

             Los Montes Drive approaching Hillside Drive;

             Loyola Drive approaching Trousdale Drive.

     (m)  Magnolia Drive approaching Murchison Drive;

             Majilla Avenue approaching Chula Vista Avenue;

             Malcolm Road approaching Gilbreth Road;

             Marco Polo Way approaching Davis Drive;

             Marco Polo Way approaching Trousdale Drive;

             Margarita Avenue approaching Skyline Boulevard;

             Mariposa Drive approaching Frontera Way;

             Marsten Road approaching Rollins Road;

             Martinez Drive approaching Trousdale Drive and Castenada Drive;

             Mitten Road approaching Gilbreth Road;

             Montecito Way approaching Frontera Way;

             Montero Avenue approaching Easton Drive;

             Murchison Drive approaching California Drive;

             Murchison Drive approaching Magnolia Drive;

             Murchison Drive approaching Ogden Drive while traveling east.

     (n)   North Lane approaching Carolan Avenue while traveling west;

             North Carolan Avenue approaching Rollins Road.

     (o)   Oak Grove both directions approaching Winchester;

             Occidental Avenue approaching Howard Avenue;

             Ogden Drive approaching Murchison Drive;

             Ogden Drive approaching Trousdale Drive.

     (p)   Palm Drive approaching Fairfield Road;

             Palm Drive approaching Paloma Avenue;

             Paloma Drive approaching Easton Drive;

             Paloma Drive approaching Palm Drive;

             Park Road approaching Burlingame Avenue;

             Plymouth Way approaching Bloomfield Road;

             Poppy Drive approaching Columbus Avenue;

             Primrose Road approaching Bellevue Avenue;

             Primrose Road approaching Douglas Avenue.

     (q)   Quesada Drive approaching Davis Drive;

             Quesada Way approaching Ray Drive;

             Quesada Way approaching Trousdale Drive.

     (r)    Ralston Avenue approaching Pepper Avenue;

             Ray Drive approaching Balboa Avenue;

             Ray Drive approaching Davis Drive;

             Ray Drive approaching Devereux Drive;

             Rivera Drive approaching Sebastian Drive;

             Rivera Drive approaching Skyline Boulevard;

             Rollins Road approaching Marsten Road and North Carolan Avenue;

             Rollins Road approaching Toyon Drive.

     (s)    Sanchez Avenue approaching Cortez Avenue;

             Sebastian Drive approaching Arguello Drive;

             Sebastian Drive approaching Frontera Way;

             Sebastian Drive approaching Mariposa Drive;

             Sebastian Drive approaching Trousdale Drive;

             Sequoia Avenue approaching Murchison Drive;

             Sequoia Avenue approaching Trousdale Drive;

             Sherman Avenue approaching Cortez Avenue;

             Skyline Boulevard approaching Trousdale Drive;

             Skyview Drive approaching Skyline Boulevard;

             Stanton Road approaching Gilbreth Road;

             Summit Drive approaching El Prado Road;

             Summit Drive approaching Hillside Circle.

     (t)    Toledo Avenue and Court approaching Martinez Drive;

             Toledo Drive approaching Trousdale Drive;

             Trousdale Drive approaching California Drive;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Castenada Drive and Martinez Drive;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Hunt Drive;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Loyola Drive while traveling west;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Marco Polo Drive;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Ogden Drive;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Quesada Drive;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Sebastian Drive;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Sequoia Avenue;

             Trousdale Drive approaching Toledo Drive while traveling east.

     (u)   [Reserved for future use].

     (v)   Vancouver Avenue approaching Broadway;

             Vancouver Avenue approaching Hillside Drive.

     (w)  Walnut Avenue approaching Willow Avenue;

             Westmoor Road approaching Rosedale Avenue;

             Winchester Drive approaching Oak Grove Avenue. (1941 code § 1211, Ord. 508, (1951); Ord. 543, (1954); Ord. 544, (1954); Ord. 577, (1955); Ord. 584, (1955); Ord. 604, (1955); Ord. 632, (1956); Ord. 683, (1959); Ord. 685, (1959); Ord. 693, (1959); Ord. 720, (1969); Ord. 722, (1960); Ord. 734, (1961); Ord. 740, (1961); Ord. 743, (1961); Ord. 751, (1962); Ord. 776, (1963); Ord. 798, (1964); Ord. 802, (1964); Ord. 805, (1964); Ord. 814, (1964); Ord. 819, (1965); Ord. 850 § 1, (1966); Ord. 860 § 1, (1966); Ord. 874 § 1, (1968); Ord. 878 § 1, (1968); Ord. 893 § 1, (1969); Ord. 900 § 1, (1969); Ord. 912 § 1, (1970); Ord. 919 §§ 1, 2, (1970); Ord. 925 § 1, (1970), Ord. 931 § 1, (1971); Ord. 951 § 1, (1972); Ord. 972 § 1, (1972); Ord. 997 § 1, (1973); Ord. 998 § 1, (1973); Ord. 1005 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1204 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1042 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1063 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1072 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1087 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1099 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1116 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1119 § 1, (1978); Ord. 1144 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1154 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1156 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1158 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1160 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1196 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1224 § 1, (1982); Ord. 1241 §§ 1, 2, (1983); Ord. 1247 § 1, (1983); Ord. 1265 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1275 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1309 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1336 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1340 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1358 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1367 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1385 § 1, (1989); Ord. 1387 § 1, (1989); Ord. 1414 § 1, (1990); Ord. 1427 § 1, (1990); Ord. 1428 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1497 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1502 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1537 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1559 § 3, (1996); Ord. 1562 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1574 § 2, (1997); Ord. 1581 § 2, (1997); Ord. 1582 § 2, (1997); Ord. 1590 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1594 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1608 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1635 §§ 2, 3, (2000); Ord. 1643 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1651 § 1, (2001); Ord. 1659 § 2, (2001); Ord. 1665 § 2, (2001); Ord. 1683 § 2, (2002); Ord. 1726 § 2, (2004); Ord. 1729 § 2, (2004); Ord. 1787 §§ 2, 3, (2006); Ord. 1799 §§ 2, 3, (2007); Ord. 1898 § 2, (2014); Ord. 1922 § 2, (2015); Ord. 1948 § 2, (2017); Ord. 1965 § 2, (2019))

 

13.20.020 Through highways.
     Except at any intersection with El Camino Real, the following streets are designated through highways within the meaning of and in conformity to the provisions of Section 21354 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. The operator of any vehicle entering the intersections from any direction shall bring his or her vehicle to a full stop.

     (1)   Rollins Road;

     (2)   Bayshore Highway;

     (3)   Airport Boulevard;

     (4)   California Drive, Dufferin Avenue to southeasterly city limits;

     (5)   Adeline Drive;

     (6)   Hillside Drive from Alvarado Avenue to El Camino Real;

     (7)   Easton Drive;

     (8)   Sherman Avenue from Cortez Avenue to El Camino Real;

     (9)   Broadway;

     (10) Carmelita Avenue;

     (11) Sanchez Avenue;

     (12) Oak Grove Avenue;

     (13) Carolan Avenue from Cadillac Way to Park Avenue;

     (14) Burlingame Avenue from Myrtle to Rollins Road;

     (15) Howard Avenue;

     (16) Bayswater Avenue;

     (17) Peninsula Avenue;

     (18) Barroilhet Avenue;

     (19) Grove Avenue;

     (20) Lincoln Avenue;

     (21) Ralston Avenue;

     (22) Occidental Avenue;

     (23) Primrose Road from Donnelly Avenue to Douglas Avenue;

     (24) Palm Drive from California Drive through Acacia Drive. (1941 Code § 1125, Ord. 627, (1956); Ord. 794, (1964); Ord. 795, (1964); Ord. 820, (1965); Ord. 846, (1966); Ord. 858, (1966); Ord. 864, (1967); Ord. 1063 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1156 § 2, (1979); Ord. 1414 § 2, (1990))

 

13.20.030 Yield right-of-way intersections.
     The operator of any vehicle entering any of the following designated intersections shall yield the right-of-way:

     Almer Road approaching Bellevue Avenue;

     Almer Road approaching Floribunda Avenue;

     Ansel Avenue approaching Bellevue Avenue;

     Bellevue Avenue approaching Primrose Road after entering the center islands from either direction;

     California Drive approaching Bellevue Avenue;

     California Drive northerly turn onto eastbound Oak Grove Avenue;

     Chapin Lane approaching Pepper Avenue;

     Clarendon approaching Dwight;

     Concord Way approaching Bloomfield Road;

     Lexington Way approaching Dwight Road;

     Primrose Road approaching Floribunda Avenue;

     Vernon Way approaching Bloomfield. (1941 Code § 1222.15, Ord. 684, (1958); Ord. 865 § 1, (1967); Ord. 1063 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1116 § 2, (1977); Ord. 1144 § 2, (1979); Ord. 1156 § 3, (1979); Ord. 1241 § 3, (1983); Ord. 1244 § 1, (1983); Ord. 1314 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1427 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1429 § 2, (1991); Ord. 1438 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1559 § 4, (1996); Ord. 1568 § 2, (1997); Ord. 1590 § 3, (1998))

Chapter 13.24 SPEED LIMITS
13.24.005 Forty miles per hour.
     (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any of the following designated streets at a speed greater than forty (40) miles per hour; it is determined that the speed limitation hereby established is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe:

     (1)   Skyline Boulevard from six hundred (600) feet north of Rivera Drive south to the city limits. (Ord. 1902 § 2, (2014))

 

13.24.010 Thirty-five miles per hour.
     (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any of the following designated streets at a speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour; it is determined that the speed limitation hereby established is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe:

     (1)   Airport Boulevard between Old Bayshore Highway and Lang Road;

     (2)   Adrian Road between Millbrae city limits and David Road;

     (3)   Old Bayshore Highway;

     (4)   California Drive between Oak Grove Avenue and Murchison Drive;

     (5)   Carolan Avenue between Broadway and Oak Grove Avenue;

     (6)   Peninsula Avenue between California Drive and Humboldt Road;

     (7)   Rollins Road between southern city limits to northern city limits;

     (8)   Skyline Boulevard from six hundred (600) feet north of Rivera Drive south to the city limits; and

     (9)   Trousdale Drive between El Camino Real and Skyline Boulevard. (1941 Code § 1221-A, Ord. 455, (1947); Ord. 585, (1955); Ord. 715, (1960); Ord. 732, (1961); Ord. 755, (1962); Ord. 849 § 1, (1966); Ord. 1080 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1124 § 1, (1978); Ord 1662 § 2, (2001); Ord. 1902 § 2, (2014); Ord. 1971 § 2, (2020))

 

13.24.015 Thirty miles per hour.
     (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any of the following designated streets at a speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour; it is determined that the speed limitation hereby established is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe:

     (1)   Peninsula Avenue between El Camino Real and California Drive; and

     (2)   Hillside Drive between Alvarado Avenue and El Camino Real. (Ord. 1067 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1084 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1124 § 2, (1978); Ord. 1249 § 1, (1983); Ord. 1561 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1697 § 2, (2002); Ord. 1902 § 2, (2014) ; Ord. 1971 § 3, (2020))

 

13.24.020 Twenty-five miles per hour for certain vehicles.
     No person shall drive any motor truck or truck-tractor having three (3) or more axles or any motor truck or truck-tractor drawing any other vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour in descending the grade on all portions of Trousdale Drive; it is determined that the speed limitation hereby established is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. This section does not apply to any bus having three (3) or more axles. (Ord. 862 § 1, (1967); Ord. 1902 § 2, (2014))

 

13.24.025 Twenty-five miles per hour.
     No person shall drive a vehicle upon any of the streets not identified in Sections 13.24.005, 13.24.010, and 13.24.015 at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour; it is determined that the speed limitation hereby established is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. (Ord. 1902 § 2, (2014))

Chapter 13.28 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
13.28.010 One-way streets and alleys designated.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Alvarado Avenue from Hillside Drive to Hillside Circle except in a southerly direction.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Capuchino Avenue between Broadway and Carmelita Avenue except in a southerly direction.

     (c)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Capuchino Avenue between Lincoln Avenue and Broadway except in a southerly direction.

     (d)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Chula Vista Avenue between Broadway and Carmelita Avenue except in a southerly direction.

     (e)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on lands of the City and County of San Francisco paralleling California Drive between North Lane and the northerly curbline of Bellevue Avenue, extended, except in a northerly direction.

     (f)    It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on City Hall Lane between Primrose Road and Park Road except in an easterly direction, such traffic to enter on Primrose Road and exit on Park Road.

     (g)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on East Lane from North Lane to Burlingame Avenue except in a southerly direction.

     (h)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Hatch Alley except in a southerly direction.

     (i)    It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Highland Avenue between California Drive and Howard Avenue except in a southerly direction.

     (j)    It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Hillside Circle except in a clockwise direction.

     (k)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Laguna Avenue between Carmelita Avenue and Broadway except in a northerly direction.

     (l)    It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on North Lane between Carolan Avenue and East Lane except in an easterly direction.

     (m)  It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Paloma Avenue between Broadway and Lincoln Avenue except in a northerly direction.

     (n)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Paloma Avenue between Carmelita Avenue and Broadway except in a northerly direction.

     (o)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on the alley from Parking Lot ‘P’ to Laguna Avenue except in an easterly direction; provided, no vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight of five (5) tons or more shall drive on said alley in any direction, refuse collection and emergency vehicles excepted.

     (p)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on the Service Road between Dufferin Avenue and Murchison Drive except in a northerly direction.

     (q)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on South Lane between California Drive and the railroad tracks except in an easterly direction.

     (r)    It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on West Lane except in a southerly direction.

     The director of public works is authorized and directed to procure and install appropriate signs giving notice of the provisions of this section. (1941 Code § 1427, Ord. 474, (1948); Ord. 569, (1954); Ord. 578, (1955); Ord. 579, (1955); Ord. 587, (1955); Ord. 733, (1961); Ord. 791, (1964); Ord. 941, (1971); Ord. 978 § 1, (1972); Ord. 1052 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1071 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1139 §§ 1, 2, (1978); Ord. 1194 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1261 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1520 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1559 § 1, 2, (1996); Ord. 1820 § 2, (2008))

Chapter 13.32 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
13.32.010 Application of regulations.
     (a)   The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

     (b)   The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.015 Repeat violations.
     If a vehicle receives a second citation for the violation of the same parking regulation or limitation within the same calendar day, and the vehicle was not moved between citations, or is stationary pursuant to Section 13.32.140, the bail for the second citation shall be increased to such amount as may be established upon the schedule of bail for violation of this section. (Ord. 1276 § 1, (1984))

 

13.32.020 Extended parking permits.
     (a)   The city engineer may issue cards, meter covers or appropriate indicia to allow contractors and tradesmen to park beyond the time periods specified in this title or without operation of parking meters, or both. A fee may be established in lieu of parking meter fees and a deposit shall be established to insure the return of any indicia.

     (b)   The city manager may issue cards or other appropriate indicia to allow a city employee to park during the employee’s city working hours in specified city municipal parking facilities beyond the time periods specified in this title or without operation of parking meters, or both. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978); Ord 1642 § 2, (2000))

 

13.32.030 City engineer to maintain no stopping zones and no parking areas.
     The city engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this title.

     When said curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.040 No parking areas.
     No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:

     (a)   Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

     (b)   In any area where the city engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

     (c)   In any area established as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

     (d)   Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any rail or light rail vehicle traveling upon such track;

 

     (e)   In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

     (f)    On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.050 Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.
     No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street, alley or public parking facility for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978); Ord. 1338 § 1, (1987))

 

13.32.060 Parking for demonstration.
     No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon the right-of-way of any street or upon any publicly owned property in the city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale or for selling merchandise from said vehicle unless authorized by the city council. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.070 Parking adjacent to schools.
     (a)   The city engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

     (b)   When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978); Ord. 1154 § 3, (1979))

 

13.32.090 Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
     (a)   The city engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.

     (b)   When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.100 Parking on grades.
     No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three (3) percent without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.110 Emergency parking signs.
     (a)   Whenever the police chief or city engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the police chief or city engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the police chief or city engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the city engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

     (b)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.120 Taxicab stands.
     (a)   The city engineer shall establish taxicab stands and determine the locations thereof.

     (b)   The curb surface within each taxicab stand shall be painted white and marked “Taxicab Stand” in red lettering, or shall be designated by signs of a type and size approved by the city engineer.

     (c)   No operator of any vehicle, other than a taxicab or automobile for hire, shall park such vehicle in such taxicab stand. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.130 Parking on city property.
     (a)   Whenever the city manager determines that the orderly and efficient conduct of the city’s business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on parking facilities maintained for city buildings, city parks or other such municipal operation, be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city manager shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted.

     (b)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.140 Moving parked vehicle to avoid parking time limit.
     For the purpose of the regulations contained in this title relating to limitations on stopping, standing and parking, any vehicle moved a distance of less than one-tenth of a mile during the limited parking period shall be deemed to have remained stationary. A vehicle parked with the odometer obscured from view from without the vehicle shall be presumed to have remained stationary. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.150 Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets.
     No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, or dismantle or cause to be dismantled, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.160 Washing or polishing vehicles.
     No person shall wash or cause to be washed, or polish or cause to be polished, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city when a charge is made for such service. (Ord. 1136 § 6, (1978))

 

13.32.170 Vehicles of excessive length.
     No vehicle, including a truck, tractor, trailer, camping vehicle or combination thereof that exceeds twenty (20) feet in overall length shall be parked at any time upon a public municipal parking facility or in an angle street parking space. This prohibition shall not apply to trucks or delivery vehicles which are stopped or parked temporarily for loading or unloading merchandise and materials. (Ord. 1142 § 5, (1979); Ord. 1680 § 3, (2002))

 

13.32.180 Overnight parking of recreation vehicles and trailers.
     No person shall permit any trailer, semitrailer, camper, camp trailer, house car, trailer coach or mobilehome to park or remain upon any street, park or other public place within the city, other than the RR zone, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 1259 § 1, (1983); Ord. 1793 § 5, (2006))

 

13.32.190 Living in vehicles prohibited.
     No person shall use any trailer, semitrailer, camper, camp trailer, house car, trailer coach, mobile home or any other vehicle for the purpose of sleeping or living quarters whether on public or private property. (Ord. 1259 § 2, (1983))

Chapter 13.36 PARKING LIMITATIONS
13.36.010 No parking at any time.
     It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle at any time on:

     (1)   Airport Boulevard;

     (2)   Arc Way, southwesterly side;

     (3)   Bayshore Boulevard;

     (4)   Beach Road, cul-de-sac only;

     (5)   Broadway, both sides from Rollins Road to the Southern Pacific right-of-way; south side from California Drive to Chula Vista Avenue; south side from El Camino Real to Vancouver Avenue;

     (6)   California, east side from North Lane to Oak Grove Avenue; east side from Sanchez Avenue to Murchison Drive;

     (7)   Anza Boulevard;

     (8)   Chatham Road, at the north side intersection with Plymouth Way;

     (9)   Cortez Avenue, west side from Hillside Drive to Easton Drive;

     (10) Donnelly Avenue north side;

     (11) Easton Drive, from Cortez Avenue to El Camino Real;

     (12) El Camino Real;

     (13) El Camino Real, east service road, east side from Trousdale Boulevard to Murchison Drive;

     (14) Gilbreth Road, north side from Mitten Road, south two hundred (200) feet;

     (15) Hatch Lane;

     (16) Laguna Avenue, east side from Broadway to Rhinette Avenue;

     (17) Lang Road, cul-de-sac and south side;

     (18) Rollins Road, east side from Humboldt Street to Marsten Road;

     (19) Victoria Station Place;

     (20) Carolan Avenue, westerly side, from Broadway to Sanchez Creek and from the prolongation of the centerline of Larkspur Drive to Oak Grove Avenue;

     (21) Adeline Drive, north side from Alvarado Avenue to Hoover Avenue;

     (22) Hillside Circle, west side from Summit Drive to Hillside Drive;

     (23) Peninsula Avenue, north side, from California Drive to the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way; and

     (24) Burlway Road, east of Bayshore Highway. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1284 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1323 1, (1986); Ord. 1336 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1427 § 3, (1990); Ord. 1435 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1451 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1479 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1580 § 2, (1997))

 

13.36.020 No parking during specified hours.
     It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle on the following streets on the designated hours and days as follows:

     (1)   Adrian Road, east side between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays excepted;

     (2)   Airport Boulevard, east side, from Beach Road to Fisherman’s Park, between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;

     (3)   Broadway, both sides from El Camino Real to California Drive, 4:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Sundays and holidays excepted, unless otherwise prohibited or limited;

     (4)   Burlingame Avenue, north side, from El Camino Real to Occidental Avenue between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;

     (5)   Burlingame Avenue, both sides, from El Camino Real to California Drive between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday;

     (6)   California Drive, west side from Juanita Avenue to Broadway between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.; west side from Trousdale Drive to Dufferin Avenue, between 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday;

     (7)   Capuchino Avenue, from Broadway to Carmelita Avenue between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., east side on Wednesdays; west side on Thursdays;

     (8)   Carmelita Avenue, south side, from California Drive to El Camino Real, between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.; north side, from California Drive to El Camino Real, between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.;

     (9)   Carolan Avenue, east side, from Burlingame Avenue to Oak Grove Avenue between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.; east side between Broadway and a point two hundred twenty-five (225) feet southerly from the southeasterly right-of-way line of Broadway from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.; west side from Sanchez Creek to the centerline of Larkspur Drive from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.;

     (10) Chula Vista Avenue, both sides, from Broadway to Carmelita between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; east side on Mondays; west side on Tuesdays;

     (11) El Camino Real West Service Road from Trousdale to Murchison from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.;

     (12) Gilbreth Road, both sides, from Cowan Road to Mahler Road, between 12:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;

     (13) Howard Avenue, north side, from El Camino Real to Crescent Avenue, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays excepted;

     (14) Laguna Avenue, both sides, from Broadway to Carmelita between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; east side on Mondays; west side on Tuesdays;

     (15) North Carolan Avenue, both sides, from Edwards Avenue to one hundred fifty (150) feet north of Whitehorn Way, between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;

     (16) Paloma Avenue, both sides, from Broadway to Carmelita between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; east side on Wednesdays; west side on Thursdays;

     (17) Peninsula Avenue, north side from the Southern Pacific right-of-way to Humboldt Street, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays excepted;

     (18) Rhinette Avenue, south side, between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays excepted; and

     (19) Rollins Road, west side from North Carolan Avenue to Broadway from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1168 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1187 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1283 § 3, (1984); Ord. 1323 § 2, (1986); Ord. 1408 § 1, (1990); Ord. 1451 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1564 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1580 § 3, (1997); Ord. 1585 § 2,(1998); Ord. 1597 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1611 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1696 § 2, (2002); Ord. 1734 § 2, (2004); Ord. 1798 § 3, (2007); Ord. 1925 § 2, (2016); Ord. 1953 § 2, (2018); Ord. 1959 § 2, (2019))

 

13.36.030 One-hour parking.
     Except where prohibited or otherwise designated for shorter term time periods, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period longer than one hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, excepting Sundays and holidays, upon any part of the following streets or portions of streets:

     (a)   California Drive, west side, from Douglas to Bellevue Avenue and from Carmelita Avenue to Broadway;

     (b)   Ingold Road, north side, forty-eight (48) feet west from the curb return of Rollins Road to one hundred twenty-eight (128) feet west from that same curb return;

     (c)   Magnolia Avenue, east side, from the intersection of Magnolia Avenue to three hundred (300) feet north of the center line of Trousdale Drive;

     (d)   Primrose Road, from Bellevue Avenue to Floribunda Avenue. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1200 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1349 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1371 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1397 § 1, (1989); Ord. 1434 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1496 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1558 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1573 § 2, (1997); Ord. 1580, § 4, (1997); Ord. 1674, § 4, (2001); Ord. 1684 § 2, (2002); Ord. 1690 § 2, (2002); Ord. 1696 § 3, (2002) ; Ord. 1972 § 2, (2020))

 

13.36.040 Two-hour parking.
     It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle, unless elsewhere in this title otherwise provided, for a longer period than two (2) hours between the hours designated any day, excepting Sundays and holidays, upon any part of the following streets, or portions of streets:

     (a)   8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.:

     (1)   Adrian Road, west side, one hundred fifty-five (155) feet southerly from the southeast end of the curb return of David Road;

     (2)   Anita Road, west side, from Peninsula Avenue one hundred forty-five (145) feet north toward Bayswater Avenue;

     (3)   Bayswater Avenue from El Camino Real to Park Road; south side, from California Drive to the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way;

     (4)   Bellevue Avenue, except the south side from Primrose Road to Almer Road;

     (5)   Broadway from El Camino Real to California Drive;

     (6)   Burlingame Avenue, from Myrtle to Carolan Avenue; south side from Occidental to El Camino Real and El Camino Real to California Drive;

     (7)   California Drive, west side, from Carmelita Avenue to Palm Drive; from Burlingame Avenue to Peninsula Avenue; from Oak Grove Avenue four hundred (400) feet northwards to 755 California Drive, except areas designated for thirty (30) minute parking;

     (8)   Capuchino Avenue from four hundred (400) feet southerly of the centerline of Broadway to Lincoln Avenue;

     (9)   Carmelita Avenue, south side, from El Camino Real to Chula Vista Avenue;

 

     (10) Carolan Avenue, east side, from one hundred (100) feet northerly of Toyon Drive to four hundred sixty (460) feet northerly of Toyon Drive; and east side, from Cadillac Way to Broadway;

     (11) Chapin Avenue, from Chapin Lane to El Camino Real;

     (12) Chula Vista Avenue from the centerline of Broadway to four hundred ten feet (410) southerly of the centerline of Broadway;

     (13) Douglas Avenue;

     (14) East Lane, east side, from Burlingame Avenue to Howard Avenue;

     (15) El Camino Real service road between Dufferin Avenue and Murchison Drive;

     (16) Howard Avenue, south side, from Crescent Avenue to El Camino Real and from California Drive to the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way;

     (17) Laguna Avenue from two hundred eighty feet (280) southerly to five hundred ten (510) feet northerly of the centerline of Broadway;

     (18) Lorton Avenue, west side, from Bayswater Avenue to Howard Avenue; east side, from Howard Avenue one hundred twenty (120) feet south toward Bayswater and forty (40) feet north toward Burlingame Avenue;

     (19) Magnolia, west side, from Trousdale Drive to Plaza Lane;

     (20) North Carolan Avenue with three (3) parking spaces along the lot front of 1361 North Carolan Avenue;

     (21) Occidental Avenue, from El Camino Real to Ralston Avenue;

     (22) Paloma Avenue from three hundred ten (310) feet southerly of the centerline of Broadway to Lincoln Avenue;

     (23) Park Road, except the west side, from Howard Avenue to Bayswater Avenue;

     (24) Primrose Road, west side, from Howard Avenue to El Camino Real;

     (25) Ralston Avenue, from Occidental Avenue to El Camino Real;

     (26) Rollins Road from ninety (90) feet northerly of Toyon Drive to four hundred sixty (460) feet northerly of Toyon Drive;

     (27) South Lane, both sides;

     (28) Trousdale Drive, north side, from the curb return of Trousdale Drive and California Drive to ninety (90) feet west of said curb return;

     (29) Trousdale Drive, south side, from the curb return of Marco Polo Way to forty (40) feet east of said curb return;

     (30) Marco Polo Way, east side, from the curb return of Trousdale Drive to forty (40) feet south of said curb return;

     (31) Crescent Avenue, both sides, from the curb return of Ralston Avenue to the curb return of Howard Avenue;

     (32) 1600 block of Howard Avenue, both sides, from the curb return of Crescent Avenue to the curb return of Occidental Avenue;

(33) Newlands Avenue, both sides;

     (34) Cypress Avenue, both sides, from El Camino Real to twenty (20) feet southerly of the centerline of Central Avenue (between the addresses of 1500 and 5141);

     (35) Carol Avenue, both sides, from El Camino Real to Barroilhet Avenue; and

     (36) East Carol Avenue, both sides, from Carol Avenue to Barroilhet Avenue.

     (b)   9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.:

     (1)   Carmelita Avenue, north side, between Chula Vista Avenue and El Camino Real;

     (2)   Magnolia Avenue, east side, from three hundred (300) feet north of the center line of Trousdale Drive to Murchison Drive.

     (c)   2:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.:

     (1)   Carolan Avenue, from Oak Grove Avenue to North Lane. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1150 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1195 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1200 § 3, (1981); Ord. 1212 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1274 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1283 § 4, (1984); Ord. 1349 §§ 2, 3, (1987); Ord. 1353 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1371 § 2, (1988); Ord. 1420 § 1, (1990); Ord. 1434 § 2, (1991); Ord. 1440 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1467 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1491 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1496 § 2, (1994); Ord. 1524 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1554 § 1, (1996); Ord 1604 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1638 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1674 § 5, (2001); Ord. 1684, (2002); Ord. 1690 § 3, (2002); Ord. 1734 § 3, (2004); Ord. 1771 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1804 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1860 §§ 2, 3, (2011); Ord. 1882 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1886 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1893 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1895 § 2, (2013); Ord. 1904 § 2, (2014); Ord. 1926 § 2, (2016); Ord. 1938 § 2, (2017) ; Ord. 1972 § 3, (2020))

 

13.36.042 Four-hour parking.
     It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of more than four (4) hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, Sundays and holidays excepted, upon any part of the following streets or portions of streets:

     (a)   Adrian Court, both sides;

     (b)   Adrian Road, on the west side of the 1600 and 1700 blocks;

     (c)   California Drive, west side, between Trousdale Drive and Murchison Drive;

     (d)   West side of Gilbreth Road, between Cowan Road and Mahler Road; and

     (e)   Howard Avenue, from Primrose Road to Highland Avenue. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1150 § 2, (1979); Ord. 1611 § 3, (1999); Ord. 1771 § 3, (2005); Ord. 1850 § 3, (2010))

 

13.36.043 Ten-hour parking.
     Except where prohibited or otherwise designated for shorter term time periods, it is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle, unless elsewhere in this title otherwise provided, for a longer period than ten (10) hours on any day, excepting Sundays and holidays, upon any part of the following streets or portions of streets:

     (1)   Bellevue Avenue, south side, from Primrose Road to Almer Road;

     (2)   Carolan Avenue from North Lane to South Lane;

     (3)   Chapin Avenue, north side, from El Camino Real to five hundred (500) feet west of Primrose Road; south side, from El Camino Real to four hundred seventy (470) feet west of Primrose Road;

     (4)   Donnelly Avenue, south side, from two hundred ten (210) feet east of Primrose Road to four hundred thirty-four (434) feet east of Primrose Road;

     (5)   East Lane from North Lane to Burlingame Avenue;

     (6)   Howard Avenue, from El Camino Real to Primrose Road;

     (7)   Lorton Avenue, east side, from one hundred twenty (120) feet south of Howard Avenue to Bayswater Avenue;

     (8)   North Lane from Carolan Avenue to East Lane;

     (9)   Park Road, west side, from Howard Avenue to Bayswater Avenue; and

     (10) Primrose Road, east side, from one hundred (100) feet south of Howard Avenue to Bayswater Avenue. (Ord. 1200 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1232 § 1, (1982); Ord. 1353 § 2, (1987); Ord. 1397 § 2, (1989); Ord. 1491 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1674 § 6, (2001))

 

13.36.044 Parking parallel on one-way streets.
     (a)   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

     (b)   In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

     (c)   The city engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway or a highway having two (2) or more separate roadways, and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

     (d)   The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978))

 

13.36.045 Angle parking.
     (a)   The following streets are designated as streets on which the city engineer may place angle parking:

     (1)   Burlingame Avenue between California Drive and El Camino Real;

     (2)   California Drive between Burlingame Avenue and Highland Avenue;

     (3)   Chapin Avenue between Primrose Road and El Camino Real;

     (4)   East Lane between North Lane and Burlingame Avenue;

     (5)   The 1800 block of the Frontage Road to El Camino Real;

     (6)   Howard Avenue from Highland Avenue to Primrose Road;

     (7)   Magnolia Avenue from Trousdale Drive to Murchison Avenue; and

     (8)   Oak Grove Avenue from North Carolan Avenue to Linden Avenue.

     (b)   On any of the streets or portions of streets established as angle parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except:

     (1)   At the angle to the curb or wheel stop indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of such allotted space;

     (2)   With the front wheel nearest the curb or wheel stop within six (6) inches of the curb or wheel stop; however, an operator of a motorcycle who parks a motorcycle with either a front or rear wheel within six (6) inches of the curb or wheel stop shall be considered to be in compliance with this subsection.

     (c)   The provisions of subsection (b)(2) shall not apply when a vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight.

     (d)   Angle parking includes both diagonal and perpendicular parking. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1680 § 4, (2002); Ord. 1826 § 2, (2008))

 

13.36.046 Parking space markings.
     (a)   Whenever parking space markings are placed on a street or parking lot, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked:

     (1)   So as to impede or block the flow of traffic on the traveled way; nor

     (2)   Other than entirely within a single space as defined by the parking space markings.

     (b)   Whenever parking space markings are placed on a street or parking lot, no more than one vehicle may be parked within a single space. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1202 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1680 § 5, (2002))

 

13.36.047 Limited height parking zones.
     (a)   Limited height parking zones, not in excess of one hundred (100) feet of any intersection, or on certain streets or highways or portions thereof, may be established by the city engineer. Limited height parking zones may also be established by the city engineer for or any portion within any city off-street parking facility.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any vehicle, more than six (6) feet in height to park in an area designated as a limited height parking zone.

     (c)   The city engineer shall provide for the placement of signs marking such parking zones. (Ord. 1243 § 1, (1983); Ord. 1547 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1680 § 6, (2002))

 

 

13.36.048 Motorcycle zones.
     Whenever parking spaces on a street or parking lot are marked or designated for the use of motorcycles, it is unlawful for any other vehicle to be parked in said spaces. (Ord. 1366 § 1, (1988))

 

13.36.049 Moving vehicles in public parking lots or facilities and use of public parking lots or facilities for storage of vehicles.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle within a municipal parking lot so that it remains therein for a period of time in violation of Section 13.36.050. Any vehicle observed at two (2) or more parking spaces in the parking facility within such a period of time and having an observed odometer change of less than one-tenth miles shall be presumed to have remained within such lot; a vehicle observed at two (2) or more parking spaces in the parking facility within such a period of time and with the odometer obscured from view from without the vehicle shall be rebuttably presumed to have remained stationary.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle, to park or leave such vehicle upon any municipal parking lot for a period of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours or more. For purposes of this subsection, a vehicle shall be considered to have been parked or left standing for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours if it has not been moved at least one-tenth of a mile during the seventy-two (72) hour period. A vehicle with the odometer obscured from view from without the vehicle shall be rebuttably presumed to have remained stationary. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1142 § 7, (1979); Ord. 1680 § 7, (2002); Ord. 1688 § 4, (2002))

 

13.36.050 Municipal parking lots.
     (a)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any property owned, possessed or maintained by the city as a municipal parking facility in violation of time limitations or any other regulations which may be fixed or determined by resolution or ordinance of the city council.

     (b)   It is unlawful for any person to park or operate any vehicle on any property owned, possessed or maintained by the city as a municipal parking facility in violation of any regulations which may be fixed or determined pursuant to this title.

     (c)   No such regulation shall be enforceable prior to installation of appropriate signs giving notice of the provisions of the regulation. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1142 § 8, (1979); Ord. 1176 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1680 § 8, (2002))

 

13.36.051 Litter and refuse.
     It is unlawful to throw, place or deposit any trash, litter, paper or any refuse upon the pavement or in the landscaped area of any property owned, possessed or maintained by the city as a municipal parking lot. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978))

 

13.36.052 Application of other chapters.
     All provisions of this title, including, but not limited to, those regarding parking meters, stopping, standing, and parking vehicles, insofar as they are applicable, shall apply to public off-street parking facilities owned or operated by the city. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1680 § 9, (2002))

 

13.36.065 Parking of commercial vehicles prohibited in residential districts.
     (a)   No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more that is a commercial vehicle, a tow truck, or a dump truck either:

     (1)   On a street in a residential district or upon any private property in a residential district at any time; or

     (2)   In city parking lot “F” or “H” between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

     (b)   This section shall not apply to a commercial vehicle parking or standing while making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide landscaping, grading, repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure for which a building permit has been obtained.

     (c)   This section shall not apply to parking upon private property of such vehicles by a licensed contractor, or of one such vehicle by an owner-builder, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) continuous days, when such vehicle or vehicles are used during the course of landscaping, grading, repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such property for which a building permit has been obtained. (Ord. 1136 § 7, (1978); Ord. 1142 § 9, (1979); Ord. 1425 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1449 § 1, (1992); Ord. 1674 § 7, (2001))

 

13.36.070 Preferential parking zones.
     (a)   The city council may establish by resolution preferential parking zones that would exempt the motor vehicles of residents and the residents’ guests on designated streets from the restrictions of time-limited parking contained in Section 13.36.030, 13.36.040, 13.36.042, or 13.36.043, or any combination thereof that the council may deem appropriate that applies on the designated streets.

 

     (b)   However, nothing contained in such a resolution shall allow or be construed to allow any motor vehicle of a resident or a resident’s guest to be exempt from any parking meter, no parking designation, seventy-two (72) hour parking limit, or any other parking limitation or curb marking except as specifically listed in the preferential parking zone policy for the specified streets.

     (c)   Preferential parking zone permits will be issued on a calendar year basis, and a fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid for each permit, permit renewal, and permit reissuance.

     (d)   It is unlawful for any person to:

     (1)   Alter, forge, counterfeit, or falsify any parking permit relating to a preferential parking program or display or cause or permit to be displayed any such altered, forged, counterfeited or false permit with intent to represent the permit has been issued by the city.

     (2)   Transfer, loan, sell, or otherwise provide a parking permit relating to a preferential parking program to a person who is not eligible for such a permit under the terms of the preferential parking program, or to display or cause or permit to be displayed any such unlawfully transferred permit.

     (3)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed any parking permit relating to a preferential parking program when the person knows or has reason to know that the person is not eligible or is no longer eligible to display or cause or permit the permit to be displayed. (Ord. 1819 § 2, (2008))

Chapter 13.38 STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING
13.38.010 Authority to establish loading zones.
     (a)   The city engineer is authorized to determine and to mark freight zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

     (1)   At any place in the central traffic district or any business or commercial district;

     (2)   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

     (b)   In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. (Ord. 1136 § 8, (1978); Ord. 1142 § 10, (1979))

 

13.38.020 Curb markings to indicate stopping and parking regulations.
     (a)   The city engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:

     (1)   “Red” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code or this title, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus stop.

     (2)   “Yellow” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between eight a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or freight. The city engineer may apply these restrictions for longer hours or on Sundays and holidays, or both, for particular yellow zones, and such additional restrictions shall be effective when signs are posted giving notice of the restrictions.

     (3)   “White” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading or passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three (3) minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except that when such zone is in front of a hotel, theater or public building, or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times.

     (4)   “Green” shall mean no standing or parking for longer than thirty (30) minutes, unless some other period of time is indicated, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. The city engineer may apply these restrictions for longer hours or on Sundays and holidays, or both, for particular green zones, and such additional restrictions shall be effective when signs are posted giving notice of the restrictions.

     (5)   “Blue” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose by any vehicle except those displaying a distinguishing plate or placard issued to disabled persons or disabled veterans.

     (b)   The city engineer is authorized to mark the pavement or to post signs, or both, in addition to or in place of such curb markings as the city engineer may determine and as provided by state law and regulations.

     (c)   The city engineer is authorized to establish zones combining any of the above markings and signage for such hours and days as may be determined. (Ord. 1136 § 8, (1978); Ord. 1142 § 11, (1979); Ord. 1159 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1526 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1583 § 2, (1997); Ord. 1680 § 10, (2002))

 

13.38.030 Effect of permission to load or unload.
     (a)   Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of freight shall apply only to commercial vehicles as defined in Vehicle Code Section 260 and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefore, and in no event for more than thirty (30) minutes.

     (b)   The loading or unloading of freight shall apply only to the pickup or delivery of freight in the ordinary course of business.

     (c)   Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.

     (d)   Within the total time limits specified above the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to ac-commodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading, but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. (Ord. 1136 § 8, (1978))

 

13.38.040 Standing for loading or unloading only.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or freight as defined herein for such time as is permitted in Section 13.38.030. (Ord. 1136 § 8, (1978))

 

13.38.050 Standing in passenger loading zone.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 13.38.030. (Ord. 1136 § 8, (1978))

 

13.38.055 Handicapped zones.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose in a blue handicapped zone unless the vehicle displays a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued to disabled persons or disabled veterans pursuant to the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1159 § 2, (1979))

 

13.38.060 Standing in any alley.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or freight in any alley. (Ord. 1136 § 8, (1978))

 

13.38.065 Limited time parking.
     When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation of such signs, parking meters or curb markings. (Ord. 1142 § 12, (1979))

 

13.38.070 Coach zones to be established.
     The city engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. (Ord. 1136 § 8, (1978))

Chapter 13.40 PARKING METERS
13.40.010 Parking meter zones.
     (a)   The streets hereinafter described are defined and established as parking meter zones. The parking of vehicles along such portions of these streets, and at such times as may be designated by the city council, shall be controlled, regulated, and inspected with the aid of parking meters:

     (1)   Broadway from El Camino Real to California Drive;

     (2)   Burlingame Avenue from El Camino Real to California Drive;

     (3)   California Drive, west side, from Broadway to Carmelita Avenue and Bellevue Avenue to Howard Avenue; and east side from North Lane to two hundred seventy (270) feet south of Howard Avenue;

     (4)   Capuchino Avenue from one hundred forty (140) feet north of the centerline of Broadway to two hundred thirty-three (233) feet south of the centerline of Broadway;

     (5)   Carolan Avenue from South Lane to North Lane;

     (6)   Chapin Avenue, from Primrose Road to El Camino Real;

     (7)   Chula Vista Avenue from Broadway to two hundred eighty-two (282) feet south of the centerline of Broadway;

     (8)   City Hall Lane from Primrose Road to Park Road;

     (9)   Donnelly Avenue from Primrose Road to Lorton Avenue;

     (10) East Lane from Burlingame Avenue to North Lane;

     (11) Highland Avenue from Howard Avenue to California Drive and one parking space on the southwest corner of Highland at Howard;

     (12) Howard Avenue from El Camino Real to Highland Avenue;

     (13) Laguna Avenue from Broadway to one hundred thirty-six (136) feet south of the centerline of Broadway;

     (14) Lorton Avenue from Bellevue Avenue to Howard Avenue, and the east side of Lorton Avenue from Howard Avenue to Bayswater Avenue;

     (15) North Lane from Carolan Avenue to East Lane;

     (16) Paloma Avenue from one hundred (100) feet north of the centerline of Broadway to one hundred twenty (120) feet south of the centerline of Broadway;

     (17) Park Road, from Burlingame Avenue to Howard Avenue, and the west side of Park Road from Howard Avenue to Bayswater Avenue;

     (18) Primrose Road from Bellevue Avenue to Howard Avenue; and the east side of Primrose Road from Howard Avenue to Bayswater Avenue; and the west side of Primrose Road from Howard Avenue to two hundred (200) feet south of the centerline of Howard Avenue;

     (19) South Lane from Carolan Avenue/East Lane to California Drive; and

     (20) West Lane from South Lane to two hundred (200) feet south of South Lane.

     (b)   The following parking meter rates are established in the city:

     (1)   24-Minute Parking Limit

             On the following streets:

             Broadway from El Camino Real to Rollins Road;

             Capuchino Avenue from Broadway to Carmelita Avenue; and

             Chula Vista Avenue from Broadway to Carmelita Avenue:

20 cents for 24 minutes

             On the following streets:

             California Drive from Bellevue Avenue to Howard Avenue;

             Chapin Avenue from Primrose Road to El Camino Real;

             Highland Avenue from California Drive to Howard Avenue;

             Howard Avenue from El Camino Real to Highland Drive;

             Lorton Avenue from Bellevue Avenue to Bayswater Avenue;

             Park Road from Burlingame Avenue to Howard Avenue; and

             Primrose Road from Bellevue Avenue to Bayswater Avenue:

40 cents for 24 minutes

             All other areas:

5 cents for each 12 minutes

     (2)   2-Hour Parking Limit

             On the following street:

             Burlingame Avenue from El Camino Real to California Drive:

$1.00 the first hour; $2.00 the second hour

             On the following streets:

             California Drive from Bellevue Avenue to Bayswater Avenue;

             Chapin Avenue from Primrose Road to El Camino Real;

             Donnelly Avenue from Primrose Road to Lorton Avenue;

             Highland Avenue from California Drive to Bayswater Avenue;

             Howard Avenue from Primrose Road to Highland Avenue;

             Lorton Avenue from Bellevue Avenue to Howard Avenue;

             Park Road from Burlingame Avenue to Howard Avenue;

             Primrose Road from Bellevue Avenue to Howard Avenue:

$2.00 for two hours

             On the following streets:

             Broadway from El Camino Real to California Drive;

             Capuchino Avenue from Lincoln Avenue to Carmelita Avenue;

             Chula Vista Avenue from Broadway to Carmelita Avenue;

             Laguna Avenue from Lincoln Avenue to Carmelita Avenue; and

             Paloma Avenue from Lincoln Avenue to Carmelita Avenue:

$1.00 for two hours

             All other areas:

75 cents for each hour

     (3)   4-Hour Parking Limit

             On the following street:

             Howard Avenue from Primrose Road to Highland Avenue:

$1.00 for each hour

     (4)   10-Hour Parking Limit

             On the following streets:

             California Drive from Howard Avenue to Bellevue Avenue;

             Chapin Avenue from Primrose Road to El Camino Real;

             City Hall Lane from Primrose Road to Park Road;

             Donnelly Avenue from Primrose Road to Lorton Avenue;

             Highland Avenue from Howard Avenue to California Drive; and

             Howard Avenue from El Camino Real to California Drive:

$3.00 for 10 hours

             On the following streets:

             Lorton Avenue from Bayswater Avenue to Howard Avenue;

             Park Road from Bayswater Avenue to Howard Avenue;

             Primrose Road from Bayswater Avenue to Howard Avenue;

             South Lane from Carolan Avenue/East Lane to California Drive; and

             West Lane from South Lane to two hundred (200) feet south of South Lane:

$3.00 for 10 hours

             All other areas:

25 cents for each 2-1/2 hours

 

(Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978); Ord. 1200 § 4, (1981); Ord. 1201 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1434 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1560 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1576 § 2, (1997); Ord. 1604 § 3, (1998); Ord. 1674 § 2, (2001); Ord. 1719 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1798 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1873 § 3, (2012); Ord. 1952 § 2, (2018) ; Ord. 1972 §§ 4, 5 (2020))

 

13.40.020 Manner of installation.
     The city engineer shall cause parking meters to be installed and maintained in all parking meter zones.

     Parking meters shall be installed upon the curb or sidewalk area immediately adjacent to each parking space. Each meter shall be placed in such manner as to show or display by a sign or signal that the parking space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use.

     Each parking meter shall be set to display, after the operational procedure has been completed, a sign or signal indicating legal parkings for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time as indicated on the meter. Each parking meter shall indicate the limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent to the parking meter, and shall continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit or a portion thereof for the part of the street upon which the meter is placed. Each meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of the legal parking time it will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.030 Time of operation of parking meters.
     The provisions of this title relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every day except Sunday and holidays. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978); Ord. 1733 § 2, (2004))

 

13.40.040 Operational procedure to be followed.
     Immediately after occupancy of a parking meter space, the operator of a vehicle shall deposit a coin of the United States in the parking meter and if necessary turn a crank, knob or handle in accordance with the instructions posted on the face of the parking meter. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.050 Parking meters and parking meter standards not to be used for certain purposes.
     No person shall attach anything to or allow a bicycle, newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a parking meter or a parking meter standard without the approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.060 Unlawful to extend time beyond limit.
     No person shall follow the operational procedure or any part of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which said parking meter is placed. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.070 Improper use of meter.
     No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.080 Deposit of coins in meter by unauthorized person.
     No person other than the owner or operator of a vehicle shall deposit any coin in any parking meter without the knowledge or consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle using the parking space immediately adjacent to the meter. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.090 Commercial vehicles loading or unloading exempt for thirty-minute limit.
     Commercial vehicles may park in parking zones to load or unload freight without depositing coins for a period not to exceed thirty (30) minutes. Should any truck or delivery vehicle be parked longer than thirty (30) minutes, it shall be classed as a violation hereof and the regular penalty herein provided imposed. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.100 Unlawful to park after meter time has expired.
     No operator of any vehicle shall permit such vehicle to remain parked in any parking space during any time that the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such time immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.105 Parking permits.
     (a)   The city manager is authorized to issue parking permits subject to a payment of forty dollars ($40.00) per month for use in lieu of the deposit of coins in the parking meters at meters designating ten (10) hour parking spaces on the following streets:

     (1)   Bellevue Avenue from El Camino Real to Primrose Road;

     (2)   Chapin Avenue from El Camino Real to Primrose Road;

     (3)   City Hall Lane from Primrose Road to Park Road;

     (4)   Donnelly Avenue from Primrose Road to Lorton Avenue;

     (5)   East Lane from Burlingame Avenue to North Lane;

     (6)   Howard Avenue from El Camino Real to Primrose Road;

     (7)   Lorton Avenue from Bayswater Avenue to Howard Avenue;

     (8)   North Lane from Carolan Avenue to East Lane;

     (9)   Park Road from Bayswater Avenue to Howard Avenue; and

     (10) Primrose Road from Bayswater Avenue to Howard Avenue.

     (b)   Parking permits issued pursuant to this section do not assure the owner of a particular parking space of any kind nor at any particular location, but are a one-time payment for a calendar month in lieu of the hourly payment otherwise required for occupancy of an otherwise metered space.

     (c)   No parking permit issued pursuant to this section shall be used or interpreted to extend the maximum amount of time allowed for parking at any parking space pursuant to the time limits established by this title.

     (d)   In order to ensure orderly and efficient use of the parking supply, the city manager is authorized to limit the number of permits which may be issued, in which case priority shall be based on the order in which requests for such permits are received.

     (e)   The city manager is authorized to collect deposits, require the submission of application forms, and to establish other administrative procedures for the parking permit program as may be necessary from time to time. The parking permits issued pursuant to this section may also be used as may be provided by council resolution in designated municipal parking lots. (Ord. 1779 § 2, (2006))

 

13.40.110 Rules of evidence.
     The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by this title. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.120 Use of funds collected.
     The specified coin or coins required to be deposited in parking meters as herein provided are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets, and also the cost of supervision and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones hereby created, and to cover the cost of purchase, acquiring, installation, operation, maintenance, supervision, regulation and control of the parking meters herein described and to provide for off-street parking. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

 

13.40.130 Application of other chapters.
     No section of this chapter shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other provision of this title. (Ord. 1136 § 9, (1978))

Chapter 13.44 DRIVING OR PARKING ON PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT
13.44.010 Driving or parking on property without consent unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive upon, or across, or to park, or leave standing, or to cause, or permit to drive, park or leave standing, any vehicle upon any property in the city without the consent of the owner or person in control of such property. (Ord. 677 § 1, (1958))

 

13.44.020 Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
     The owner or person in control of any public or private property upon which a vehicle has been parked or left standing may remove, or cause the removal of, such vehicle pursuant to the provisions of Sections 22658 or 22658.2 of the Vehicle Code.  (Ord. 677 § 2, (1958); Ord. 1454 § 1, (1992))

Chapter 13.48 TRAINS BLOCKING STREETS
13.48.010 Unlawful to block street for longer than five minutes.
     It is unlawful for the operator of any steam, interurban or street railway train or car to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes. (1941 Code § 1239)

Chapter 13.52 BICYCLES
13.52.015 Police exempt.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a member of the police department while operating a bicycle in the course and scope of his or her duties. (Ord. 1487 § 1, (1993))

 

13.52.100 Keeping to right—Two abreast—Riding on sidewalks.
     (a)   Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at a speed less than the normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction at that time shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under any of the following situations:

     (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, pedestrian, or vehicle proceeding in the same direction.

     (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.

     (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions (including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes) that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge, subject to the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 21656. For purposes of this section, a “substandard width lane” is a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.

     (4)   When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.

     (b)   Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway of a highway, which highway carries traffic in one direction only and has two (2) or more marked traffic lanes, may ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of that roadway as practicable.

     (c)   It is unlawful for two (2) or more bicycles to travel abreast when motorized vehicle traffic is present except when riding in a Class II bike lane of at least seven (7) feet wide with a three (3) feet wide buffer.

     (d)   It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle on the sidewalk in any of the business districts of the city, and no bicycle shall be operated on the sidewalk in any of the residential districts when and where the sidewalk is being used by pedestrians. Bicycles on sidewalks shall be walked in any business district or in any residential district when pedestrians are present.

     (e)   If any of the above provisions of this section become inconsistent with the California Vehicle Code due to subsequent amendments to that Code, the state law provisions then in effect shall supersede the inconsistent provisions of this section. (Ord. 1950 § 1, (2018))

 

13.52.110 One person only—Passengers.
     Bicycles designed and constructed to carry only one person shall not be used to carry any additional person or persons either on the handlebars thereof or elsewhere thereon, unless equipment that has been designed and manufactured for transportation of additional passengers in a safe manner has been properly affixed to the bicycle and is used as designed. (1941 Code § 1476; Ord. 1950 § 1, (2018))

 

13.52.120 Pulling other vehicle.
     Bicycles shall only be allowed to pull another vehicle/trailer that has been manufactured and designed for transportation of additional passengers or equipment. In order to comply with this provision, any vehicle/trailer must be properly and safely affixed to the bicycle in a manner that is consistent with the manufacturer’s instructions. (Ord. 1950 § 1, (2018))

 

13.52.130 Obedience to traffic signs and signals—Signaling intention to turn.
     Every person riding and operating a bicycle shall obey all traffic signals and signs, and before making turns shall give the same signals as required of the operators of motor vehicles. (1941 Code § 1479)

 

13.52.140 Lights at night.
     No rider of a bicycle shall ride the same at night without an adequate white headlight on the front thereof and a red light or red reflector on the rear, as required by the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (1941 Code § 1480)

 

13.52.150 Parking in racks—Impounding bicycles lying on sidewalks.
     The city shall provide and set up suitable racks adjacent to the curb or gutter at such places in the business districts of the city as may be deemed advisable for the parking of bicycles by persons who have occasion to stop temporarily in such districts. All bicycles found lying on the sidewalk may be taken up and impounded by the police department, from whence they may be recovered by proving property and obtaining an order from the chief of police or designee. (1941 Code § 1481; Ord. 1950 § 1, (2018))

 

13.52.160 Impoundment of bicycles for violations.
     In addition to or in lieu of any other penalty to be imposed for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the court may prohibit the operation upon the streets, alleys and public places of the city for a period of not to exceed thirty (30) days, of the bicycle used in such violation, in which event the bicycle so used shall be impounded with the police department and retained there for the prohibited period. (Ord. 1950 § 1, (2018))

 

13.52.170 Clinging to moving vehicles.
     It is unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle or street car upon the roadway. (1941 Code § 1245)

 

13.52.180 Riding on park or playground.
     Bicycles operated on any path in any public park or playground within the city shall yield right-of-way when and where the path is being used by pedestrians. Bicyclists shall obey all posted park rules and speed limits, and may be cited for failure to do so. It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive or operate a motorcycle or motor scooter in or on any public park or playground within the city. (Ord. 1950 § 1, (2018))

Chapter 13.54 SKATEBOARD, ROLLER BLADES, IN LINE SKATES, ROLLER SKATES AND COASTERS
13.54.010 Rights and duties on streets.
     Every person riding a skateboard, in line skate, roller blade, or roller skate, coaster or similar device, referred to in this chapter as a “skate,” upon a city street has all the rights and is subject to all duties applicable to the driver of a bicycle by Section 21200 of the Vehicle Code, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. Such persons shall also be subject to the additional regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1316 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1483 § 1, (1993))

 

13.54.020 Keeping to right and other regulations.
     (a)   Every person riding or operating a skate on any public street in the city shall keep to the extreme right of the traffic lane.

     (b)   Two (2) or more skaters shall not travel abreast.

     (c)   No person shall ride or operate a skate on the sidewalk or street in any of the business districts of the city.

     (d)   No skate shall be operated on the sidewalk in any of the residential districts when and where the sidewalk is being used by pedestrians.

     (e)   Only one person shall ride upon a skate.

     (f)    No person shall ride a skate in or on any public park or city parking lot.

     (g)   No person shall ride on a skate except in a standing position. (Ord. 1316 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1483 § 1, (1993))

 

13.54.030 Clinging to other skates or vehicles.
     No person traveling on a skate shall hold onto, pull, cling to or attach himself or herself or his or her skate to any other moving skate or vehicle. (Ord. 1316 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1483 § 1, (1993))

 

13.54.040 Obedience to traffic signs and signals.
     Every person riding and operating a skate shall obey all traffic signals and signs and before making turns give the same signals as required by the operators of motor vehicles. (Ord. 1316 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1483 § 1, (1993))

 

13.54.050 Night riding prohibited.
     No person shall ride a skate at night upon any street, alley or sidewalk. (Ord. 1316 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1483 § 1, (1993))

Chapter 13.60 TRUCK TRAFFIC
13.60.010 Designating truck traffic routes.
     Whenever any ordinance, or provision thereof, of the city designates or describes any street or streets, or portions thereof as a street or streets, the use of which is permitted by any commercial vehicle, or by any vehicle exceeding the maximum gross weight, including the load thereon, of eight tons, the city manager is authorized to designate such street or streets, or portions thereof, by approaching signs as “truck traffic routes” for the movement of commercial vehicles and vehicles exceeding the weight limit of eight tons. No such ordinance shall prohibit any commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering material to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. No such ordinance shall apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use for the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 843 § 1, (1966))

 

13.60.020 Designating prohibited truck traffic routes.
     Whenever any ordinance, or provision thereof, of the city designates or describes any street or streets, or portions thereof as a street or streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, or by any vehicle exceeding the maximum gross weight, including the load thereon, of eight tons, the city manager is authorized to designate such street or streets, or portions thereof, by erecting and installing appropriate signs in appropriate places to indicate the restriction against the movement of commercial vehicles and vehicles exceeding the weight limit of eight tons. No such ordinance shall prohibit any commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. No such ordinance shall apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use for the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 843 § 1, (1965))

 

13.60.030 Destination points—Outside origin.
     (a)   Outside Destination. All trucks entering the city for a destination point outside the city shall operate only over a truck traffic route as established by Section 13.60.050 of this chapter.

     (b)   One Inside Destination Point. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall enter the city only on an established truck route and shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, the deviating truck shall return to the nearest truck route by the shortest route.

     (c)   Multiple Inside Destination Points. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall enter the city only on established truck routes, shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point a deviating truck shall proceed to all other destination points by the shortest route. Upon leaving the last destination point the deviating truck shall return to the nearest truck route by the shortest route. (Ord. 843 § 2, (1966))

 

13.60.040 Destination points—Inside origin.
     (a)   Outside Destination Point. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest route to the nearest truck route as herein established.

     (b)   Inside Destination Points. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed to such destination points by the shortest route. (Ord. 843 § 3, (1966))

 

13.60.050 Weighing at public scale may be required.
     Any police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any truck on any public street or highway in the city to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this chapter has been complied with. (Ord. 843 § 4, (1966))

 

13.60.060 Designation of truck traffic routes.
     The following streets or highways are hereby declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight, including load, of eight (8) tons, hereinafter sometimes called “trucks,” and the city manager is hereby authorized and directed to designate such street or highway by appropriate signs as “Truck Route.”

     Said streets or highways are particularly designated as follows:

     (1)   Bayshore Freeway within the limits of the city;

     (2)   El Camino Real within the limits of the city;

     (3)   Skyline Boulevard within the limits of the city. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.070 Permit.
     Any person, firm or corporation desiring to haul earth and fill and/or other material along any restricted street shall file an application, in triplicate, for a permit so to do with the city manager, the original of which shall be verified. The application shall set forth the following information:

     (1)   A full identification, and the residence and business address of the applicant, including all members of any firm or partnership, and the president and secretary of any corporation applying; if the applicant is the agent or employee of any person for whose benefit the permit is requested, this fact, with the full identification of such person and his or her business and residence address;

     (2)   The facts constituting the necessity for hauling the fill and/or other material;

     (3)   The amount of fill and/or other material intended to be hauled;

     (4)   The dates on which the hauling is intended to be commenced and completed, and the times of day during which hauling is intended to be done;

     (5)   The route within the city which applicant proposes to use over public streets and/or private property transporting the fill and/or other material;

     (6)   The time interval between vehicles, and the number of vehicles per hour, which will travel over the route for which the permit is applied;

     (7)   The locations of the place or places of destination and origin; provided, however, that if delivery is to be made in small quantities to numerous places, a general description satisfactory to the city manager of the locations of the contemplated deliveries will be sufficient;

     (8)   Such further information as the city manager may require. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.080 Application—Filing fee.
     At the time of filing the application, applicant shall pay to the city, at the office of the city treasurer, a minimum filing fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to cover the cost of the city’s investigation of such application. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.090 Application—Copies.
     Immediately upon the filing of an application for a permit to haul, two (2) copies of such application shall be delivered to the city manager. The city manager shall have made an investigation of the facts stated in the application, and within five (5) days from the date of filing such application shall either grant a permit with or without modification, as hereinafter set forth, or deny the same in whole or in part. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.100 Findings prior to granting permit.
     The application shall be granted by the city manager only if he or she finds as follows:

     (1)   That the public health, safety or welfare require the hauling and deposit of the fill and/or other material and the use of the route applied for, or such modification thereof as he or she may deem advisable;

     (2)   That the hauling over the route specified will not be injurious to the public health, safety or welfare; and that the vehicles used are in conformance with the safety maintenance and inspection requirements of the state of California;

     (3)   That the city will be duly protected from liability for injury to persons and property;

     (4)   That the city will be indemnified from injury to its public streets and other places by reason of the use thereof for such hauling. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.110 Deposit.
     The city manager shall require, as a condition to the granting of such permit, that the applicant, prior to the issuance of the permit, deposit with the city treasurer, as security for the payment of fees specified in subsection (f) hereof, a sum of money to be fixed by the city manager, which shall be based upon the charges set forth in subsection (f) hereof; provided, however, as follows:

     (1)   That said security shall be applied to the progress payments, or if none be required, then to the sole payment on the permit fee required under subsection (f) hereof as and when such payments become due;

     (2)   That within thirty-five (35) days after the hauling shall have been completed, permittee shall pay to city at the office of the city treasurer the difference between the amount deposited pursuant to this subsection and the fee due the city under subsection (f) hereof, if the fee due under subsection (f) hereof be greater than the sum deposited under this subsection;

     (3)   That within thirty-five (35) days after the hauling shall have been completed, the city treasurer shall return to permittee the difference between the fee due under subsection (f) hereof and the amount deposited under this subsection, if the fee due under subsection (f) hereof be less than the sum deposited under this subsection;

     (4)   That the amount deposited under this subsection shall be returned to applicant if, prior to the commencement of any hauling operation, pursuant to such application, applicant shall have notified the city manager of his or her intention not to engage in any such hauling operation and demanded the return of the deposit.

     All notices required under these provisions shall be in writing and delivered personally to the city manager or transmitted by United States registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to him or her at the City Offices, City Hall, Burlingame, California.

     The amount demanded by applicant shall be returned to him or her within ten (10) days after such notice shall have been received by the city manager. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.120 Permit fee.
     In the event a permit be granted, the permittee shall pay to the city at the office of the city treasurer a fee for the privilege of such permit at the rate of one cent per ton mile hauled; such material shall be weighed and measured by the city from time to time at the time and place and in the manner specified by the city manager, and the amount due hereunder shall be paid by permittee to the city at the end of each week of haul, if the hauling shall consume more than one week; otherwise, at the end of the hauling period. The moneys collected from such fees shall be deposited in the “limited truck route fund,” and shall be used primarily for the repair and maintenance of limited truck routes and thereafter for general street repair and maintenance. The limited truck route fund is hereby created, and shall be kept by the city treasurer. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.130 Surety bond.
     The city manager shall require, as a condition to the granting of any permit hereunder for the hauling of earth, fill or any other material, that the applicant deposit with the city manager a surety bond in an amount to be fixed and form to be specified by the city manager inuring to the benefit of the city, guaranteeing that applicant will faithfully perform all of the conditions and requirements specified in the permit, and will repair to the satisfaction of the city engineer or superintendent of streets, or at the option of the city manager, reimburse the city for any damage caused to city streets or other city property by the proposed hauling or transportation of material or equipment. Such bond shall be executed by a surety or sureties approved by the city manager as being sufficient in financial responsibility. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.140 Insurance.
     The city manager shall also require, as a condition to the granting of any such permit, that the applicant deposit with the city manager a certificate or policy of a responsible insurance company, showing that the city, its elective and appointive boards, officers, agents and employees are insured, in amounts hereinafter specified, against any loss or damage arising directly from the operations of the applicant or any firm, person or corporation acting in his, their or its behalf in carrying on any operation connected directly or indirectly with the hauling for which such permit is issued. Such policies of insurance shall be as follows:

     (1)   Public Liability Insurance. In an amount not less than one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars for injuries, including, but not limited to, accidental death to any one person and, subject to the same limit for each person, in an amount of not less than three hundred thousand ($300,000.00) dollars on account of one accident.

     (2)   Property Damage Insurance. In an amount of not less than twenty thousand dollars ($20.000.00).

     With the approval of the manager the applicant may deposit the aforesaid surety bonds and policies of insurance on an annual or continuing basis, to cover one or more permits for hauling in the same or different locations. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.150 Restricted streets—Designation of limited truck routes.
     The following restricted streets or highways or portions thereof within the limits of the city are hereby declared and designated limited truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding the maximum gross weight, including load, of eight tons, subject to and in accordance with the provisions of this section, and the city manager is hereby authorized and directed to designate such streets or highways or portions thereof by appropriate signs such as “Limited Truck Route — Permit Required”:

     (1)   Bayshore Highway;

     (2)   California Drive;

     (3)   Peninsula Avenue;

     (4)   Trousdale Drive;

     (5)   Bayshore Boulevard. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.160 Further specifications for permit.
     The city manager shall also specify, in granting the permit, the following:

     (1)   The gross weight limit of each truck or vehicle which shall be authorized to haul under the permit;

     (2)   The time interval between vehicles, and the number of trucks per hour, which shall be permitted to travel over the route specified;

     (3)   The hours of the day and the days of the week during which such trucks shall be permitted to travel over said route;

     (4)   The total number of yards of fill which may be hauled subject to the permit;

     (5)   The period during which the permit is effective. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.170 Right to appeal.
     In the event the application be denied, or the permit be issued on modified terms, on any application for a permit as provided for in this section, within five (5) days of such action, the city manager shall notify applicant, in writing by registered United States mail, of such modification or denial stating the reasons therefor. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.180 Notice of appeal.
     In the event the city manager modifies or denies in whole or in part any application for a permit as provided for in this section, applicant may file with the city clerk a written notice of appeal to the city council from such decision. Such notice of appeal must be filed within five (5) days of the mailing of the notice provided for in Section 13.60.170. In such event, the city clerk shall set the hearing on such appeal before the city council for the second succeeding regular meeting after the date of filing such notice. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.190 Evidence on appeal.
     At the time set for the hearing the council may summon witnesses and hearing evidence relating to the application. The council may continue the hearing from time to time. At the conclusion thereof, the council shall make its findings thereon and may grant or deny the application, or make such modifications with reference thereto as it may deem fit. The findings and order of the council shall be final and conclusive on applicant, and no application for substantially the same purpose may be made by applicant for one year after the date of such findings and order. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.200 Revocation or suspension of permit.
     Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked only by the council as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and just for any reason for which the issuance of such permit might lawfully be denied, or for any failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter or of such permit. Revocation of such permit shall be made only upon a hearing before the council, after at least five (5) days notice to permittee. Such notice shall be in writing mailed by United States mail addressed to permittee at his or her business or residence address as stated in his or her application for a permit. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.210 Revocation—Notice.
     All provisions of Sections 13.60.170, 13.60.180 and 13.60.190 for hearings, findings, orders and conclusiveness of such findings and orders shall apply to this section; provided, however, that the minimum time for any notice required by this section shall be five (5) days.

     The city manager or council may suspend any permit granted hereunder pending the hearing herein provided, where, in his or her opinion, the public health, safety or welfare require it. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.220 Expiration of permits—Issuance of supplemental permits.
     In the event that any hauling for which a permit has been granted hereunder is not commenced within five (5) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or in the event that such hauling is at any time abandoned for a period of five (5) consecutive days, such permit shall automatically expire, without notice, and no further hauling shall be made; however, the conditions expressed in such permit shall remain binding upon the person to whom such permit was issued, and all legal and equitable remedies shall be available against him or her for any breach thereof. When the amount of material hauled equals the number of cubic yards which such permit authorizes to be hauled, or if haulings vary from terms of the permit, no further hauling may be made until a new or a supplemental permit to haul has been issued. In either event herein set forth, an application for a supplemental permit to continue the hauling may be filed, setting forth all the information required for the original application and not contained therein. No further filing fee shall be required, but if such supplemental permit is issued, the applicant shall pay the fee prescribed in subsection (f) of this section and the fee so paid shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (f). The city manager may dispense with any further investigation or hearing, if, in his or her opinion, the information furnished him or her by the original investigation is sufficient to enable him or her to determine whether the supplemental permit should be issued and upon what condition, if any. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.230 Denial of supplemental permit—Right to appeal.
     In the event a supplemental permit be refused, permittee may appeal to the council in the manner provided in Sections 13.60.170, 13.60.180 and 13.60.190 hereof for an appeal from a denial of a permit, and all provisions of said subsections for giving of notices, hearings, findings, orders and conclusiveness of such findings and orders shall apply to this subsection. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.240 Permit does not excuse compliance with other ordinance provisions.
     Nothing in this section, or in any permit granted hereunder, shall be deemed to authorize the doing or omission of any act contrary to any term or provision of any ordinance or license of this city or without any license or permit otherwise required by such term, provision, ordinance or license. (Ord. 843 § 5, (1966))

 

13.60.250 Designation of prohibited streets.
     The following street, streets or highways, or portion thereof, are hereby declared to be prohibited as a route or routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding the maximum gross weight, including load, of eight tons, and the city manager is hereby authorized and directed to erect appropriate signs at appropriate places signifying the restrictions and prohibitions set forth herein:

     (1)   Easton Drive, (2) Hillside Drive, (3) Ralston Avenue and (4) Dwight Rd., city streets for their entire lengths within the limits of the city. (Ord. 843 § 6, (1966))

 

13.60.260 Permitted trucking.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this or any other ordinance of the city, trucks exceeding the maximum gross weight limits herein set forth, the operation of which is not otherwise permitted hereunder, may be permitted on restricted streets of the city designated as “limited truck routes,” under the conditions and provisions as set forth in Section 13.60.170. (Ord. 843 § 7, (1966))

 

13.60.270 Permitted trucking conditions.
     Prior to the adoption of this chapter the city council, as the legislative body of the city, did duly and regularly comply with the provisions of Section 35705 of the California Vehicle Code. In accordance with Section 35705, the city council, after notice given and published as provided in said section, conducted the hearing referred to therein and received the presentation of all oral and written objections of interested parties to the reduction of the weight limit referred to in this chapter. The hearing was duly held before the city council and all objections were considered and all interested parties were afforded an adequate opportunity to be heard in respect to their objections. (Ord. 843 § 8, (1966))

 

13.60.280 Penalty for violations.
     Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 843 § 9, (1966))

Chapter 13.62 INTERSTATE TRUCKS
13.62.010 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth, and if any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it shall have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the Vehicle Code, it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

     (a)   “Caltrans” means the state of California Department of Transportation or its successor agency.

     (b)   “City” means the city of Burlingame.

     (c)   “Director” means the director of public works of the city of Burlingame or his or her authorized representative.

     (d)   “Interstate truck” means a truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the Vehicle Code.

     (e)   “Terminal” means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be loaded and off loaded or at which the vehicles are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. (Ord. 1291 § 1, (1984))

 

13.62.015 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks operating on a federally designated highway system and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 1291 § 1, (1984))

 

13.62.020 Application.
     (a)   Any interested person requiring terminal access for interstate trucks from the federally designated highway system shall submit an application, on a form as provided by the city, together with such information as may be required by the director and appropriate fees to the city.

     (b)   Upon receipt of the application, the director will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal. Upon his or her approval of that designation, he or she will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections and highways and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes. No access off a federally designated highway system will be approved without the approval of Caltrans.

     (c)   Should the requested route pass through the city to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with that jurisdiction’s application process. Coordination of the approval of the route through the city will be the responsibility of the entity which controls the terminal’s land use. Costs for trailblazer signs shall be provided in Section 13.62.030(b). (Ord. 1291 § 1, (1984))

 

13.62.030 Fees and costs.
     (a)   The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by the city by resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route.

     (b)   Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the city and by Caltrans the applicant shall deposit with the city sufficient funds as estimated by the director to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the city on route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place. Costs for trailblazer signs may be proportioned in accordance with the procedures in Section 13.62.040(c). (Ord. 1291 § 1, (1984))

 

13.62.040 Retrofitting.
     (a)   If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory by the director, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual construction will be done by the city or by a contractor acceptable to it.

     (b)   When the work is to be done by the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant as the case might be. When the work is done by the applicant, the applicant may file with the director, on a form satisfactory to the director, a statement detailing the actual costs of the retrofitting.

     (c)   If at any time within five (5) years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any applicant seek terminal approval which could use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such applicants’ fee may include the applicants proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the director, which fee shall be disbursed by the city to the applicant who paid for the retrofitting as well as to any applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting under this subsection. Nothing herein shall require the payment of a proportionate fee if the applicant doing the work failed to file the report with the director required by subsection (b) above. (Ord. 1291 § 1, (1984))

 

13.62.050 Revocation of route.
     The director may revoke any approved terminal or route if the terminal or route becomes a traffic hazard for vehicular traffic. A safety hazard includes the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate the route or said vehicles causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. (Ord. 1291 § 1, (1984))

 

13.62.060 Appeal process.
     (a)   If the director denies terminal designation, route feasibility or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, the applicant/terminal owner, within ten (10) days following the date of receipt of the decisions of the director may appeal the decision to the city council in writing. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by the director or wherein the decision is not supported by the evidence in the record.

     (b)   The city council shall set a hearing at which time it shall make its order approving, modifying or reversing the decision of the director.

     (c)   If Caltrans and not the director denies or revokes terminal access from federally designated highways, no appeal may be made to the city council, but must be made to Caltrans as may be permitted by Caltrans. (Ord. 1291 § 1, (1984))

Chapter 13.65 ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
13.65.010 Findings.
     In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council of the city of Burlingame hereby makes the following findings and declarations:

     The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1478 § 1, (1993))

 

 

13.65.012 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     (a)   “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

     (b)   “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

     (c)   “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

     (d)   “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 1478 § 2, (1993))

 

13.65.015 Exceptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to:

     (a)   A vehicle or parts thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

     (b)   A vehicle or parts thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

     Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under the provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.020 Additional remedies.
     This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.025 Enforcement officer.
     Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.030 Entry.
     When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.035 Administrative costs.
     The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.040 Abatement and removal.
     Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.045 Notice of intention.
     A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

 

Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove an Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative Vehicle or Parts Thereof as a Public Nuisance

 

(Name and address of owner of land)

 

        As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Section 13.65.040 of the Burlingame Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ____________, license number _________ which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Title 13.65 of the Burlingame Municipal Code.

        You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the city, and the costs thereof, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.

        As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Commission of Public Health and Safety within such 10 day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10 day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn, written statement, as aforesaid, in time for consideration at such hearing.

        Notice mailed:_________________________

s/________________

Chief of Police

 

Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove an Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Vehicle or Parts Thereof as a Public Nuisance

        (Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle — notice should be given to both, if different.)

        As last registered (and/or) legal owner of record of (description of vehicle — make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Section 13.65.040 of the Burlingame Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 13.65 of the Burlingame Municipal Code.

        You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or parts of said vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this note.

     As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Commission of

Public Health and Safety within such 10 day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

Notice mailed:_____________

(date)         

s/___________________

Chief of Police

(Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.050 Hearing.
     Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the commission of public health and safety within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the commission of public health and safety on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

     If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten (10) day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten (10) days before hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.055 Decision.
     All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the commission of public health and safety which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The commission of public health and safety shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.

     The commission of public health and safety may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the commission of public health and safety may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if available at the site.

     If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the commission of public health and safety shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

     If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the commission of public health and safety but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.060 Appeal.
     Any interested party may appeal the decision of the commission of public health and safety by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within five (5) days after its decision.

     Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.

     The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 13.65.045.

     In conducting the hearing the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.065 Removal.
     Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five (5) days from the date of mailing of the notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 13.65.055, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

 

13.65.070 Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles and Department of Justice.
     Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles and the Stolen Vehicle System of the Department of Justice identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971); Ord. 1478 § 3, (1993))

 

13.65.075 Assessment.
     If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 13.65.055 are paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Ord. 937 § 1, (1971))

Chapter 13.70 REGULATION OF VEHICULAR TRAFFIC ON PRIVATE ROADS
13.70.010 Finding and declaration.
     The city council does hereby find and declare that the following privately owned and maintained road:

     (1)   Portion of Airport Boulevard which is particularly described in Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 929 and made a part hereof by reference, is generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, and said road so connects with public streets or highways that the public cannot determine that such private road is not a public street or highway. (Ord. 929 § 1, (1971))

 

13.70.020 Vehicle code.
     The provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state of California shall apply to the private roads specifically designated in Section 13.70.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 929 § 1, (1971))

Chapter 13.75 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
13.75.010 Definitions.
     As used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed thereto in this section:

     (a)   “Alternative work hours program” shall mean any system for shifting the work day of an employee so that the work day starts or ends outside of the peak periods. Such programs include but are not limited to: (1) compressed work weeks; (2) staggered work hours involving a shift in the set work hours of employees at the work place; (3) flexible hours involving individually determining work hours within guidelines established by the employer.

     (b)   “Carpool” shall mean a motor vehicle occupied by two (2) or more employees commuting together.

     (c)   “Complex” shall mean any multi-tenant, non-residential building or group of buildings that houses employees. A complex may have more than one but not necessarily all of the following characteristics:

     (1)   It is known by a common name;

     (2)   It is governed by a common set of covenants, conditions, and restrictions;

     (3)   It was approved, or is to be approved, as an entity by the city;

     (4)   It is covered by a single subdivision or parcel map;

     (5)   It is operated by a single management;

     (6)   It shares common parking.

     (d)   “Employee” shall mean any person hired by an employer for work at the work place, working twenty (20) hours or more per week on a regular full-time basis, including independent contractors, but excluding field construction workers, field personnel, seasonal/temporary employees (working less than ninety (90) days consecutively) and volunteers.

     (e)   “Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC)” shall mean a person, who could be an employee or an employer or sponsor, designated to implement a TSM trip-reduction program and to carry out any other requirements of this ordinance at a work place.

     (f)    “Employer” shall mean any public or private employer, including the city, who has a permanent place of business in the city. “Employer” shall not include contractors or other business entities with no permanent place of business in the city.

     (g)   “Inter-City Agreement” shall mean the agreement approved by the city and one or more other cities to establish an organization and procedures for governing a joint TSM program.

     (h)   “Joint Powers Authority” shall mean that agency created under the “Joint Powers Agreement Establishing the Inter-City Transportation Systems Management (TSM) Authority.”

     (i)    “Peak traffic periods,” “peak hour,” and “peak periods” shall mean the periods of highest traffic volume and congestion which are from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusively. A peak period trip shall mean an employee commute trip to or from a work place when the employee’s work day begins or ends within a peak period.

     (j)    “Public transit” shall mean publicly provided transportation, usually either by bus or rail.

     (k)   “Ridesharing” shall mean the transportation of persons in a motor vehicle for commute purposes where the driver is not employed for that purpose. The term includes arrangements known as carpools and vanpools.

     (l)    “Single occupant vehicle” shall mean a vehicle occupied by one employee.

     (m)  “Sponsor” shall mean the owner(s) or developer(s) or manager(s) of a commercial development project or complex.

     (n)   “Telecommuting” shall mean a system of working at home or at an off-site, non-home telecommute facility for the full work day on a regular basis at least one day per week.

     (o)   “Transportation Systems Management (TSM)” shall mean a program to improve the movement of persons through better and more efficient use of the existing transportation system.

     (p)   “TSM Board of Directors” shall mean the group responsible for policy direction of the TSM organization, with membership and responsibilities as defined in the Inter-City Agreement. Responsibilities also include the general direction of the TSM Coordinator and program as set forth in the Inter-City Agreement.

     (q)   “TSM trip-reduction program” shall mean a group of measures developed and implemented by an employer to provide transportation information, commute alternatives assistance and incentives to employees.

     (r)    “Vanpool” shall mean a van occupied by seven (7) or fifteen (15) employees (of the same or multiple employers) including the driver who travel together during the majority of their individual commute distance.

     (s)    “Work site” shall mean any real property, real or personal, which is being operated, utilized maintained, or owned by an employer as part of an identifiable enterprise. All property on contiguous, adjacent, or proximate sites separated only by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, served by a common circulation or access system, and not separated by an impassable barrier to bicycles or pedestrian travel such as a freeway or flood control channel is included as part of the work site. (Ord. 1518 § 3, (1995))

 

13.75.020 TSM coordinator.
     The TSM coordinator shall be employed by the Joint Powers Authority and shall serve as staff in administering the TSM provisions of this ordinance as provided in the Inter-City Agreement. Duties shall include, but are not limited to, assisting employers in carrying out TSM responsibilities, providing commute alternatives assistance, preparing summary reports, and developing incentives for employer participation in the TSM program. (Ord. 1518 § 3, (1995))

 

13.75.030 TSM requirements.
     (a)   Each employer within the city subject to the Bay Area Air Quality Management District’s (BAAQMD) Regulation 13, Rule 1 (regional employer-based trip-reduction rule), shall conform to the employer-based trip-reduction program requirements established and enforced by the BAAQMD.

     (b)   Each employer of twenty-five (25) or more employees, and every sponsor of twenty-five (25) or more employees, is encouraged to distribute to its employees on a regular basis, commute alternatives information on ridesharing, transit, bicycling, etc.; and participate when possible in programs, sponsored by the Joint Powers Authority, that may contribute to the reduction of single occupant vehicle commute trips. (Ord. 1518 § 3, (1995))

 

13.75.040 Fees.
     (a)   Impact Fees. To the extent that available funding is not adequate, the TSM Board of Directors is authorized to determine and levy annual fees upon all public and private employers with twenty-five (25) or more employees. The amount of the fee shall be fixed annually by the Board and shall be presented for approval to each participating city.

     (b)   Collection. The finance director or other designated city staff shall be responsible for collecting fees levied against private employers and/or sponsors. The amounts may be billed and collected with the annual business license fee or such other manner as deemed necessary and appropriate, and the total amount collected shall be transmitted with a collection report to the TSM Board of Directors or its designated agent. Public agencies may be billed directly by the TSM Board of Directors. (Ord. 1518 § 3, (1995))

 

13.75.050 Enforcement.
     An employer or sponsor, except for those subject to Regulation 13, Rule 1, who fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall, after their thirty (30) days written notice to remedy the failure, be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1518 § 3, (1995))

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 WATER AND SEWERS
Chapter 15.04 WATER CONNECTIONS AND FEES
Chapter 15.06 WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCIES
Chapter 15.08 SEWER CONNECTIONS AND CHARGES
Chapter 15.10 SANITARY SEWER USE REGULATIONS
Chapter 15.11 LIEN PROCEDURES FOR UNPAID CHARGES
Chapter 15.12 ABATEMENT OF IMPROPER SEWER CONNECTIONS
Chapter 15.14 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Chapter 15.15 MANAGEMENT OF PCBS DURING BUILDING DEMOLITION PROJECTS

Chapter 15.04 WATER CONNECTIONS AND FEES
15.04.010 Fee for service installations.
     Fees for water service installations shall be those provided from time to time by resolution of the city council. The council shall also establish by resolution such other fees, charges and procedures as may be necessary for the administration of water service. (Ord. 917 § 2, (1970); Ord. 1026 § 1, (1974))

 

15.04.030 Installation of fire protection service.
     (a)   All fire protection services are to be installed by the owner at his or her expense with the required encroachment permit and inspection by the city public works department.

     (b)   A double check detector valve of a type approved by the city public works department is required on all fire services and is to be furnished by the owner. Each building with a fire protection service shall have its own separate fire connection with the city water main.

     (c)   A backflow prevention device, which shall be of a type approved by the director of public works and the health officer, is required on buildings three (3) stories or more in height. (Ord. 917 § 2, (1970); Ord. 1035 § 1, (1975); Ord. 1679 § 4, (2002))

 

15.04.040 Ownership of installed service.
     The ownership of this water service installation including the meter, and complete service from main through the meter box shall be vested in the city of Burlingame.

     A credit for the cost of the meter on an existing service being abandoned may be claimed when a new larger service replaces an existing service. (Ord. 917 § 2, (1970))

 

15.04.050 Cross-connections and backflow standards.
     (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to describe the cross-connection control program implemented by the city of Burlingame public works department to protect the public water supply against actual or potential contamination through cross-connection and backflow.

     (b)   Scope. The scope of the cross-connection control program includes all of the elements necessary to ensure compliance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Public Health Sections 7583 through 7605. The city of Burlingame partners with the San Mateo County environmental health services division to implement the majority of the scope of this program, including compliance with required program personnel certifications, surveying of residential, industrial and commercial user facilities for potential cross-connection hazards, designation of appropriate backflow preventers, requirements for testers and testing of backflow prevention assemblies, and maintenance of records.

     (c)   Definitions. The following definitions describe those terms and phrases that are pertinent to the various elements of a cross-connection control program:

     (1)   Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly. The term “approved backflow prevention assembly” shall mean assemblies listed, and installed as prescribed, on the most current List of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies, published by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC Foundation), and meet any additional requirements deemed necessary by the city or environmental health.

     (2)   Approved Water Supply. The term “approved water supply” means any local water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.

     (3)   Auxiliary Water Supply. The term “auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply as delivered by the water purveyor to the service connection.

     (4)   AWWA. The term “AWWA” is an acronym for the American Water Works Association.

     (5)   Backflow. The term “backflow” shall mean a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, which causes the flow of water or other liquid, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause.

     (6)   Backflow Preventer. The term “backflow preventer” shall mean an approved assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.

     (A)  Air Gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet conveying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. These vertical physical separations must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, never less than one inch.

     (B)   Reduce Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly. This assembly consists of two (2) independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units are located between two (2) tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves as an assembly and equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks.

     (C)   Double Check Valve Assembly. This assembly consists of two (2) internally loaded check valves, either spring-loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit between two (2) tightly closed resilient-seated shutoff valves and equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks.

     (D)  Double Check Valve Detector Assembly. This assembly is a specially designed backflow assembly composed of a line-sized-approved double check valve assembly with a bypass containing a water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for only very low rates and is used to show unauthorized usage or leaks in the customer’s system.

     (E)   Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly. This assembly contains one or two (2) independently operated spring loaded check valves and an independently operated spring loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check or checks. It also includes two (2) tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves and equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks.

     (F)   Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker Assembly. This assembly contains an air inlet valve, a check seat and an air inlet port(s). A shut off valve immediately upstream may be an integral part of the assembly, but there shall be no shutoff valves or obstructions downstream. The assembly shall not be subject to operating pressure for more than twelve (12) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period.

     (G)  Hose Bibb Vacuum Breaker. This device is permanently attached to a hose bibb and acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker.

     (7)   Customer or Responsible Party. The “customer or responsible party” is the person that either has applied for water service from the city, or owns or controls water piping or fixtures served by the city water supply. The terms customer and responsible party have the same meaning within this chapter.

     (8)   Contamination. The term “contamination” means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health, or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.

     (9)   Pollution. The term “pollution” shall mean an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health, but, which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use.

     (10) Cross-Connection. The term “cross-connection” as used in this chapter means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections.

     (11) Person. The term “person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution.

     (12) Facility. The term “facility” means any and all areas on a water user’s property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system.

     (13) Public Water System. The term “public water system” means a system for the provision to pipe water to the public for human consumption that has five (5) or more service connections or regularly serves an average of twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year.

     (14) Service Connection. The term “service connection” refers to the point of connection of a facility’s piping to the water supplier’s facilities, usually considered the point at the outlet from the water meter.

     (15) Water Supplier. The term “water supplier” means the person who owns or operates the approved water supply system.

     (16) Water User. The term “water user” means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system.

     (17) City. Unless otherwise specified, the term “city” shall refer to the city of Burlingame department of public works, water division or San Mateo County environmental health working as a partner to the water division.

     (18) Inspection Tag. “Inspection tag” means a current-calendar-year backflow tag purchased from San Mateo County environmental health.

     (19) Cross-Connection Control Program Specialist. The term “cross-connection control program specialist” means a person certified by AWWA, or an approved equivalent certifying entity, to evaluate the hazards inherent in supplying a customer’s water system.

     (20) Certified Tester. The term “certified tester” means a person certified by AWWA or an approved equivalent certificate and certified by San Mateo County environmental health services to perform backflow prevention assembly testing.

     (d)   Administration of Program.

     (1)   Authority. The city of Burlingame department of public works is the administrative authority for the cross-connection control program. The authority to administer this program comes from state of California, Title 17; state of California, Public Utilities Commission Rule 16c; and state of California, Department of Public Health Services (and any successor agencies).

     (2)   Program Administrator. The program administrator for the cross-connection control program in the city of Burlingame is the public works superintendent or designee. The city also partners with the San Mateo County environmental health services division through an agreement to implement portions of the program, as allowed by California Health and Safety Code. However, the city is ultimately responsible for the implementation of the program.

     (e)   Appropriate Backflow Protection.

     (1)   New Construction, Remodels and Tenant Improvements.

     (A)  Residential, Single-Family and Duplexes Only.

     (i)    Domestic Water. The city may require an approved backflow prevention assembly to be installed on the customer’s facility, as close as possible to the service connection. The assembly shall be a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RPP) or a double check valve assembly (DC) as determined by the city. If it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is required, the customer may also need to install a thermal expansion tank in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.

     (ii)   Irrigation System. The city requires an approved backflow prevention assembly to be installed on the customer’s facility on the branch line serving an irrigation system. The assembly shall be a pressure vacuum breaker (PVB), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RPP), or atmospheric pressure vacuum breaker (AVB) as determined by the city.

     (iii)  Fire Suppression System. All facilities with an installed fire suppression system must have an approved backflow prevention assembly, excluding flow-through fire systems, on the branch line serving the fire suppression system. The assembly shall be a double check valve assembly (DC) or as determined by the city. Flow-through fire protection systems shall be constructed with approved potable water piping and materials.

     (B)   Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, Multifamily.

     (i)    Domestic Water. The city may require an approved backflow prevention assembly to be installed on the customer’s facility, as close as possible to the service connection. The assembly shall be a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RPP) or a double check valve assembly (DC) as determined by the city. If it’s determined after a survey, that a backflow prevention assembly is required, the customer may also need to install a thermal expansion tank in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.

     (ii)   Irrigation System. The city requires an approved backflow prevention assembly to be installed on the customer’s facility, as close as possible to any irrigation system service connections or on any irrigation branch line. The assembly shall be a pressure vacuum breaker (PVB), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RPP) or atmospheric pressure vacuum breaker (AVB) as determined by the city.

     (iii)  Fire Suppression System. All facilities with an installed fire suppression system must have an approved backflow prevention assembly. The assembly shall be a double check valve detector assembly (DCDA) and installed according to city standard specifications and drawings, and this section. The assembly must incorporate a city-supplied bypass water meter at customer’s cost which is also protected with an approved double check valve assembly.

     (2)   Existing Service Connection. When it is determined in a survey by a city or environmental health cross-connection control program specialist that an actual or potential cross connection or backflow condition is present on an existing facility, the installation of an appropriate backflow preventer shall be required. Should an existing backflow prevention assembly be in place that does not meet the city’s installation requirements, does not comply with this section, or does not provide adequate protection with the degree of hazard found on-site, the assembly shall be replaced or upgraded as required by the city, at the expense of the customer or responsible party.

     (f)    Surveys.

     (1)   Identification of Survey Candidates. The city may identify specific industries that might pose an actual or potential backflow hazard to the public water supply. Some of these industries are identified from common lists of industries where cross-connections are likely to be found, as provided by the state of California, the USC Foundation, and other recognized organizations. From these lists, specific facilities in the city’s service area may be identified by directories, mailing lists, associations, and business licenses.

     (2)   Survey. Surveys may take the form of office surveys or field surveys. Office surveys may include determination of facility hazards based on business type or known water use on the facility. Office surveys could also include evaluation of responses to mailed or on-line surveys.

 

     Field surveys may include evaluation of water use by observations made from public or private areas not on the subject facility, or physical inspection on all or a portion of the facility. When possible, a request to survey the facility shall be made at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance, and a date and time agreed upon with a responsible party. Should the request to survey be denied by a responsible party, notice shall be sent to the customer or responsible party directing installation of the appropriate backflow assembly, at the water meter, based on best available knowledge of the water use and potential hazards at the facility.

     During the survey many factors are considered to determine if activities or water use on facility are or could be a potential hazard to the public water supply. Factors that may be considered include:

     (A)  Alternative sources of water on site (auxiliary water supplies).

     (B)   Piping configurations on-site.

     (C)   Uses of water on-site.

     (D)  Types of water using equipment.

     (E)   Condition of water using equipment.

     (F)   Complexity and elevations of plumbing on-site, and the potential for alterations of that system.

     (G)  Storage and use of hazardous materials on-site.

     All the factors found and recorded during the survey shall be considered in the determination of the degree of potential hazard (degree of hazard) to the public water supply. This information shall be considered in the determination of the appropriate backflow preventer. The customer or responsible party shall be informed of the requirement to provide backflow protection and the type of backflow prevention assembly required in accordance with Title 17 of the California Regulations Related to Drinking Water or the direction of the county health officer.

     (g)   Location and Configuration of Backflow Assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 7603, the city’s Standard Specifications, and the most recent edition of the USC Foundation manual. Any deviation from these requirements shall require the city’s approval. Unless otherwise permitted by the city, all backflow preventers shall be installed on the customer’s or responsible party’s facility.

     (1)   Air-Gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located as close as practical to the user’s connection and all piping between the user’s connection and the receiving tank shall be entirely visible unless otherwise approved.

     (2)   Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). A double check valve assembly and double check valve detector assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above grade and not more than thirty-six (36) inches above grade measured from the bottom of the assembly in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance.

     (3)   Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RPP). A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above grade and not more than thirty-six (36) inches above grade measured from the bottom of the assembly, and with a minimum of twelve (12) inches side clearance in a manner where the assembly is readily accessible for testing and maintenance.

     (4)   Pressure Vacuum Breaker (PVB). A pressure vacuum breaker check valve assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above all downstream piping and flood level rims of receptors and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance.

     (5)   Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker (AVB). An atmospheric vacuum breaker check valve assembly shall be installed a minimum of six (6) inches above all downstream piping and flood level rims of receptors and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance.

     (6)   Backflow Prevention Assembly Enclosures. A backflow prevention assembly enclosure, cage or locked bag may be required by the city to be installed at the customer’s expense, to combat against tampering, vandalism or theft. The city may require that any enclosure, cage or locked bag be secured to a concrete slab and securely locked.

     Any deviation of installation from the descriptions provided shall require the city’s approval prior to installation. All backflow prevention assembly installations shall be inspected by the city to ensure compliance with all relevant statutes, regulations, ordinances, and city requirements.

     (h)   Testing and Maintenance of Backflow Preventers.

     (1)   Responsibility. As per the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, the city shall assure that adequate maintenance and periodic testing of backflow prevention assemblies are provided by the customer or responsible party, to ensure the proper operation of the assemblies. Therefore, the city declares that the customer or responsible party is ultimately responsible for the installation, testing, and maintenance of all required backflow prevention assemblies on or related to the customer’s facility.

     (2)   Certified Testers. No person shall test and/or make reports on backflow prevention assemblies to comply with this section unless he or she possesses a current certification issued by the San Mateo County environmental health services division as defined in County Ordinance Code.

     (3)   Frequency of Testing. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested by a certified tester immediately after they are installed, relocated or repaired and not placed in service unless they are functioning as required. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at least annually or more frequently if determined to be necessary by the city or environmental health, in accordance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, and San Mateo County Ordinance Code. Exception is subsection (h)(4)(A).

     (4)   Fire Suppression System Backflow Preventer Testing.

     (A)  Single-Family and Duplex Residential. Single-family and duplex residential (SFDR) fire suppression systems with an installed backflow prevention assembly shall be tested upon installation only, unless otherwise required by the city. After completion of successfully testing the assembly, the #1 and #2 shut off valves shall remain in the open position and the handles removed. The handles shall be stored in the spare head box. SFDR fire suppression system backflow assemblies are not required to be tested annually because of the low degree of hazard.

     (B)   Commercial, Industrial, Multifamily.

     (i)    Commercial, industrial, multifamily fire suppression system backflow preventers must be tested annually by a certified tester.

     (ii)   If an existing fire suppression system backflow assembly is located in a vault, and has adequate physical clearance to test, it is considered “existing non-conforming” and approved for testing.

     (iii)  If an existing assembly fails the field test, the assembly must be repaired or replaced with an appropriate, approved backflow prevention assembly, installed to current city standards. If any failed assembly is currently in a vault, the assembly must be relocated above grade, to meet all current codes and city standards.

     (iv)  If an existing fire system does not have testable approved backflow prevention assembly the city shall require that a new appropriate assembly that meets all current codes be installed at customer or responsible party expense.

     (i)    Procedures for Testing and Inspection.

     (1)   Testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested using current USC Foundation test procedures.

     (2)   When a backflow prevention assembly is inspected and has passed the testing procedure, the certified tester shall immediately affix a numbered inspection tag to the assembly purchased from the county of San Mateo environmental health services division.

     (3)   When a backflow prevention assembly fails the testing procedure, the certified tester shall immediately affix a “Failed” inspection tag to the assembly. Records of failed assembly tests shall be filed/submitted as directed within ten (10) days. The “Failed” inspection tag shall remain affixed to the assembly until the assembly is repaired, has passed the testing procedures and has been affixed with a numbered inspection tag.

     (4)   Certified testers are solely responsible to comply with applicable municipal requirements for additional permits or licenses (i.e., local business license, plumbing permit, etc.) to test or repair backflow prevention assemblies within the city.

     (j)    Enforcement. San Mateo County environmental health has the authority to take enforcement action as allowed in the County Ordinance Code relating to backflow prevention, and as it applies to the agreement between the city and environmental health. The city shall have the authority to enforce this section as follows:

     (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or bypasses or renders inoperative any backflow prevention assembly installed under the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to fines as detailed in Burlingame Municipal Code Chapter 1.12, Violations of Code.

     (2)   Failure to comply with any section of this chapter may be cause for the discontinuance of water service by the city. The program administrator shall give notice in writing of any violations of this chapter to the customer or responsible party. If appropriate action is not taken within ten (10) days after such notice has been mailed or delivered in person, the program administrator may discontinue delivery of water. However, if the program administrator or the health officer determines that the violation constitutes an immediate threat to the public health or safety or to the integrity of the public water system, the program administrator or the health officer may discontinue delivery of water immediately without prior notice; in such an instance, the program administrator or the health officer shall deliver notice of discontinuance as soon as practicable to the property owner and customer or responsible party. Delivery of water shall not be resumed until all required corrective actions have been made and certified as complete by the city or environmental health.

     (3)   All costs incurred by the city for discontinuance of water service and all fees associated with reinstating water service shall be paid by the customer or responsible party. Costs incurred by environmental health for inspections shall be paid by the customer or responsible party at the rate set forth by San Mateo County ordinance.

     (k)   Reporting. All reporting required by this chapter at the city shall be the responsibility of the program administrator. This includes any reports to local, state, and federal regulatory or health agencies such as: California Department of Health Services, and San Mateo County environmental health services division.

     (l)    Training of Personnel.

     (1)   Program Administrator. The program administrator of the cross-connection control program at the city shall be a minimum of a supervisor capacity. He or she shall be a cross-connection control program specialist as defined in this section.

     (2)   Cross-Connection Control Inspector and Tester. The city representative assigned to the inspection and survey of consumers to determine if backflow prevention is warranted shall be a cross-connection control program specialist as defined in this chapter. The city employee assigned to the testing of city-owned assemblies shall be a certified tester as defined in this section.

     (m)  Maintenance of Records.

     (1)   Assembly Records. Records of assembly type, size, manufacturer, installation date, location, account number, customer or responsible party of record, and repair history shall be kept electronically or in hard copy form. Assembly records shall be kept for the life of the assembly by either the city or by environmental health as appropriate.

     (2)   Testing Records. Test results on all assemblies shall be kept electronically or in hard copy form for a minimum of three (3) years. (Ord. 1903 § 2, (2014))

 

15.04.060 Domestic and fire services over two inches within public property.
     Design details, methods and materials for construction of water services over two (2) inches in diameter within public property are not specified in this code. Such details, methods and materials shall conform with specifications for the construction of such work as are compiled by the city engineer. Such specifications may be changed from time to time at the option of the city engineer but such changes shall in no way affect the validity of regulations or requirements contained herein. (Ord. 1035 § 2, (1975))

Chapter 15.06 WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCIES
15.06.010 Implementation of chapter.
     (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall be implemented only upon adoption by the city council of a declaration that a water shortage condition exists that requires special conservation measures or emergency allocation measures pursuant to California Water Code Section 350 et seq.

     (b)   The provisions of the chapter shall be of no further force or effect when the city council determines that a water shortage condition no longer exists. (Ord. 1101 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1365 § 1, (1988))

 

15.06.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this chapter:

     (a)   “Customer” is any person using water supplied by the Burlingame water department.

     (b)   “Director” is the director of public works of the city of Burlingame.

     (c)   “Emergency allocations” are the allocations allowed various classifications of customers to achieve a specific reduction in water use necessitated by a water shortage of emergency proportions.

     (d)   “Person” is any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

     (e)   “Special conservation measures” are the measures required to achieve a specific reduction in water use necessitated by a water shortage which has not reached emergency proportions.

     (f)    “Unit of water” is one thousand (1,000) gallons of water.

     (g)   “Water” is water from the water department.

     (h)   “Water department” is the Burlingame municipal water system.

     (i)    “Water shortage” means a water shortage condition declared by the city council pursuant to Sections 350 et seq., of the Water Code. (Ord. 1101 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1365 § 1, (1988))

 

15.06.030 Allocations.
     When the city council declares a water shortage that requires emergency allocations, it shall specify in the declaration the specific allocations required to achieve the specified reduction in water use. The allocations may include any or all of the following classifications:

     (a)   Single-party residential and multifamily residential customers, including a minimum or lifeline allocation;

     (b)   Nonresidential customers:

     (1)   Industrial customers using process water to manufacture, alter, convert, clean, heat or cool a product, including water used in laundries and recycled car wash facilities,

     (2)   Industrial, commercial (including nonrecycled car wash facilities) and governmental agency customers;

     (c)   Irrigation and Outside Water Usage Customers. Irrigation of lawns, gardens, playfields, parks, median strips and landscaping of any type. (Ord. 1101 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1365 § 1, (1988))

 

15.06.040 Regulations and restrictions.
     The city council at the time it declares a water shortage may adopt water use regulations and restrictions, including, but not limited to, any or all of the following:

     (a)   Broken or defective plumbing, sprinklers, watering or irrigation systems which permit the escape or leakage of water shall be immediately repaired.

     (b)   Irrigation of lawns, gardens, playfields, parks, median strips and landscaping of any type shall be reduced by an amount determined by the city council to be necessary to achieve the goals set forth in its declaration of a water shortage.

     (c)   No use of water shall be allowed which results in flooding or runoff in gutters, driveways or streets.

     (d)   When a hose is used for washing cars, buses, boats, trailers or other vehicles, or washing building structures or parts thereof, or any similar purpose, it shall have a positive shutoff valve.

     (e)   Use of a hose for the purposes set forth in subsection (d) of this section shall be prohibited.

     (f)    Restaurants shall serve water to customers only upon request.

     (g)   No water shall be used to clean, fill or maintain levels in decorative exterior fountains; interior fountains must recirculate water.

     (h)   Sidewalks, walkways, driveways, patios, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas shall not be cleaned using water from hoses or by other use of water directly from faucets or other outlets.

 

     (i)    Draining and filling of any existing or new swimming pools with city-supplied water shall be prohibited.

     (j)    Service connections for new construction incorporating water-saving devices shall be granted as long as conditions of this chapter are met, provided no residential landscaping shall be installed during the water shortage.

     (k)   Construction water for consolidation of backfill and other nondomestic uses shall be denied if other methods of water sources can be used.

     (l)    No new residential irrigation services shall be permitted, and additional water shall not be allowed for expansion of existing irrigation facilities. (Ord. 1101 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1365 § 1, (1988))

 

15.06.050 Exceptions.
     Considerations for exceptions regarding allocations of water or from any of the regulations and restrictions set forth herein shall be as follows:

     (a)   Written applications for exceptions shall be made to the City of Burlingame Water Department, 501 Primrose Road, Burlingame, California 94010.

     (b)   Each application shall be reviewed and determined by the director. Denials of applications may be appealed to the city council whose decision shall be final.

     (c)   The only grounds for granting such exceptions are:

     (1)   Undue hardship to the applicant, including adverse economic impacts such as loss of production or jobs;

     (2)   A condition affecting the health, sanitation or safety of the applicant or the general public.

     Prior to granting an exception, the director must be satisfied that all practical water conservation measures have been adopted by the applicant. (Ord. 1101 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1365 § 1, (1988))

 

15.06.060 Penalties for excess water consumption.
     The following penalties may be imposed on excess water consumption:

     (a)   Excess Use Charge. The city council shall set by resolution an amount to be added to the normal cost per unit for each unit in excess of allocation.

     (b)   Flow-Restricting Devices. The city manager may, after one written warning, direct the installation of a flow-restricting device on the service line of any customer observed by city personnel to be violating any of the regulations and/or exceeding water allocations hereinabove set forth.

     Charges for installation and removal of flow-restricting devices shall be set by council.

     First installation shall be a minimum of three (3) days, second and last installation, ten (10) days minimum.

     (c)   Discontinuance of Water Service. Continued water consumption in excess of the allocation may result in the discontinuance of water service by the water department. A reactivation charge shall be paid prior to reactivating the service.

     (d)   Fines and Penalties as Provided in Title 1 of this Code. Persons violating the provisions set forth in this chapter may also be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Title 1 of this code. (Ord. 1101 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1365 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1921 § 1, (2015))

 

15.06.070 Enforcement.
     The director, all employees of the water department, public works department and fire department have the duty and are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have all the powers and authority contained in California Penal Code Section 836.5, including the power to issue written notices to appear.

     In addition to the foregoing, the city attorney, code compliance officer and their designees are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter through the mechanisms provided in Title 1 of this code. (Ord. 1101 § 1, (1977); Ord. 1365 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1921 § 1, (2015))

Chapter 15.08 SEWER CONNECTIONS AND CHARGES
15.08.010 Application for sewer connection.
     Whenever sewer laterals are to be laid and connected with the sewer mains of the city, the person, firm or corporation desiring to lay and connect the same shall apply in writing to the city engineer stating the location of the premises to which the connection is to be made. Such application will signify the customer’s willingness and intention to comply with this chapter and other ordinances or regulations relating to the regular sewer service and to make payment for sewer service required. An application will not be honored unless payment in full has been made for sewer service previously rendered to the applicant by the city. Upon receipt of the application, the city engineer shall issue the necessary permits and collect such inspection fees as may be established by council from time to time. (1940 Code § 1650, Ord. 1118 § 1, (1978); Ord. 1235 § 1, (1982); Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983))

 

15.08.020 Connection charge.
     (a)   Any person requesting a connection to a sewer shall, as a condition of the connection, pay a charge for each separate building site based upon the following schedule.

 

Land Use

Connection Fee

Single-family and duplex

$101/unit

Multifamily

$77/unit

Commercial/retail

$161/thousand square feet

Office

$35/thousand square feet

Warehouse

$45/thousand square feet

Restaurant

$398/thousand square feet

Hotel w/restaurant

$254/room

Hotel without restaurant

$157/room

 

     (b)   The schedule listed in subsection (a) of this section shall be adjusted to conform to the latest Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for the city of San Francisco using two thousand five hundred (2,500) as the base index. The connection charges listed in subsection (a) of this section shall therefore be multiplied by the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for the city of San Francisco in effect on January 1, and the result divided by two thousand five (2,500) hundred to obtain the true connection charge for the subsequent calendar year.

     (c)   The director of public works shall determine the appropriate land use category for each applicant. If an appropriate category cannot be determined, a fee shall be charged on the basis of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) per estimated pound of B.O.D. generated per year. The rate per pound shall be adjusted as set forth in subsection (a) of this section for scheduled fees. (Ord. 1235 § 2; (1982))

 

15.08.030 Number of laterals per lot.
     Every lot, piece and parcel of land in the city as originally subdivided and shown on the official subdivision map recorded in the office of the county recorder of the county of San Mateo shall be entitled to at least one sewer service lateral connecting from the main sewer to the particular piece or parcel of land, capable of being used for building purposes when the piece or parcel of land has a street or alley frontage of fifty (50) feet or more and when the street or alley frontage is less than fifty (50) feet as shown on the original subdivision record as mentioned in this section and the piece or parcel of land is capable of being used for building purposes, then only one service lateral will be granted to the piece or parcel of land; and when the particular piece or parcel of land is on a corner and frontage on the street or alley, the lateral service will be on the basis only of the official width of the property as appears on the original subdivision record in the office of the county recorder of San Mateo County as mentioned in this section. (1941 Code § 1652, Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983))

 

15.08.040 Application for lateral rearrangement of lot frontage.
     Whenever any person, firm or corporation has made or is to make a rearrangement of his, her or its property on the street or alley frontage, it shall be necessary, before any sewer lateral service is given to any property, piece or parcel of land so rearranged, that such person, firm or corporation shall apply in writing to the city council for the desired sewer service lateral, and attached to the application shall be a drawing of the piece or parcel of land as rearranged.

     It shall be within the discretion at all times of the city council to grant or deny the application as required in this section and under such times and conditions as it deems proper. (1941 Code § 1652, Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983))

 

15.08.050 No sublaterals permitted.
     All sewer lateral connections from the street or alley mains shall be made on a direct connection thereto and shall be a separate and distinct connection, no sublateral being permitted. (1941 Code § 1654, Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983))

 

15.08.060 Sewer rental—Definitions.
     As used in Sections 15.08.070 through 15.08.110, the following words shall have the meanings given in this section:

     “Industrial” refers to a user which may be subject to any pretreatment program established by the city.

     “Person” means and includes individuals, partnerships, associations and corporations.

     “Premises” refers to and includes a lot, parcel of land, building or establishment.

     “Sewage” is defined as water or a combination of water and waterborne wastes conducted from residences, commercial buildings and institutions and which is known as domestic sewage; also the liquid or water-carried waste resulting from commercial manufacturing or industrial operation or process, which water or waterborne wastes enter the system of sewerage, or any part thereof, of the city from any premises having a connection therewith or thereto. (1941 Code § 1725, Ord. 444, (1947); Ord. 1064 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983))

 

15.08.070 Sewer rental—Service charges.
     (a)   Every person whose premises in the city are served by a connection with the system of sewerage of the city, whereby the sewerage or industrial wastes, or either or both, are disposed by the city, shall pay a bimonthly sewer charge based upon the quantity of metered water per bimonthly billing period as set forth in the following rate schedules, whether such water is derived from a source other than city water supply or all or part of such water is furnished to the premises without charge. The director of public works shall determine the classification of uses not specifically listed. The finance director shall have the discretion and authority to establish a different sewer charge when circumstances such as water leaks or unseasonable or atypical water usage cause established rates to result in inequitably low or high sewer charges; any such determination shall be reviewed by the city manager upon request from the customer. The finance director may request documentation evidencing the existence of a leak or any other problem that may have resulted in an inequitable charge.

 

Classification

Amount

 

 

(1) Single-family/duplex

Effective for all billings on or after March 3, 2010:

 

 

 

$9.43 per thousand gallons of average water consumption for the billing periods January through April of the years 2007, 2008, and 2009. Any user with an average water consumption of less than a thousand gallons per month shall pay $18.86 as the bimonthly sewer charge.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2011:

 

 

 

$10.75 per thousand gallons of average water consumption for the billing periods January through April of the years 2008, 2009, and 2010. The three-year average consumptions will be recalculated on January 1, 2011. Any user with an average water consumption of less than a thousand gallons per month shall pay $21.50 as the bimonthly sewer charge.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2012:

 

 

 

$12.25 per thousand gallons of average water consumption for the billing periods January through April of the years 2009, 2010, and 2011. The three-year average consumptions will be recalculated on January 1, 2012. Any user with an average water consumption of less than a thousand gallons per month shall pay $24.50 as the bimonthly sewer charge.

 

 

(2) Multifamily residential

Effective for all billings on or after March 3, 2010:

 

 

 

$8.81 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2011:

 

 

 

$10.05 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2012:

 

 

 

$11.45 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

(3) Restaurant, caterers, supermarkets, bakeries and other commercial food processing and food-related commercial

Effective for all billings on or after March 3, 2010:

$25.08 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2011:

 

 

 

$25.89 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2012:

 

 

 

$32.59 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

(4) Moderate strength commercial, including manufacturing, hotels with restaurants and hospitals

Effective for all billings on or after March 3, 2010:

$16.91 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2011:

 

 

 

$19.27 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2012:

 

 

 

$21.97 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

(5) Light strength commercial including office-warehouse, office buildings, cocktail lounges, auto-related, carwash, laundromats, convalescent homes and hotels without restaurants

Effective for all billings on or after March 3, 2010:

$10.41 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2011:

 

 

 

$11.87 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2012:

 

 

 

$13.53 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

(6) Institutional (schools and churches)

Effective for all billings on or after March 3, 2010:

 

 

 

$3.69 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2011:

 

 

 

$4.21 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

 

 

Effective for all billings on or after January 1, 2012:

 

 

 

$4.80 per thousand gallons of water consumption for the current billing period.

 

(Ord. 444, (1947); Ord. 784, (1963); Ord. 848 § 1, (1966); Ord. 916 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1021 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1064 § 2, (1976); Ord. 1109, (1977); Ord. 1155 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1203 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1245 § 1, (1983); Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983); Ord. 1254 § 1, (1983); Ord. 1282 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1307 § 1, (1985);Ord. 1330 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1352 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1370, (1988); Ord. 1396 § 1, (1989); Ord. 1416 § 1 (1989); Ord. 1416 § 1, (1990);Ord. 1442 § 1, (1991); Ord. 1469, (1992); Ord. 1488 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1509 § 1, (1994);Ord. 1530 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1534 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1551 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1571 § 1, (1997); Ord. 1596 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1617 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1631 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1658 § 2, (2001); Ord. 1693 § 2, (2002); Ord. 1716 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1785 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1844 § 2, (2010))

 

 

15.08.072 New customers in single-family or duplex classification
     (a)   When new customer service is provided to premises classified as single-family or duplex under Section 15.08.070, the customer will be charged at a bimonthly rate based on the number of residents reported to occupy the premises as follows:

 

Number of residents

Rate effective for billing on or after March 3, 2010

Rate effective for billing on or after January 1, 2011

Rate effective for billing on or after January 1, 2012

1

$36.65

$41.78

$47.63

2

$45.60

$51.98

$59.26

3

$55.80

$63.62

$72.52

4

$66.01

$75.25

$85.78

5

$75.37

$85.92

$97.94

6

$78.06

$88.98

$101.44

7

$84.87

$96.76

$110.30

8

$98.85

$112.69

$128.46

9 or more

$115.88

$132.10

$150.60

 

     (b)   This per capita rate will be used until the customer has had service through a consecutive January, February, March, and April, and on January 1 following that consecutive period, the sewer rate for the customer will be adjusted to the applicable rate specified in Section 15.08.070(a)(1) of this chapter according to the water usage for those months. Following a second consecutive January, February, March, and April, the rate will be further adjusted according to the demonstrated water usage for the total eight (8) months on January 1 following the second consecutive period. (Ord. 1716 § 3, (2003); Ord. 1724 § 3, (2003); Ord. 1785 § 3, (2006); Ord. 1844 § 3, (2010))

 

15.08.090 Sewer rental—Industrial sampling.
     Every premises determined to be within the industrial class shall provide a facility for the sampling of its effluent at a location approved by the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1725.3, Ord. 444, (1947); Ord. 1064 § 4, (1976); Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983))

 

15.08.100 Sewer rental—Charges payable bimonthly.
     The sewer rental specified in this chapter shall be charged, collected and enforced in the same manner, at the time and by the same persons as are the charges for water furnished by the city, and the amount thereof shall be included in the total amount due for water. All provisions of this code applicable to the charge, collection and enforcement of rates for water furnished by the city are made applicable to the provisions of Sections 15.08.060 through 15.08.110. (Ord. 1064 § 5, (1976); Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983))

 

15.08.110 Sewer rental—Fund.
     All moneys received from the collection of the sewer rental charges as authorized shall be deposited with the city treasurer who shall keep a separate and distinct fund and account to be known as “the sewer rental fund.” This fund shall be used, when appropriated by the council, for the management, maintenance, operation and repair of the sewage system, sewage pumping, treatment and disposal works and for the planning, extension and enlargement of the works. (Ord. 1064 § 6, (1976); Ord. 1235 § 3, (1982); Ord. 1250 § 1, (1983))

Chapter 15.10 SANITARY SEWER USE REGULATIONS
15.10.005 Purpose and policy.
     These sanitary sewer use rules and regulations are intended to do the following:

     (a)   Set uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment system and enable the city to comply with the administrative provisions of the clean water grant regulations, the water quality requirements set by the applicable effluent limitations, national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards and all other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by state or federal law, and to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged into the city of Burlingame’s sewer system.

     (b)   Provide for and regulate the disposal of sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer system of the city in such a manner and to such an extent as is reasonably necessary to sustain the ability of the sanitary sewer system to handle and dispose of sanitary sewage.

     (c)   Provide for and regulate the disposal of industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system of the city in such a manner and to such an extent as may be reasonably necessary to maintain and increase the ability of such system to handle and dispose of industrial waste without decreasing the ability of said system to handle and dispose of all sanitary sewage.

     (d)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer system which will pass through the treatment works of the city and cooperating agencies or otherwise be incompatible with such works or interfere with the ability of the works to treat, discharge and recycle wastewater, or to use or dispose of bio-solids.

     (e)   Improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim treated effluent and wastewater sludge.

     (f)    Protect the physical structures of the sanitary sewer system and the efficient functioning of its component parts.

     (g)   Protect the city, its citizens, and the personnel working in the sanitary sewage system facilities.

     (h)   Preserve and protect the health, safety and property of the public.

     (i)    Protect the environmental health of San Francisco Bay.

     (j)    Provide a means for determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees and the issuance of permits to certain users.

     (k)   Derive revenues to be used to defray the city’s cost of operating and maintaining adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide funds for capital outlay, bond service costs, capital improvements and depreciation. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.007 Conflicts with other provisions.
     In the event of any conflicts or inconsistencies between the provision of this chapter and any other provisions of this code, the provisions that provide the greatest protection to the sewage works and San Francisco Bay shall prevail as determined by the director of public works. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.010 Violation unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person to:

     (a)   Connect to, construct or install or provide, maintain or use any other means of sewage disposal except by connection to a public sewer as required by this chapter; or

     (b)   Dispose of any sewage in the city in violation of this chapter or of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.015 Definitions.
     When used in this chapter or in connection with any resolution, regulation, permit, order, or other action undertaken pursuant to this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

     (a)   “A” Definitions.

     (1)   ACT or Act. “ACT” or “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, P.L. 92-500, and amendments thereto, as well as any guidelines, limitations, standards, and regulations promulgated by the United States government through the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.

     (2)   Agency. “Agency” means the city when the context so indicates.

     (3)   Ammonia. “Ammonia” means that form of nitrogen which is chemically definable as NH3.

     (4)   Applicant. “Applicant” means the person making application for a permit for a sewer or plumbing installation or discharge, and shall be the owner of the premises to be served by the sewer or plumbing installation or from which the discharge is to occur, or the owner’s duly authorized agent.

     (5)   Audit Protocols. “Audit protocols” mean the procedures to be followed in performing a mass audit study.

     (6)   Average Concentration. “Average concentration” means the concentration of a pollutant in an industrial user’s discharge that is calculated by adding the concentrations of the particular pollutant in all composite samples taken during a given time period, including, but not limited to, self monitoring samples, and dividing the total by the number of samples taken.

     (b)   “B” Definitions.

     (1)   Beneficial Uses. “Beneficial uses” mean uses of the waters of the state that may be protected against quality degradation, including domestic, municipal, agricultural, and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation, and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife, and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible or intangible as specified by federal or state law.

     (2)   Best Management Practices. “Best management practices” mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of pollutants to the sanitary sewer system which have been determined by the director to be cost effective for particular industry groups, business types, or specific industrial processes.

     (3)   BOD or Biochemical Oxygen Demand. “BOD” or “biochemical oxygen demand” means the measure of decomposable material in domestic or industrial wastewaters as represented by the oxygen utilized in decomposition over a period of incubation of five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade under laboratory conditions pursuant to standard methods.

     (4)   Building. “Building” means any structure used for a residence, place of business, recreation, or other purpose of human habitation.

     (5)   Building Sewer. “Building sewer” means that portion of any sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to a community sewer, beginning at the plumbing or drainage outlet of any building and running to the lateral sewer at or near the property line.

     (c)   “C” Definitions.

     (1)   Categorical Pretreatment Standards. “Categorical pretreatment standards” means the limitations on pollutant discharges to POTW’s promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 of the Act, that apply to specified process wastewaters of particular industrial categories. [40 CFR 403.6 and Parts 405-471].

     (2)   COD or Chemical Oxygen Demand. “COD” or “chemical oxygen demand” means the measure of chemically decomposable material in domestic or industrial wastewater as represented by the oxygen utilized as determined by the appropriate procedure described in standard methods.

     (3)   Code of Federal Regulations or CFR. “Code of Federal Regulations” or “CFR” means the Code of Federal Regulations published by the Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration. Whenever a reference is made to any portion of the CFR, or to any other federal regulation, that reference shall include all amendments and additions to that portion of the CFR or regulation, now or hereinafter adopted.

     (4)   Combined sewer. “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.

     (5)   Commercial user (COM). “Commercial user” or “COM” means any person who discharges non-domestic wastewater and who provides a service or engages in the purchase or sale of commodities.

     (6)   Community sewer. “Community sewer” means a sewer owned and operated by the city and tributary to a treatment facility operated by the city.

     (7)   Compatible pollutant. “Compatible pollutant” means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the city’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit if the city’s treatment plant is designed to treat such pollutants and if, in fact, does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.

     (8)   Composite sample. “Composite sample” means a flow-proportional or time-proportional sample, which accurately represents the average pollutant concentration discharged during a continuous time period. A composite sample may be obtained manually or automatically, and discretely or continuously. For manual compositing, at least six (6) individual samples from each sample point shall be combined and mixed to obtain one composite sample; flow-proportion may be obtained either by varying the time interval between each discrete sample and the volume of each discrete sample.

     (9)   Contamination. “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of water of the state by waste to a degree that creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. “Contamination” includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not waters of state are affected.

     (10) Contractor. “Contractor” means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or association licensed by the state to perform the type of work to be done under the permit.

     (11) Control authority. “Control authority” means the POTW.

     (12) Cost effective. “Cost effective” means that total project costs, if financed over a five (5) year period at the prime interest rate published in the Wall Street Journal plus two (2) percent at the time the project costs are being determined, do not exceed the total savings that would be generated by the project during the same five (5) year period. Project costs shall also be considered cost effective, if financing assistance is available to the discharger, from the city or any other source, at a lower rate and the project costs, if financed over a five (5) year period at that rate, do not exceed the total savings that would be generated by the project during the same five (5) year period.

     (13) Critical user. “Critical user” means a discharger whose wastewater contains priority pollutants, or who discharges waste that has the potential to cause interference, excluding sanitary sewage.

     (d)   “D” Definitions.

     (1)   Department. “Department” means the city department of public works.

     (2)   Diluting Waters. “Diluting waters” means noncontact cooling water, boiler blowdown, domestic sewage, groundwater, stormwater, surface drainage, or potable waters which are not a part of an industrial process and which do not contain priority pollutants but which are combined with industrial wastewater prior to the monitoring point for industrial wastewater discharge.

     (3)   Director. “Director” means the city director of public works, or the director’s designee.

     (4)   Discharger. “Discharger” means any person who discharges or causes a discharge to a public sewer. See also specific discharger definitions.

     (5)   Dissolved Solids or Dissolved Matter. “Dissolved solids” or “dissolved matter” means the solid matter in solution in the wastewater and shall be determined by evaporation of a sample from which all suspended matter has been removed by filtration as determined by the procedures in the standard methods.

     (6)   Domestic Wastewater. “Domestic wastewater” means the water-carried wastes and wastewater produced from noncommercial and nonindustrial activities and that result from normal human living processes.

     (e)   “E” Definitions.

     (1)   Effluent. “Effluent” means the liquid outflow of any facility designed to treat, convey, or retain wastewater.

     (2)   Engineer. “Engineer” means the city director of public works.

     (f)    Reserved.

     (g)   “G” Definitions.

     (1)   Garbage. “Garbage” means wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.

     (2)   Grab Sample. “Grab sample” means a single discrete sample collected at a particular time and place which represents the composition of the wastestream only at that time and place with no regard to the flow in the wastestream.

     (3)   Gravity Separation Interceptor. “Gravity separation interceptor” means any facility designed, constructed, and operated for the purpose of removing and retaining dangerous, deleterious, or prohibited constituents from wastewater by differential gravity separation before discharge to the public sewer.

     (4)   Grease. “Grease” means ether-soluble matter, and shall include each of the following two (2) types:

     (i)    Dispersed grease, which means grease which is not floatable grease;

     (ii)   Floatable grease, which means grease which floats on the surface of quiescent sewage water or other liquid or which floats when mixed or added to water.

     (5)   Groundwater Discharger. “Groundwater discharger” means a discharger that pumps and treats contaminated groundwater and discharges to the sanitary sewer system. This class of discharger is variable, so that some permits are a year in length while others may be written for a week. Hydrocarbons are the most common pollutants.

     (h)   “H” Definitions.

     (1)   Heavy Discharger. “Heavy discharger” means a discharge that may contribute over one hundred fifty (150) pounds per day of BOD or TSS to the sanitary sewer system. Heavy dischargers are classified as SIU’s if the volume of discharge is greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons/day or they use processes that have the potential to detrimentally affect the processes of the plant.

     (2)   Holding Tank Waste. “Holding tank waste” means any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.

     (i)    “I” Definitions.

     (1)   Incompatible Pollutant. “Incompatible pollutant” means any pollutant that is not a “compatible pollutant” as defined above.

     (2)   Industrial Connection Sewer. “Industrial connection sewer” means the sewer connecting the building sewer or building waste drainage system to the public sewer for the purpose of conveying industrial wastewater.

     (3)   Industrial User. “Industrial user” means any non-residential user that discharges industrial wastes to the sanitary sewer system.

     (4)   Industrial Wastes. “Industrial wastes” means the wastes from producing, manufacturing and processing operations of every kind and nature.

     (5)   Industrial Wastewater. “Industrial wastewater” means all water-carried wastes and wastewater of the community, excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water, and includes all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural, or other operation where the wastewater discharged includes significant quantities of wastes from non-human origin.

     (6)   Inspector. A person authorized by the director to inspect wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, disposal, and monitoring facilities.

     (7)   Interference.

     (i)    “Interference” means a discharge which alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the processes or operation of the sanitary sewer system, including the POTW, prevents the POTW from using its chosen sludge use/disposal practice, or causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, which is a permit issued to the city pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.

     (ii)   “Interference” also includes prevention of bio-solids use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under Section 405 of the Act [33 U.S.C. §§1251-1387] or in regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [42 U.S.C. §§6901, et seq.], the Toxic Substances Control Act [15 U.S.C. §§2601-2654], or more stringent state regulations (including those contained in any state bio-solids management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.

     (j)    Reserved.

     (k)   Reserved.

     (l)    “L” Definitions.

     (1)   Lateral Sewer. “Lateral sewer” means the portion of a sewer lying within a public right-of-way or easement between the city cleanout and the main sewer to which a building sewer is connected.

     (2)   Light Discharger. “Light discharger” means a discharger that contributes less than fifty (50) pounds per day of BOD or suspended solids to the sanitary sewer system. This category is often defined by whether or not the discharger has a grease trap.

     (m)  “M” Definitions.

     (1)   Main Sewer. “Main sewer” means a public sewer designed to accommodate more than one lateral sewer.

     (2)   Major Contributing Industry. “Major contributing industry” means any wastewater contributor identified in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual in any of Divisions A, B, D, E, and I that:

     (i)    Has a discharge flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average work day; if seasonal, the average shall be computed on the period of use; or

     (ii)   Has a flow of or pollutant loading greater than five (5) percent of the total flow to the POTW.

     (3)   Manager. “Manager” means the city manager.

     (4)   Mass Audit Study. “Mass audit study” means an investigation of pollution prevention and source reduction measures performed by or for an industrial user, pursuant to audit protocols adopted by the director, to analyze the volume and concentration of nickel, copper, and/or any other priority pollutant identified in regulations adopted by the director in an industrial user’s process streams and discharge, and to identify the maximum feasible reduction measures available to the industrial user.

     (5)   Maximum Allowable Concentration. “Maximum allowable concentration” means the highest permissible concentration or other measure of pollutant magnitude taken at a specific point in time.

     (6)   Maximum Feasible Reduction Measures.

     (i)    “Maximum feasible reduction measures” mean all individual measures, and all functionally interdependent measures, of reducing the mass of specified pollutants in an industrial user’s discharge, which the director finds would be cost effective if installed by the industrial user.

     (ii)   For the purpose of this chapter, individual measures which are not cost effective shall nonetheless be considered part of a functionally interdependent group of cost-effective measures if they substantially reduce the mass of pollutants discharged, and the other measures with which they are grouped are their functional prerequisite.

     (7)   Moderate Discharger. “Moderate discharger” means a discharger that contributes fifty (50) to one hundred fifty (150) pounds per day of BOD or suspended solids to the sanitary sewer system. This category is generally defined by the presence of a grease interceptor or one or more grease traps.

     (n)   “N” Definitions.

     (1)   New Source. “New source” means any wastewater generating processes constructed after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards that are applicable to that source and that are independent of an existing source.

     (2)   Non-Conventional Discharger. “Non-conventional discharger” means a discharger involved in any business or manufacturing where the possibility exists that hazardous or toxic material may be discharged to the sewer system.

     (o)   “O” Definitions.

     (1)   Outlet. “Outlet” means the end of a house plumbing system three (3) feet outside the foundation of the building.

     (p)   “P” Definitions.

     (1)   Pass-Through. “Pass-through” means a discharge that exits the sewage treatment system to the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations that alone, or in conjunction with other discharges, causes a sewage authority to violate its NPDES permit.

     (2)   Peak Flow Rate. “Peak flow rate” means the average rate at which wastewater is discharged to a public sewer during the highest thirty (30) minute flow period in the preceding twelve (12) months.

     (3)   Permit. “Permit” means any written authorization required pursuant to this or any other ordinance or regulation of the city for the installation of any sewer or the discharge of waste into the sewer system.

     (4)   pH. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution.

     (5)   Plant. “Plant” means the city POTW.

     (6)   Plumbing System. “Plumbing system” means all plumbing fixtures and traps or soil, waste, special waste and vent pipes, and all sanitary sewer pipes within a building and extending to the building sewer connection three (3) feet outside the building foundation.

     (7)   Pollution. “Pollution” means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.

     (8)   POTW. “POTW” means the city treatment works, which is a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW.

     (9)   Premises. “Premises” means a single-family dwelling, duplex, triplex, quadplex, apartment house, commercial building, industrial building, or other structure used or useful for habitation or other occupancy of human beings.

     (10) Pretreatment or Treatment. “Pretreatment” or “treatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).

     (11) Priority Pollutants. “Priority pollutants” mean all pollutants as defined by the “General Pretreatment Regulations” of the Environmental Protection Agency, found at 40 CFR 401 and 403.

     (12) Process Flow. “Process flow” means the daily, twenty-four (24) hour, flow of wastewater from any kind or nature of production, manufacturing or processing operation, including industrial and commercial operations where water is used for the removal of any type of waste other than sanitary sewage. Process flow does not include diluting waters.

     (13) Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW. “Publicly owned treatment works” or “POTW” means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act [33 U.S.C. Section 1292], which is owned by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewer, or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, “POTW” shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city POTW.

     (14) Public Sewer. “Public sewer” means any sewer dedicated to public use and whose use is controlled by a public corporation.

     (q)   Reserved.

     (r)    “R” Definitions.

     (1)   Reasonable Control Measures. “Reasonable control measures” mean control technologies, best management practices, source control practices and waste minimization procedures which prevent or reduce the introduction of pollutants to the sanitary sewer system and are determined by the director to be cost effective for particular industry groups, business types, or specific industrial processes.

     (s)    “S” Definitions.

     (1)   Sanitary Sewer. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sanitary sewage to which storm, surface, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.

     (2)   Sanitary Sewage. “Sanitary sewage” means water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, excluding ground, surface and storm waters, subsurface drainage and also excluding industrial waste.

     (3)   Sanitary Sewer System or Sewerage System. “Sanitary sewer system” or “sewerage system” means all sewers, treatment plants, and other facilities owned or operated by the city for carrying, collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.

     (4)   Sewage. “Sewage” means a combination of water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, public buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.

     (5)   Sewage Pumping Plant. “Sewage pumping plant” means any facility designed and constructed to raise wastewater in elevation or to overcome head losses due to pipeline friction.

     (6)   Sewer. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

     (7)   Sewerage. “Sewerage” means any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater.

     (8)   Side Sewer. “Side sewer” means the sewer line beginning at the house outlet and terminating at the main seer and includes the building sewer and the lateral sewer.

     (9)   Significant Change. “Significant change” means any change in an industrial user’s operation that results in a flow that exceeds the expected peak flow as shown in the sewage treatment plant expansion connection charge calculation for the property on which the industrial user is located.

     (10) Significant Industrial User or SIU. “Significant industrial user” or “SIU” means:

     (i)    A discharger subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or

     (ii)   A non-categorical discharger that in the opinion of the manager, requires special regulation or source control; or

     (iii)  A non-categorical discharger that contributes a process wastestream that makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather capacity of the POTW treatment plant, or that discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per day of process wastewater to the POTW; or

     (iv)  A non-categorical discharger that contributes more than one hundred fifty (150) pounds per day of BOD or suspended solids.

     (11) Significant Non-Compliance. “Significant non-compliance” means a compliance status assigned to an industrial discharger meeting any of the following criteria:

 

     (i)    Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits are those violations in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceeds (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1); or

     (ii)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those violations in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equal to or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC value (TRC = 1.4 BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); or

     (iii)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); or

     (iv)  A discharge of imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment, or has resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such discharge; or

     (v)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; or

     (vi)  Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any  required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance schedules; or

     (vii) Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or

     (viii)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices (BMPs), which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.

     (12) Single-family Unit. “Single-family unit” means the place of residence of single-family. Property improved for multi-family purposes shall constitute the number of units that the facilities thereon provide in number of single-family units. When such improvements are for other than residential purposes, the number of units shall be determined by dividing the total number of persons regularly using or occupying those premises by four (4). When this property is unsubdivided, it shall be deemed to have four (4) lots to the acre, unless the city council, in its sole discretion, specially fixes some other number of lots therefor.

     (13) Slug Load or Slug Discharge. “Slug load” or “slug discharge” means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of prohibited discharge standards in Section 15.10.040 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.

     (14) Standard Methods. “Standard methods” mean the procedures set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations unless another method for the analysis of industrial  wastewater has been approved in writing in advance of use of the procedure by the director. The current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as published by the American Public Health Association. All analyses shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the State for the specific pollutants and matrix to be analyzed, unless otherwise approved in writing, by the director, prior to performance of a sample analysis.

     (15) Storm Sewer or Storm Drain. “Storm sewer” or “storm drain” means a sewer that carries storm and surface or groundwaters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.

     (16) Stormwaters. “Stormwaters” mean the flow resulting from rainfall.

     (17) Street. “Street” means any public highway, public road, public street, public avenue, public alley, public way, public place, public easement, or public right-of-way.

     (18) Suspended Solids or Suspended Matter. “Suspended solids” or “suspended matter” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and that removable by laboratory filtration in accordance with procedures described in Standard Methods.

     (t)    “T” Definitions.

     (1)   Technical Review Criteria or TRC. “Technical review criteria” or “TRC” means the multipliers used to gauge the degree or severity of violations.

     (2)   Total Toxic Organics. “Total toxic organics” (TTOs) means the sum of the concentrations for each of the regulated toxic organic compounds listed at 40 CFR 401.15 and which are found in the discharge at a concentration greater than ten (10) micrograms per liter.

     (3)   Toxic Pollutant. “Toxic pollutant” means any pollutant or any combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other statutes.

     (4)   Trucked or Hauled Waste. “Trucked or hauled waste” means any waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system after being placed in a motorized vehicle for removal from the location where the waste was generated or produced.

     (5)   Trunk Sewer. “Trunk sewer” means a sewer constructed, maintained, and operated by the city that conveys wastewater and into which lateral and collecting sewers discharge.

     (u)   “U” Definitions.

     (1)   Uncontaminated Water. “Uncontaminated water” means any wasted water of the community not contaminated or polluted with wastewater and that is suitable or could readily be suitable for discharge to the city’s stormwater drainage system.

     (2)   User. “User” means any person responsible for payment of sewer service charges.

     (v)   Reserved.

     (w)  “W” Definitions.

     (1)   Wastewater. Wastewater means the liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestics wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, that is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1791 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1868 § 2, (2011))

 

15.10.017 Abbreviations.
     When used in this chapter or in connection with any resolution, regulation, permit, order, or other action undertaken pursuant to this chapter, the following abbreviations shall have the following meanings:

 

 

BOD —

Biochemical Oxygen Demand

 

CFR —

Code of Federal Regulations

 

COD —

Chemical Oxygen Demand

 

EPA —

Environmental Protection Agency

 

L —

Liter

 

mg —

Milligrams

 

mg/L —

Milligrams per Liter

 

NPDES —

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

 

SIC —

Standard Industrial Classification

 

SWDA —

Solid Waste Disposal Act [42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.]

 

USC —

United States Code

 

TSS —

Total Suspended Solids

 

(Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.020 Sewer required.
     The owner of any premises occupied or used by humans and containing any plumbing installation whatsoever is required at the owner’s expense to connect the building or structure directly to the city sewerage works, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 15.08, and Title 18, within ninety (90) days from completion of the plumbing installation. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.021 Occupancy prohibited.
     No building, industrial facility nor other structure shall be occupied or used until and unless the owner of the premises has complied with all applicable rules and regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.24 Planning, design, and construction standards.
     Public sewers and side sewers shall be planned, designed, constructed, installed, and repaired in accordance with the plans and specifications established by the director of public works. (Ord. 1825 § 2, (2008))

 

15.10.025 Construction permit required.
     (a)   Approval Required. No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, or alter or cause to be altered, any public sewer, lateral sewer, house connection or industrial connection sewer, sewage pumping plant, pollution control plant, or other sewerage facility in the city where existing or proposed wastewater flows will discharge directly or indirectly to city facilities without first obtaining approval of the sewerage construction from the city. This subsection shall not apply to duly authorized city employees or persons contracted to the city to perform the work for the city.

     (b)   Permit Required or Construction of Sewer or Sewer Connection.

     (1)   No person shall construct a building sewer or lateral sewer or make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances or perform any work on any lateral or building sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges therefor.

     (2)   A person legally entitled to apply for and receive such a permit shall make application on forms provided by the city for that purpose. The applicant shall give a description of the character of the work to be done, and the location, ownership, occupancy, and use of the premises related to the work. The director may require plans, specifications, or drawings, and such other information as the director may deem necessary in the director’s professional judgment.

 

     (3)   If the director determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, description, and information furnished in connection with the application are in compliance with this code and the ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the proposed work and installation, the director shall issue the permit upon payment of the required fees and charges. The director may attach conditions to the permit that are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this code and the ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the proposed work and installation.

     (c)   Compliance With Permit. After issuance of the permit, no change shall be made in the location of the sewer, the grade, materials, or other details from those described in the permit and as shown in the approved plans and specifications for which the permit was issued nor any deviation shall occur from any condition attached to the approved permit except with written authorization from the department, the inspector, or other duly authorized city employee.

     (d)   Agreement. The applicant’s signature on an application for a permit pursuant to this section shall constitute an agreement by the applicant and any person whom the applicant represents in connection with the application to comply with the terms, requirements, and conditions of this code, the ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the proposed work and installation, with the approved plans and specifications for the work, if any, and with the conditions placed on the permit as well as any corrections or modifications that may be ordered or permitted by the city. This agreement shall be binding on the successors and assigns of the applicant and the persons whom the applicant represents in connection with the application.

     (e)   Costs Paid by Owner. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of any sewer or other work for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this section shall be borne by the owner of the premises to be served by the work. The owner shall indemnify the city and its officers and employees from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the work.

     (f)    Additional Permits. The persons seeking to do the work under a permit issued pursuant to this section shall be solely responsible for obtaining all other permits from any agency or permission from any person necessary to performing the work, including any excavation or encroachment permit from the city.

     (g)   Liability. Neither the city, nor any of its officers, employees, or agents, shall be answerable for any liability for injury or death to any person or damage to any property arising during or growing out of the performance of work performed under any permit issued pursuant to this section. The permitholder shall be answerable for and save the city, its officers, employees, and agents harmless from any liability imposed by law upon the city, its officers, employees, and agents, and from any claims that may be made against the city, its officers, employees, and agents, including all costs, expenses, attorney fees, fees, and interest incurred in defending any such liability or claims. The permit holder shall be responsible for any defects in the design or performance of work under the permit or any failure that may develop in that work. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.028 Construction requirements.
     (a)   Minimum Size. The minimum size of a building sewer shall be six (6)-inch diameter. However, in any building designed or to be used exclusively for residential occupancy of six (6) dwelling units or less, the minimum size shall be four (4)-inch diameter. The director may order or authorize a different size of building sewer consistent with the California Plumbing Code as amended by this code.

     (b)   Public Safety. All excavations for a lateral sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades or lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Any public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to a condition that is as good or better than existed before the work began.

     (c)   The requirements of subsection (a) above shall not apply retroactively, but any replacement of an existing sewer shall conform to subsection (a). (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.029 Installation of backwater protection.
     (a)   Definitions.

     “Backwater protection” means a backwater valve, ejector or pump system, or relief valve or a combination of two (2) or more of these devices that is approved by the building official and intended to prevent sewage from backflowing into a structure.

     “Drainage unit fixture” means a drainage unit fixture listed in table 7-3 of the 1998 California Plumbing Code.

     “Inadequate height differential” means that the flood level rim of a drainage unit fixture on a property’s sanitary sewage drainage system is less than one foot above the next upstream manhole or flushing inlet cover on the sanitary sewer main serving the fixture’s drainage piping.

     “Licensed professional” means a person authorized under California law to render an applicable certification to the property owner and the city regarding a specific question under this section.

     (b)   Ongoing Responsibility. In addition to installing backwater protection when required pursuant to Title 18, a property owner shall ensure that backwater protection is installed and fully operable in the building sewer or sewers serving the property owner’s real property whenever an inadequate height differential situation exists on the property.

     (c)   Addition of Drainage Unit Fixture. Whenever any drainage fixture unit is to be added to real property, the property owner shall obtain and file with the building official at the time of application for a building permit for the fixture unit a written certification by a licensed professional determining whether an inadequate height differential situation exists on the real property. If such a situation exists, the property owner shall provide the backwater protection described in section 18.12.080 or permanently remove the drainage unit fixture or fixtures that have an inadequate height differential before completion of installation of the additional drainage unit fixture.

     (d)   Proof of Previous Installation. Instead of providing certification pursuant to subsections (c) as applicable, a property owner may file a certification from a licensed professional demonstrating that backwater protection as approved by the building official has been installed on the property’s sewage drainage system and is fully operable. This certification is subject to inspection confirmation by the city.

     (e)   Maintenance. Property owners are responsible for ensuring that backwater protection is properly maintained and functioning at all times. Backwater protection is subject to inspection by the city at any reasonable time, and failure to properly install and maintain this protection may result in suspension of sewer service.

 

     (f)    Compliance with Titles 15 and 18. Any installation of backwater protection or modification to any sewer shall be performed and inspected under the requirements of titles 15 and 18 of this code and established city procedures. (Ord. 1710 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1723 § 2, (2003))

 

15.10.030 Inspection.
     (a)   All sewer construction work, building sewers, plumbing and draining systems shall be inspected by an inspector authorized by the city to insure compliance with all city requirements. No sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and passed. No sewer shall be connected to the city’s public sewer until the work encompassed within the applicable permit has been completed, inspected, and approved by the city inspector. If the test proves satisfactory and the seer has been cleaned of all debris accumulated from construction operations, the inspector shall issue a certificate of satisfactory completion.

     (b)   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by permit to notify the department that the work is ready for inspection. This notification shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours before the work is to be inspected. The person doing the work shall ensure that the work will stand the tests required by the city before making a request for inspection.

     (c)   All building sewers and lateral sewers shall be tested in the presence of the city inspector by filling the line with water or air and inspecting for excessive leakage. Fittings, plugs, water, and labor for testing shall be furnished by the person constructing the sewer. If the existing lateral is to remain, it shall be tested as specified above. All lines showing excessive leakage shall be repaired or replaced at the sole expense of the person controlling the work to the satisfaction of the city inspector.

     (d)   When work has been inspected pursuant to this section and the work has not passed, a written notice to that effect will be given instructing the owner of the work to repair the sewer or other work authorized by the permit in accordance with the permit requirements. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.032 Maintenance of sewer laterals.
     (a)   The city shall not be responsible for maintenance or repair of any lateral sewer unless the lateral sewer conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter and other applicable city regulations and the city has expressly determined to provide this maintenance or repair.

     (b)   The city shall have the right to enter onto private property for the purpose of inspection, maintenance, repair, rehabilitation, or replacement of the portion of the lateral sewer that may be maintained by the city. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1825 § 3, (2008))

 

15.10.034 Limitation on point of discharge.
     (a)   No person shall discharge, cause or allow or permit to be discharged any substance into a manhole or other opening in a community sewer except through an approved building sewer, unless that person has first obtained a permit to do so from the city.

     (b)   No person shall discharge, cause or allow or permit to be discharged any sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters into any storm drain or natural outlet or creek or stream or channel without first obtaining a valid National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.036 Prohibited activities.
     No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is part of the sewerage works or any sampling device. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.038 Generally prohibited wastes.
     (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sanitary sewer any substance or waste that contains substances or has characteristics that either alone or by interaction with other wastewaters cause or threaten to cause interference or pass-through.

     (b)   No person shall discharge to any public sewer any wastes, if in the opinion of the city, those wastes may have any adverse or harmful effect on sewers, maintenance personnel or equipment, wastewater treatment personnel or equipment, treatment plant effluent quality, public or private property, aquatic life in any waters receiving effluent from the sanitary sewer system, or create a hazard in the use or disposal of sewage sludge, or may otherwise endanger the public, the local environment, or create a public nuisance.

     (c)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sewer any waste, including any fats, oils, or grease, that creates a stoppage, plugging, breakage, any reduction in the sewer capacity, or any other damage to sewers or sewerage facilities of the city. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1825 § 4, (2008))

 

15.10.040 Specifically prohibited wastes.
     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sanitary sewer any of the following wastes:

     (a)   Any wastewater containing any flammable liquid, solid, vapor, or gas or other substance, including but not limited to any substance having a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Celsius, using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides, and any other substances that the city, the state, or the EPA has notified the user is a fire or explosive hazard or a hazard to the system; or

     (b)   Any waste having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any corrosive or detrimental characteristic that may cause injury to any person operating, maintaining, repairing, or constructing the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, or working in or about the sanitary sewer system, or any damage to any part of the sanitary sewer system, or any waste with a pH high enough to cause alkaline incrustations on sewer walls; or

     (c)   Any solids or viscous substances of such size or in such quantity that they may cause flow obstruction in any part of the sewer or be detrimental to proper wastewater treatment plant operations. Such substances include but are not limited to, asphalt, cement, dead animals, offal, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, rages, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bones, hair and fleshings, entrails, fats, oils, grease, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, or similar paper products, either whole or ground, and resins; or

     (d)   Any wastes with excessively high BOD, COD, or decomposable organic content that will cause interference with the sanitary sewer system; or

     (e)   Any waste containing heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity at the POTW resulting in interference, but in no event, no liquid, solid, vapor, gas, or thing having or developing a temperature of one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit or more, or that may cause the temperature at the POTW to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit or

     (f)    Any non-biodegradable cutting oils, commonly called soluble oil; or

     (g)   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable oil, or refined petroleum product; or

     (h)   Any waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in such quantity that alone, or in combination with other waste substances, may create a hazard to humans, animals, or the local environment, interfere with the wastewater treatment processes, cause a public nuisance, or cause any condition hazardous to health and safety in the sewerage system; or

     (i)    Any substance promoting or causing the promotion of toxic gases; or

     (j)    Any waste requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes; or

     (k)   Any excessive amounts of chlorinated hydrocarbon or organic phosphorous type compounds; or

     (l)    Any excessive amount of deionized water, steam condensate, or distilled water; or

     (m)  Any wastewater producing excessive discoloration of wastewater or treatment plant effluent, such as dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; or

     (n)   Any wastes containing excessive quantities of iron, boron, chromium, phenols, plastic resins, copper, nickel, zinc, lead, mercury, cadmium, selenium, arsenic, or any other objectionable materials toxic to humans, animals, the local environment, or to the biological or other wastewater; or

     (o)   Any blow-down or bleed water from cooling towers or other evaporation coolers exceeding one-third of the make-up water; or

     (p)   Any single pass cooling water; or

     (q)   Any quantities of radioactive material wastes; or

     (r)    Recognizable portions of the human anatomy; or

     (s)    Any strongly odorous waste or waste tending to create odors; or

     (t)    Any waste containing greater than 0.1 mg/L of dissolved sulfides; or

     (u)   The use or addition of any chemical or biological agent used for the maintenance of grease traps and interceptors. This includes enzymes, emulsifiers, and bacterial cultures. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1791 § 3, 2006); Ord. 1825 § 5, (2008))

 

15.10.042 Prohibition on trucked and hauled wastes.
     No person shall discharge, cause, allow or permit any trucked or hauled waste to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, except at a site specifically designated in a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.044 Prohibition on garbage.
     (a)   No person shall discharge, deposit, or throw, or cause, allow or permit to be discharged, deposited, or thrown into the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, any garbage, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or other solid material from any food-processing plant or other industrial plant, food establishment or restaurant, or retail grocery store, irrespective of whether or not it shall have been first passed through a mechanical grinder.

     (b)   No person shall install, operate, use or maintain upon the premises of any food-processing plant, or any other industrial plant or retail grocery store, any mechanical grinder or waste grinder that is connected directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.046 Prohibition on use of diluting waters.
     The use of diluting waters as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment, to achieve compliance, or to meet local limitations for wastewater as set forth in this chapter, or to avoid or minimize any requirements imposed in a wastewater discharge permit is prohibited. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.048 Suspended solids—Dissolved matter.
     No person shall discharge, cause, allow or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any liquid containing suspended solids or dissolved matter of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle, process, or treat such matter at the Plant. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.050 Limitations on wastewater strength.
     No person shall discharge, cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into a public sanitary sewer or any part thereof, any waste containing an excess in concentration of the following substances:

 

Substance

Maximum Allowable
Concentration

Arsenic

0.08 mg/L

BOD

1300 mg/L

Cadmium

0.138 mg/L

Copper

2.0 mg/L

Cyanide

0.292 mg/L

Lead

0.365 mg/L

Mercury

0.010 mg/L

Nickel

0.445 mg/L

Phenol

7.8 mg/L

Selenium

0.106 mg/L

Silver

0.200 mg/L

TSS

1200 mg/L

Total Chromium

2.532 mg/L

Zinc

0.386 mg/L

 

These limitations are subject to amendment at any time, and no permit granted under this chapter shall constitute any vested right of any kind to continue to maintain concentrations at this or any other level. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1791 § 4, (2006))

 

15.10.052 Limitation on other pollutants.
     No person shall discharge or cause or allow or permit to be discharged any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants to be released at a flow rate or a pollutant concentration, or both, that a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no event shall a person discharge or cause or allow or permit a discharge to have a slug load with a flow rate or contain a concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceeds for any time period of more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration quantities or flow during normal operation. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.054 Holding tank wastes.
     (a)   No person shall discharge any holding tank waste into a community sewer unless that person has obtained a permit to do so from the city. Unless otherwise specifically allowed under the terms of a city permit, a separate permit shall be required for each separate discharge.

     (b)   No person shall discharge or cause or allow or permit to be discharged directly or indirectly to a public sewer any wastes originating from a recreational vehicle, boat, camper, mobile home, trailer, portable toilet, chemical toilet, or any temporary or mobile sanitation facility except pursuant to permit issued by the city at a facility designed and operated for this type of discharge. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.056 Stormwaters, surface water, groundwater.
     (a)   No person shall discharge, cause or allow or permit any stormwater, roof or yard drainage, foundation, underdrainage, or groundwater to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system without first obtaining a permit from the city to do so. Such a permit shall only be granted in exceptional cases of public necessity when no other reasonable alternative is available.

     (b)   No plumbing or piping shall be connected or designed in such a manner as to make possible the discharge of storm, surface and underground waters into the sanitary sewer system without first obtaining a permit from the city as described in subsection (a). (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.058 Medical wastes.
     (a)   Hospitals, medical clinics, offices of medical doctors, and convalescent homes may discharge to the sanitary sewer system through a city-approved grinder installation with inlet size and design features suitable for its intended use and so construct that all particles pass through a maximum three-eighths-inch opening wastes of the following category:

     (1)   Infectious wastes defined as follows:

     (A)  Laboratory and surgical operating room wastes except as excluded in subsection (b); and

     (B)   Wastes from outpatient areas and emergency rooms similar those included in subsection (A) above with the same exclusions; and

     (C)   Solid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are not isolated because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease.

     (b)   In no event shall any person discharge, or cause or allow or permit the following wastes to be discharged to the sewer by any means:

     (1)   Equipment, instruments, utensils, and other materials of a disposable nature that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are used in the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated; or

     (2)   Any recognizable portions of the human anatomy; or

     (3)   Wastes excluded by other provisions of this chapter except as specifically permitted pursuant to subsection (a); or

     (4)   Any solid waste not specifically described in subsection (a). (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.060 Quantity of wastes.
     The rate of discharge of industrial wastes to the sewer system shall be limited to the capacity of the lateral and main sewers flowing as open-channel conduits. Facilities shall be provided for dampening or equalizing “slug” discharges in order to comply with concentration restrictions as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.062 Protection from accidental and slug discharges.
     (a)   Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter into either the storm sewer or sanitary sewer systems. The city shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The city may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges.

     (b)   Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user’s expense.

     (c)   Any direct or indirect connection or entry point for deleterious wastes to the discharger’s plumbing or drainage system shall be eliminated through reasonable disconnection or barriers as necessary to ensure protection to the system.

 

     (d)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the city immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug load/slug discharge. (Ord. 1868 § 3, (2011))

 

15.10.064 Pretreatment of industrial waste.
     (a)   An industrial wastewater pretreatment system or device may be required by the city to treat industrial flows prior to discharge to the sewer when it is necessary to restrict or prevent the discharge to the sewer of certain waste constituents, to distribute more equally over a longer time period any peak discharges of industrial wastewaters or to accomplish any pretreatment result required by the city. All pretreatment systems or devices shall be approved by the city but such approval shall not absolve the industrial discharger of the responsibility of meeting any industrial effluent limitation required by the city, county, state, or federal government. In special cases, the city may require construction of sewer lines by the discharger to convey certain industrial wastes to a specific city trunk sewer. All pretreatment systems judged by the city to require engineering design shall have plans prepared and signed by an engineer of suitable discipline licensed in the state.

     (b)   Normally a gravity separation interceptor, equalizing tank neutralization chamber and control manhole will be required respectively to remove prohibited settleable and floatable solids, to equalize wastewater streams varying greatly in quantity and/or quality, to neutralize low or high pH flows and to facilitate inspection, flow measurement and sampling. Floor drains from commercial or manufacturing buildings, warehouses, multi-use structures, areas where any waste requiring pretreatment is involved shall not discharge directly into the sewer, but shall first discharge to a gravity separation interceptor. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at owner’s expense.

     (c)   The city may adopt additional rules and regulations by resolution, after a public hearing, for administration of this section.

     (d)   Any petroleum-contaminated groundwater shall be processed through an activated carbon pretreatment system approved by the city prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system. This discharge shall only be done under permit. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.066 Interceptors required.
     (a)   Any type of business or establishment where grease or other objectionable materials may be discharged into a public or private sewage main or disposal system shall have a grease removal device of a size and design approved by the director.

     (b)   Each grease removal device shall be so installed and connected that it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of grease.

     (c)   The grease removal device should be situated on the discharger’s premises but when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, the city may issue an encroachment permit to allow the device to be installed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. However, such a device shall not at any time pose a hazard or obstruction to public use of the street or sidewalk area.

     (d)   Waste discharge from fixtures and equipment in establishments which may contain grease or other objectionable materials including, but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, dishwashers, food waste disposals, soup kettles, and floor drains located in areas where such objectionable materials may exist, may be drained into the sanitary waste through the grease removal device when approved by the director provided, however, that toilets, urinals, wash basins, and other fixtures containing fecal material shall not flow through the grease removal device. Interceptors shall be located upstream of any dishwashers or discharges exceeding one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit.

     (e)   Grease removal devices shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the accumulated grease. The use of chemicals to dissolve grease is specifically prohibited. No accumulated grease shall be introduced into any drainage piping or public or private sewer. Users with oil and grease removal devices shall maintain them in good operating condition at all times.

     (f)    The discharger shall develop and maintain a record of periodic maintenance, and pumping of the removal device records shall be retained for a period of not less than three (3) years.

     (g)   Pumping shall be sufficiently frequent to prevent objectionable odors, surcharge of the removal device, or interference with the operation of the sanitary sewer system.

     (h)   Abandoned grease removal devices shall be emptied and filled as required for abandoned septic tanks. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.068 Screened industrial wastes.
     No person shall discharge, cause, allow or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any garbage, or any fruit, vegetable, animal, or other solid industrial wastes resulting from the processing, packaging, or canning of fruits, vegetables, or other foods or products. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.070 Wastewater discharge permit required.
     No person shall discharge, or cause or allow or permit to be discharged any industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly to sewage facilities owned by the city without first obtaining a city permit for industrial wastewater discharge. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.072 Permit application.
     Any person seeking a wastewater discharge permit, other permit, or amendment to a permit under this chapter shall complete and file an application on the form prescribed by the director and accompanied by all applicable fees and charges. The application shall contain the following information at a minimum:

     (a)   Signature, name, and address of both the owner of the property from which the discharge is to occur and the applicant for the permit if other than the owner. The persons signing the application on behalf of an entity shall be at least of the level of vice president, general partner, or an individual responsible for the overall operation of the facility or property and meeting the conditions of the requested permit, or a person meeting the federal requirements for NPDES applications as specified in Title 40 of the CFR; and

     (b)   Volume of wastewater to be discharged; and

     (c)   Estimated wastewater constituents and characteristics; and

     (d)   Time and duration of discharges; and

     (e)   Average and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any; and

     (f)    Site plans, floor plans, and mechanical and plumbing plans and details, sufficient to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation; and

     (g)   Description of all activities, facilities, and plant processes on the property that may in any way relate to the discharges, including types of materials that are or could be discharged; and

     (h)   Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production that may in way relate to the discharges; and

     (i)    Hours of work and activities at the property.

     The director may require such additional information as the director needs in order to determine whether the proposed discharge will comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.074 Determination on permit application.
     (a)   Following review of the application and receipt of such information as the director may require, the director shall determine whether to approve or deny the permit or permit amendment being sought. The director will grant the permit if:

     (1)   The applicant has complied with all applicable requirements of this chapter and applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations, laws, and orders regarding the proposed discharge; and

     (2)   The applicant has furnished all information requested by the director; and

     (3)   The director determines that there are adequate devices, equipment, chemicals, personnel, and other facilities to sample, meter, convey, treat, and dispose of the proposed discharges; and

     (4)   The persons to be responsible for treatment and control of the proposed discharges are adequately trained and capable of consistently complying with permit requirements; and

     (5)   The applicant and the property owner have expressly agreed to the conditions applied by the director pursuant to subsection (b).

     (b)   In granting such an application, the director will condition the permit in order to ensure compliance with this chapter and applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations, laws, and orders regarding the proposed discharge, which may include, but are not limited to, the following:

     (1)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;

     (2)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of flow monitoring, inspection, and sampling facilities;

     (3)   Specifications and pretreatment requirements for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule;

     (4)   Compliance schedules;

     (5)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;

     (6)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording the city access thereto;

     (7)   Requirements for notification to the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater stream;

     (8)   Requirements and plans for protection against accidental discharges, including, but not limited to, berming of chemicals and waste materials. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this code or other state or federal regulations;

     (9)   Requirements for notification of accidental discharges;

     (10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges;

     (11) Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the city to be necessary. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1868 § 4, (2011))

 

15.10.076 Permit denial.
     (a)   Notwithstanding Section 15.10.074, the director shall deny a wastewater discharge permit, other permit, or amendment to a permit under this chapter if the director determines that one or more of the following exist:

     (1)   The application is not accompanied by required fees and charges; or

     (2)   The application contains incomplete, false or misleading information; or

     (3)   The issuance of the requested permit would result in the discharge of wastewater or other substances that would endanger the public health or safety or public or private property; or

     (4)   The issuance of the requested permit would cause the plant or the sewerage system to violate any applicable permit conditions, laws, regulations, or orders of the city, county, state or federal government; or

     (5)   The applicant has not provided sufficient information to establish that its discharge will comply all requirements of this chapter and with such other terms and conditions as the director deems necessary to apply to the requested permit; or

     (6)   The applicant has not provided plans for sufficient protection from accidental discharges to the land, storm sewer system, or sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.078 Non-transferability.
     No permitholder shall assign, transfer, sell any permit issued under this chapter nor use any such permit for or on any premises or for facilities or operations or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying permit. No person shall discharge any industrial wastewaters in excess of the quality or quantity limitations set by the terms and conditions of the permit without first obtaining approval of an amendment to the permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.080 Permit amendment.
     (a)   Any permitholder may apply at any time for an amendment to a permit issued under this chapter to amend the terms and conditions of the permit. Such an application will be processed in the same manner as an original application.

     (b)   Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be automatically amended to include any more stringent, applicable federal or state requirements, regulations, laws, or orders for discharges than are contained in the permit or in this chapter. The director will endeavor to give notice of changes in reporting requirements, but the permitholder shall be responsible for complying with more stringent limitations with or without notice from the city.

     (c)   In order to protect the health and safety of the community or to comply with an applicable federal, state, or county order, regulation, or law, the director may order an amendment to an existing permit at any time upon reasonable notice. Reasonableness of the notice will be determined by the urgency of the danger or the terms of the federal or state order, regulation, or law. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.081 Reclassification from significant industrial user.
     At any time, the director may on the director’s own initiative or in response to a petition from the industrial user or POTW determine that the industrial user should not be classified as a significant industrial user in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Section 403.8(f)(6) even though the industrial user meets the definition of a significant industrial user, if the director determines the following:

     (a)   The industrial user has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting operation of the POTW; and

     (b)   The industrial user has no reasonable potential for violating any pretreatment standards or requirements. (Ord. 1791 § 5, (2006))

 

15.10.082 New sources.
     (a)   New sources of industrial waste discharges shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter at the time of commencement of discharge. Dischargers of new sources, upon request of the director, shall complete a waste minimization study in accordance with guidelines published by the director, and shall certify that measures have been taken to minimize toxic constituents in the discharge.

     (b)   The owner of every newly constructed, remodeled, or converted commercial or industrial facility shall comply with the following requirements upon commencement of discharge. These requirements shall apply to remodeled or converted facilities to the extent that the portion of the facility being remodeled or converted is related to the subject of the requirement:

     (1)   Interior (indoor) floor drains to the sewer system may not be placed in areas where hazardous materials, hazardous wastes, industrial wastes, industrial process water, lubricating fluids, vehicle fluids or vehicle equipment cleaning wastewater are used or stored, unless secondary containment is provided for all such materials and equipment. The director may allow an exception to this requirement under the following circumstances:

     (A)  When the drain is connected to a wastewater treatment unit approved by the director;

     (B)   (For safety showers) When the drain is installed with a temporary plug which remains closed except when the shower is in use, or when the drain is protected from spills by either a covered sump or berm system. If a sump is used, the capacity shall be at least as large as the largest chemical container in the laboratory;

     (C)   For industrial process equipment, if the equipment does not contain hazardous waste and if all floor drains are equipped with fail-safe valves which shall be kept closed during periods of operation.

     (2)   Exterior (outdoor) drains may be connected to the sewer only if the area in which the drain is located is covered or protected from rainwater run-on by berms and/or grading, and appropriate wastewater treatment approved by the director is provided. Any loading dock area with a sanitary sewer drain shall be equipped with a fail-safe valve, which shall be kept closed during periods of operation.

     (3)   Interior floor drains shall not be connected to the storm drain.

     (4)   Exterior drains shall be connected to the storm drain. Such connections shall not be permitted within the following areas:

     (A)  Equipment or vehicle washing areas;

     (B)   Areas where chemicals, hazardous materials, or other uncontained materials are stored unless secondary containment is provided;

     (C)   Equipment or vehicle fueling areas or fluid changing areas;

     (D)  Loading docks where chemicals, hazardous materials, grease, oil, or waste products are handled.

     (5)   Fueling areas shall have impermeable floors and rain covers that extend a minimum of ten (10) feet in each direction from each pump.

     (6)   Roof drains may discharge to the storm drain system, provided that all roof equipment, tanks, and pipes containing other than potable water, cooling system water, or heating system hot water have secondary containment.

     (7)   Boiler drain lines shall be connected to the sewer system and may not be discharged to storm drain system.

     (8)   Condensate lines shall not be connected or allowed to drain to the storm drain system.

     (9)   Copper, copper alloys, lead and lead alloys, including brass, shall not be used in the sewer lines, connectors, or seals coming in contact with sewage, except for sink traps and associated connecting pipes.

     (10) Secondary containment shall be provided for exterior work areas where motor oil, brake fluid, gasoline, diesel fuel, radiator fluid or other hazardous materials or hazardous wastes are used or stored. Drains shall not be installed within the secondary containment areas. The director may allow a drain for work areas (but not for hazardous storage areas) if the secondary containment area is covered and if the drain is connected to a wastewater treatment facility approved by the director.

     (11) Sacrificial zinc anodes are not permitted to be in contact with the water supply in a water distribution system.

     (12) Aspirators connected to laboratory sink faucets are prohibited; however, aspirators designed and used for transferring acids and bases from stationary permanent laboratory sinks to treatment facilities shall be allowed.

     (13) Laboratory countertops and laboratory sinks shall be separated by a lip which prevents hazardous materials spilled on the countertop from draining to the sink.

     (14) Sewer traps below laboratory sinks shall be made of glass or other approved transparent materials to allow inspection and to determine frequency of cleaning. Alternatively, a removable plug for cleaning the trap may be provided, in which case a cleaning frequency shall be established by the director. In establishing the cleaning frequency, the director shall consider the recommendations of the facility. The director will grant an exception to this requirement for areas where mercury will not be used; provided, that in the event such an exception is granted and mercury is subsequently used in the area, the sink trap shall be retrofitted to meet this requirement prior to use of the mercury.

     (15) Swimming pool discharge drains shall not be connected directly to the storm drain system or to the sewer system. When draining is necessary, a hose or other temporary system shall be directed into a sewer (not storm drain system) clean out. A sewer clean out shall be installed in a readily accessible area.

     (16) Food service facilities shall have a sink or other area for cleaning floor mats, containers, and equipment, which is connected to a grease interceptor and the sanitary sewer. The sink or cleaning area shall be large enough to clean the largest mat or piece of equipment to be cleaned. New buildings constructed to house food service facilities shall include a covered, bermed area for a dumpster.

     (17) Parking garage floor drains on interior levels shall be connected to an interceptor and to the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.084 Compliance schedules.
     In the event that an industrial waste discharge permitholder or applicant should be affected by a newly promulgated waste discharge standard or an existing discharge permitholder is reclassified as being subject to the categorical standards provided in the pretreatment regulations due to process changes, or an inspection reveals the presence of regulated processes, or new information becomes available that justifies or requires a reclassification, the discharger shall, within ninety (90) days of the effective date of a categorical standard or reclassification, file a baseline monitoring report [BMR]. If additional pretreatment or additional operation at and maintenance procedures or installation of facilities, equipment or improvement, will be required to meet the pretreatment regulations, the discharger shall include a compliance time schedule which specifies the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment procedures or facilities, equipment or improvements to attain compliance For purposes of pretreatment regulations, the completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the established compliance date provided by the applicable pretreatment regulations. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.088 Revocation, suspension, or modification of permit.
     (a)   In addition to any other remedies that may be provided to enforce the provisions of this chapter, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, made subject to additional terms or conditions, modified or suspended by the director in addition to other remedies provided by law, when such action is necessary in order to stop a discharge or a threatened discharge which presents a hazard or a threat of hazard to the public health, safety, welfare, natural environment, sewer system, or which violates this chapter, or which action is intended to implement programs or policies required or requested of the city by appropriate state or federal regulatory agencies.

     (b)   Any discharger notified of the city’s intent to revoke, make subject to additional terms or conditions, modify, or suspend the discharger’s permit shall immediately comply with directives of the director or cease and desist the discharge of all industrial wastes or such portion of said wastes as will eliminate the wrongful discharge to the sewer system pending any hearing that the discharger may request as set forth in this chapter.

     (c)   The director shall reissue or reinstate any industrial wastes permit or modified permit upon proof of satisfactory ability to comply and/or compliance with all discharge requirements, and the payment of any costs, fines, or penalties which may be assessed. The director may require any permitholder to develop and implement a compliance schedule for any proposed modification to permit terms and conditions.

     (d)   The city will have the authority to comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR part 25 in the enforcement of National Pretreatment Standards by annually providing public notification in local newspapers. This notification may consist of a list of industrial users that, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant non-compliance of applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.090 Appeal of decision of director.
     (a)   Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the director to issue, deny, condition, amend, suspend, revoke, or modify any permit pursuant to this chapter may file a written appeal with the city manager. Such an appeal shall only be effective if the appeal is filed in writing together with any applicable fees with the city manager no more than ten (10) days following the date of the decision by the director.

     (b)   The director shall give the industrial waste discharger applicant or permitholder ten (10) calendar days’ written notice of intent to issue or deny the application or to revoke, make subject to additional terms or conditions, modify or suspend the discharger’s permit. The director shall post a copy of such notice at city hall for interested persons. The notice shall set forth specifically the grounds for the director’s intention to deny, revoke, or suspend and shall inform the applicant or permitholder or members of the public that they have ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the notice to file a written request for a hearing. The application shall be issued or denied or the permit shall be revoked, modified or suspended if a hearing request is not received within the ten-day period.

     (c)   If the applicant or permitholder or interested party or parties file(s) a timely hearing request, the city manager, or manager’s designee, shall within ten calendar days from the receipt of the request, set a time and place for the hearing. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues and to be represented by counsel. The decision of the city manager, or the manager’s manager’s designee, whether to issue or deny the application or revoke, make subject to additional terms and conditions, modify or suspend the permit shall be final. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.092 Public access and confidentiality of information.
     (a)   It is the intent of this chapter that the procedures and enforcement conducted pursuant to this chapter be conducted openly and publicly whenever possible. Pursuant to state law, the information filed and submitted by applicants, permitholders, and other interested persons shall be public record and open for public review.

     (b)   However, when permitted by state law, information submitted to the city pursuant to this chapter may be claimed as confidential by the applicant or permitholder. Any such claim must be asserted at the time of submission in the manner prescribed on the application form or, in the case of other submissions, by stamping the words “confidential business information” on each page containing such information. Information submitted prior to the inclusion of this section in the chapter may be withdrawn and replaced by submittals stamped “confidential business information.” If no such claim is made at the time of submission, the information may be made available to the public without further notice. Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public which includes information which the applicant or permitholder has notified the city is claimed to be a trade secret as provided herein, the city shall notify the discharger in writing of the request by certified mail, return receipt requested. The city shall release the information to the public, but not earlier than thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the notice of the request for information, unless, prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the applicant or permitholder files an action in an appropriate court for a declaratory judgment that the information is subject to protection under the laws of the state of California or for an injunction prohibiting disclosure of the information to the public and immediately notifies the city of that action. This section does not permit any person to refuse to disclose the information required pursuant to this chapter to the city.

     (c)   Information and data provided to the city pursuant to this section that constitutes a description of wastewater constituents and characteristics, effluent or flow data, and effluent concentrations shall be available to the public without restriction. A discharger may be prohibited from discharging a substance unless its composition is made known to the city.

     (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (b), the information shall be made available upon written request to other governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES permitting system, or other similar pollution regulatory programs. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.094 Reporting requirements.
     (a)   All permitholders shall submit periodic reports to the director. Specific reporting requirements will be specified in the underlying permit or in controlling directives or violation notices. Minimum reports required will be:

     (1)   Baseline monitoring reports (BMR);

     (2)   Compliance reports, which will be submitted within ninety (90) days of the compliance date calculated pursuant to the applicable pretreatment standards or local standards;

     (3)   Periodic discharge reports, which may include, but not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rate of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operations, number and classification of employees, or other information that relates to the generation of waste including wastewater discharge. These reports will indicate whether applicable pretreatment standards and discharge limits are being met during the reporting period. These reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on-site, even though they are not normally discharged.

     (A) Except as specified in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(1), all significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the director submit no less than twice per year June and December (or on dates specified), reports indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with best management practices (BMP) or pollution prevention alternatives, the user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user,

     (B)   Significant non-categorical industrial users may be required to submit to the director at least once every six (6) months (or on dates specified) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the city. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the administrator determines that the Part 136 and sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including suggested by the city or other persons, approved by the city. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the city or a duly authorized city representative in lieu of the significant non-categorical industrial user. Monitoring frequencies and parameters, as specified in the underlying permit, must be followed in the event that the significant non-categorical industrial user is required to conduct self-monitoring;

     (4)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge;

     (5)   If sampling by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the user is not required if the city or any authorized representative of the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user of the district receives the results of this sampling, or if the city or authorized representative has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the user.     (b)          A zero discharge report may be required to certify that a discharger does not discharge industrial waste to the sanitary sewer system.

     (c)   In order to be complete, any report filed pursuant to this section shall contain a certification statement reading as follows:

 

I certify under penalty of perjury that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

 

     This certification statement shall be signed by the responsible corporate officer, manager, general partner, or duly authorized representative of the discharger and makes that person legally accountable for the information submitted.

     (d)   It is a violation of the underlying permit to fail to timely file or refuse to file a report required pursuant to this section. (Ord. 913 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1868 § 5, (2011))

 

15.10.096 Water conservation.
     The director may require a discharger to evaluate water conservation measures for industrial process water as a part of any pre-construction audit, industrial wastewater discharge permit application, mass audit study (MAS), reasonable control measures plan (RCMP), best management practices (BMP) or at any other time deemed necessary by the director. The director may require implementation of water conservation measures that are found to be cost effective. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.098 Monitoring.
     (a)   All monitored discharges shall be analyzed and tested according to procedures outlined in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.

     (b)   Each discharger shall provide at its own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of the building sewer and internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be located on the discharger’s premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, allow the facility to be located in the public street or sidewalk area, so long as an encroachment permit is first obtained and it will not pose any hazard or inconvenience to vehicle or pedestrian traffic.

     (c)   A monitoring facility shall allow ample room to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis and shall be located so that it is not obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained in a safe and proper operating condition at all times at the expense of the discharger.

     (d)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.

     (1)   Except as indicated in subsections (d)(2) and (3), the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four (24) hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CRF Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four (24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.

     (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.

     (3)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety (90) day compliance reports required in Section 15.10.094(a)(2) and (3), a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by Section 15.10.094(a)(3)(A) through (C), the user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or specified in the underlying permit. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1868 § 6, (2011))

 

15.10.100 Self-monitoring.
     (a)   As a permit condition, the director may require the discharger to conduct a sampling and analysis program of discharger’s industrial waste of a frequency and type required by the director to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The discharge permit shall specify the minimum frequency and type of samples, flow monitoring, measuring, and analyses to be conducted by the discharger. The permit may also specify the type of sampling equipment and flow monitoring equipment which must be installed and used. The required self-monitoring program will depend on factors such as flow, potential for the discharge to cause interference, pass-through, or upset of treatment processes, pollutants present, and prior compliance history (if any) of the discharger. Additional monitoring may be required by the director for violation follow-up, assisting the city in evaluating effects of the discharge, or as part of a compliance directive or notice of violation.

     (b)   The director may require self-monitoring for facilities for which a permit has not been issued. In addition, the director may require investigations or studies to determine methods of reducing toxic constituents in the discharge. The director may also request that information be submitted within a reasonable time concerning the chemical or biological constituents of any substance or chemical product that could potentially be discharged to the sewer system or the storm drain system or which the director determines may, alone or in accumulation with other discharges, contribute to a violation by the plant of any applicable water quality standards or of any of its NPDES permits or contribute to an upset of plant processes.

     (c)   If a discharger is subject to the reporting requirements in Section 15.10.094(a)(3)(A) monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the city, using the procedures prescribed in Section 15.10.098, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. (Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1868 § 7, (2011))

 

15.10.102 Inspection and sampling.
     (a)   The director, or any authorized representative of the director, county health officer, or state or federal government agency related to pollution regulation, may conduct all inspection, surveillance, sampling, photographing, measuring, observing, and monitoring procedures necessary to assure compliance with applicable sections of this chapter, any applicable permit issued pursuant to this chapter, and applicable county, state, and federal orders, regulations and laws.

     (b)   The director and these authorized representatives shall be authorized, and the owner and occupants of any premises where wastewater is discharged or created shall allow these representatives to enter without unreasonable delay during all hours of discharge and hours of operation of the premises to conduct these procedures.

     (c)   The director and these authorized representatives shall further have the right, and the owner and occupants of any premises where wastewater is discharged or created shall allow these representatives to set up on the premises any devices necessary to conducting sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, or metering operations.

     (d)   The director and these authorized representatives shall further have the right to inspect and copy any and all records related to the quantity and quality of wastewater discharges, building systems, and chemical and hazardous material usage, as well as those records supporting any reports submitted by the discharger or required by the underlying discharge permit. These records shall be made available by the discharger at either the premises themselves, the department of public works, or another location within the city designated in writing by the dischargers.

     (e)   Any unreasonable refusal to provide access and records as required by this section shall be grounds to terminate all sewer service or revoke the underlying permit, or both. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.104 Charges and fees.
     The city council may adopt charges and fees to implement this chapter. Those fees and charges may include civil penalties. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.106 Accidental discharges.
     Dischargers shall notify the city immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this chapter or the discharger’s permit in order to enable countermeasures to be taken by the city and other government agencies to minimize damage to the community sewer, plant, treatment processes, and waters of the city and the state. The discharger shall file a detailed written statement with the city within fifteen (15) days of the accidental discharge that describes the causes of the discharge and the measures being taken to prevent any further occurrence. Compliance with this section will not relieve the discharger of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the sewer system, plant, or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under the Water Code or Fish and Game Code. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.108 Employee training and notice.
     (a)   Permitholders shall inform appropriate employees of the provisions of this chapter by conducting orientation of new employees involved in permit-related activities and annual training.

     (b)   Permitholders shall provide areas for posting of information regarding pollution control, and in all cases, shall post signs or notices indicating approved methods for disposition of wastes and reporting requirements for accidental or slug discharges and increased loadings with telephone numbers for appropriate response agencies. (1633 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1868 § 8, (2011))

 

15.10.110 Disposal of unacceptable waste.
     Waste not permitted to be discharged into the community sewer shall be transported to a state-approved disposal site. The required waste haulers report shall be completed and a copy furnished within thirty (30) days to the city by the discharger. (Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.112 Protection of streams and watercourses.
     It is unlawful to discharge to any stream or watercourse any sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.113 Illegal sewer uses.
     Any use of any sanitary sewer system that does not conform to the regulations established in this chapter is illegal. Within thirty (30) days following notice by the city engineer that an illegal use exists, corrective measures to eliminate the illegal use shall be made by the owner or responsible party except that in cases where extensive or exceptional repairs or replacements to existing installations are required, the city engineer may grant extensions of time or consent to temporary remedial arrangements. (Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.114 Agreements in exceptional cases.
     (a)   Discharge of wastes not meeting the requirements stated in this title may be permitted by special agreement between the discharger and the city, so long as the agreement conforms to state and federal limitations.

     (b)   The city shall have the right to disallow exceptional discharges, prescribe pretreatment of some types of industrial wastes and to establish surcharges based on the cost of handling exceptional wastes in the city’s sewage collection and treatment system. (Ord. 1250 § 2, (1983); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.116 Civil penalties.
     (a)   Pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4, the city may impose civil penalties on persons who violate the provisions of this chapter in addition to any other remedies that the city or any other government agency may have. Civil penalties of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day for each violation may be imposed.

     (b)   The process by which such civil penalties are determined and reviewed will be the same as and a part of the process by which a violation of the sanitary sewer use rules and regulations is determined and reviewed as adopted by the council by resolution from time to time.

     (c)   If such a process is not applicable, any person may appeal the imposition of a civil penalty under this chapter by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within fifteen (15) days of the notice of imposition of a civil penalty. The city manager will fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and give notice in writing to the appellant of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at the address appearing on the notice of appeal. At the hearing on the appeal, the city manager shall receive testimony from the appellant and the city officers or employees recommending the penalties. The decision of the city manager shall be in writing, shall be served on the appellant in the same manner as prescribed for the notice of hearing, and shall be a final administrative decision.

     (d)   Any civil penalties imposed under this chapter may be collected in the same manner as other sanitary sewer charges and fees. The imposition of civil penalties shall not preclude in any way the imposition of additional requirements, charges, damages, or criminal sanctions that may be required or imposed by the city or any other person.

     (e)   Any person contesting a decision on a civil penalty shall be bound by the requirements of Government Code Section 53069(b).

     (f)    The city may petition the superior court to impose, assess, and recover these civil penalty sums. In determining whether to enforce the civil penalties, the court will take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violations occurred, and corrective action, if any, taken. (Ord. 1572 § 3, (1997); Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.118 Show cause hearing.
     (a)   The director may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the sanitary sewer system to show cause before the city manager or the city council why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice will be served on the user specifying the time and place of the hearing and the proposed enforcement action and reasons therefore. The notice will be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least ten (10) days before the scheduled hearing.

 

     (b)   After reviewing the evidence and testimony presented at the hearing, the city manager or the city council, as applicable, may make such orders as the manager or council deems appropriate with due regard to the violations, if any. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.120 Abatement.
     (a)   In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the director shall have the power to disconnect the user sewer system from the sewerage works. Upon disconnection, the city will estimate the cost of the re-connection to the system, and this user shall deposit the cost of disconnection and estimate re-connection before the user is reconnected to the system. The city will refund any part of the deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and re-connection.

     (b)   During the period of disconnection, any habitation or occupancy of the premises shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.122 Correction of violation and emergency action.
     (a)   In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city may correct any violation. The cost of such correction, including installation of additional pretreatment facilities shall be added to any sewer service charges and fees on the premises and collected in the same manner as other sewer service charges and fees.

     (b)   In case of emergency, the city may take such steps and obtain such warrants as necessary to enter and correct any illegal discharge or permit violation that pose an imminent threat to public health or safety.

     (c)   Any sewer or sewerage maintenance expenses attributable to a violation of this chapter or a permit issued under this chapter, including excessive preventative maintenance or cleaning, will be charged to the offending discharger by the city. Any refusal to pay such maintenance expenses duly authorized by the city shall constitute a violation of this code. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.124 Injunction.
     In addition to any other remedy provided in this code or by law, the city may petition the superior court or the federal district court for the issuance of a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction, or permanent injunction, as may be appropriate, restraining any person from a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.126 Falsifying information or tampering with processes.
     (a)   It is unlawful to:

     (1)   Knowingly or recklessly make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document filed with the city in connection with this chapter; or

     (2)   Falsify, tamper with, or knowingly or recklessly render inaccurate, any monitoring device or method or access point; or

     (3)   Divert flow from any monitoring device or equipment installed or operated pursuant to this chapter or any permit issued under this chapter.

     (b)   In addition to any other remedy provided in this code or by law, any such illegal activity will be grounds for revocation of the underlying permit. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

 

15.10.128 Compliance with federal pretreatment regulations.
     Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter, no industrial user shall discharge, cause, allow or permit any discharge into the sanitary sewer system in violation of any federal or state regulation regulating discharges by such users, including, but not limited to, the federal pretreatment regulations found in Title 40 of the CFR. Any pretreatment facilities required by those regulations or this chapter shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. (Ord. 1633 § 2, (2000))

Chapter 15.11 LIEN PROCEDURES FOR UNPAID CHARGES
15.11.010 Definitions.
     Unless the context otherwise specifies or requires, the terms defined in this section shall, for all purposes of this article, have the meanings herein specified:

     “City” means the city of Burlingame;

     “Council” means city council of the city of Burlingame;

     “Customer” means the accepted applicant for water or sewer service, as shown on department records;

     “Department” means the finance department;

     “Owner” when used with reference to real property shall mean, and shall conclusively be deemed to be, the legal owner of the real property;

     “Real property” means a lot or building thereon or other facility whether private, governmental, or otherwise receiving water or sewer services from the city;

     “Sewer service” means service rendered to real property and paid for by the sewer service charge and sewer discharge permit fee as established pursuant to this title;

     “Water service” means the water service rendered to real property and including the charges for such service. (Ord. 1557 § 1, (1996))

 

15.11.020 Owner responsibility for water and sewer service charges.
     The owner of any real property shall be responsible for subscribing to and paying for water service to such real property in accordance with rate schedules and rules and regulations established from time to time by the council. The owner of any real property shall be responsible for paying the sewer service charges and the sewer discharge permit fee from the use or occupancy of said property.

     Nothing in this section is intended to or shall prevent an arrangement or the continuance of any existing arrangement, pursuant to rules and regulations established by the council under which payments for water or sewer service charges or sewer discharge permit fees are made by a customer, a tenant or tenants, or any agent, in behalf of the owner; provided, however, that any such arrangement shall not relieve the owner of the obligations set forth in the first paragraph of this section where water or sewer service charges or sewer discharge permit fee is unpaid.

     Nothing in this chapter is intended to permit recovery of charges for water or sewer services to or for a tenant’ s residential use from any subsequent tenant or the property owner in contravention of the provisions of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California. (Ord. 1557 § 1, (1996))

 

15.11.030 Collection of delinquent service charges as a special assessment lien.
     Whether or not water service is shut off for nonpayment of service charges, the finance director may initiate proceedings to make delinquent water and sewer service charges and sewer discharge permit fees a special assessment lien against parcels of property to which said service was rendered. (Ord. 1557 § 1, (1996))

 

15.11.040 Additional request for payment—Warning notice.
     When service has been rendered and a bill has been presented to the owner, or to the customer when the latter is not the owner, with a bill for such service on a continuing account and such bill remains unpaid until the succeeding billing cycle, the department shall mail to the owner written request for payment. In the case of accounts that have been closed without payment in full, the department shall mail to the owner a written request for payment.

     The written request for payment shall include information as to the amount due and a warning notice that if the amount due is not paid within fifteen (15) days, proceedings to establish a special assessment lien against the real property to which the service was furnished will be instituted, and if the lien is established and recorded, penalties and interest, pursuant to this article, will accrue. (Ord. 1557 § 1, (1996))

 

15.11.050 Report and notice.
     If payment is not received within fifteen (15) days following mailing of the request, the account shall be deemed to be delinquent. Delinquent accounts which are to be subjected to the lien procedure shall be reported to the finance director at least once each month. The finance director shall conduct a hearing pursuant to rules consistent with this article and approved by the city manager. The report for such delinquent account shall contain the owner’ s name, the amount due, and a description of each parcel to be subjected to the lien procedure. The descriptions of the parcels shall be those used for the same parcels on the assessor’ s map books for the current year. Upon receipt of such report, the finance director shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any protests or objections thereto, and shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to each owner of the parcels of real property described in the report not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing. (Ord. 1557 § 1, (1996))

 

15.11.060 Recordation—Charges.
     The finance director shall cause the confirmed and verified report to be recorded in the county recorder’ s office as soon as practicable. The special assessment lien on each parcel of property described in said report shall carry additional charges for administrative expenses of fifty dollars ($50.00) or ten (10) percent of the amount owed, whichever is higher, together with interest at a rate of one percent per full month compounded monthly from the date of recordation of the lien on all charges due. (Ord. 1557 § 1, (1996))

 

15.11.070 Filing with controller and tax collector—Distribution of proceeds.
     The finance director shall cause a certified copy of each confirmed report to be filed with the county controller and county tax collector within ten (10) days after confirmation of the report whereupon it shall be the duty of said officers to add the amount of said assessment to the current tax roll. Thereafter said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary taxes of the County of San Mateo.

     All sums received from the tax collector pursuant to this article shall be deposited to the credit of the water fund or sewer fund in proportion to the cost of services rendered attributable to each fund. (Ord. 1557 § 1, (1996))

 

15.11.080 Release of lien.
     On receipt of payment from the tax collector of the special assessment, the finance director shall cause to be recorded a release of lien with the county recorder. (Ord. 1557 § 1, (1996))

Chapter 15.12 ABATEMENT OF IMPROPER SEWER CONNECTIONS
15.12.010 Improper sewer connections.
     All sewer laterals or sewer cleanouts which contain leaks or breaks, uncapped sewer cleanouts, sump pumps, downspouts or yard drains which discharge into the sewer system, and all other sources of accidental, negligent or intended introduction of storm runoff or similar waters into the sanitary system are declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be abated by the owner of the property, who is required to remove or correct such improper sewer connections. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.020 Resolution declaring nuisance—Notice of abatement.
     Whenever any such improper sewer connection exists upon any private property or in any street or alley within the city, the city council shall pass a resolution declaring the same to be a public nuisance, and order the city engineer to give notice of the passage of such resolution as herein provided and stating therein that unless such nuisance is abated without delay, the work of doing so will be done by the city and the expense thereof assessed upon the property from which the nuisance is removed. Such resolution shall fix the time and place for hearing any objections to the proposed correction or removal. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.030 Form of Notice—Mailing.
     Such notice shall be substantially as follows:

 

Notice to Correct or Remove Improper Sewer Connection

        NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on _______ , 20____ , pursuant to the provisions of the Ordinance Code, City of Burlingame, the City Council of said City passed a resolution declaring that all improper sewer connections upon any private property in any public street or alley, constitute a public nuisance and must be abated by correction or removal thereof.

        The improper connection on your property is ______________________________________ .

        NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that property owners shall within thirty (30) days hereof correct or remove all such improper sewer connections from their property, or such improper sewer connections will be removed or corrected by the City, in which case the cost of correction or removal will be assessed upon the land upon which such improper sewer connections have been corrected or removed; and such cost will constitute a lien upon such land until paid, and will be collected upon the next tax roll upon which general municipal taxes are collected.

        All property owners having any objection to the proposed correction or removal of such improper sewer connections are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the Council of said City, to be held at the Council chambers in the City Hall in said City on ___________ , 20____ , at seven o’clock, p.m., when and where objections will be heard and given due consideration.

                DATED _______________ , 20____

________________________________

City Engineer of the City of Burlingame

 

     Such notice shall be mailed to the owner of each property, as such ownership is shown on the last equalized assessment roll, on which the nuisance exists, at least ten (10) days prior to the time fixed by the council for hearing objections. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.040 Hearing—Action by council.
     At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider any and all objections to the proposed corrections of improper sewer connections and may continue the hearing from time to time.

     Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the council by motion shall allow or overrule any or all objections, if any, after which the council shall thereupon be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work of correction of the improper sewer connection. The action of the council at the conclusion of such hearing shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.050 Order to abate nuisance—Abatement by property owner.
     After final action shall have been taken by the council on the disposition of all objections or in case no objections shall have been received, the city council shall by resolution order the city engineer to abate or cause to be abated such nuisance by having the improper sewer connection corrected or removed, and the city engineer and his or her assistants, employees, contracting agents or other representatives are authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose.

     As an alternate remedy, the city may take such legal action as may be necessary to require correction or removal of the improper sewer connection by the property owner.

     Any property owner shall have the right to correct or remove such improper sewer connections himself or herself or have the same corrected at his or her own expense; provided, that such correction or removal shall have been completed prior to the arrival of the city engineer or his or her representatives to perform such work. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.060 Account and report of cost.
     The city engineer shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance upon each separate lot or parcel of land, and include such account in a report and assessment list to the city council, which shall be filed with the clerk. Such report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient to identify such lot or parcel, together with the expense proposed to be assessed against each separate lot or parcel of land therefor respectively. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.070 Notice of hearing on report and assessment list.
     The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list at or near the city clerk’s office and shall notify property owners that they may appear and object to any matter contained therein. The notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the time such report will be considered by the city council. Such notice shall be substantially in the following form.

 

NOTICE OF HEARING ON REPORT AND
ASSESSMENT

FOR IMPROPER SEWER CONNECTIONS

        NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the _________ day of _____________ , 20____ the City Engineer of the City of Burlingame filed with the City Clerk of said City a report and assessment list on the abatement of improper sewer connections within said City, a copy of which is posted near the office of the City Clerk.

        The assessment against your property is ___________________ .

        NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on Monday, the _________ day of______________ , 20____ , at the hour of seven o’clock, p.m. in the Council Chambers in the City Hall of said City, said report and assessment list will be presented to the City Council of said City for consideration and confirmation, and all persons interested, or to any matter or thing contained therein, may appear at said time and place to be heard.

                 Dated: _______________ , 20____ .

_____________________________

City Clerk of the City of Burlingame

 

(Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.080 Hearing and confirmation of assessments—Lien against property.
     At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering such report, the city council shall hear the same together with any objections which may be filed by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating the nuisance mentioned in this chapter, and the city engineer shall attend such meeting with his or her record thereof, and at such hearing, the city council may make such modifications in the proposed assessment therefor it may deem just and proper, after which such report and assessment list shall be confirmed by resolution.

     The amount of the cost of abating the nuisance upon the property referred to in the report of the city engineer and as finally concluded by resolution of the city council shall constitute a special assessment against each respective lot or parcel of land, and after thus made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such assessments, until paid. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.090 Collection on tax roll.
     The city clerk shall transmit a copy of said resolution to the San Mateo County tax collector. Thereafter, such amounts shall be collected at the time and in the same manner, as general city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties, and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes are made applicable to such special assessments. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.100 Payment of assessments, annual installments, interest.
     The payment of any assessments of four hundred dollars ($400.00) or more upon single-family residence may be made in annual installments, not to exceed five (5); the payment of assessments so deferred shall bear interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of seven percent per annum. Said interest shall begin to run on the thirty-first day after the confirmation of the assessments. (Ord. 1329 § 1, (1986))

 

15.12.110 Inspection and correction upon sale.
     (a)   Whenever any property is to be transferred to or vested in any other person or entity and that property includes any buildings or structures constructed more than twenty-five (25) years prior to the date of transfer or vesting, the sewer lateral(s) to that property shall be tested for infiltration and all necessary repairs or replacements performed to prevent all infiltration. The city engineer shall establish or approve testing procedures. All repair or replacement work shall be completed and approved by the city prior to transfer of title.

     (b)   Exceptions: This section shall not apply:

     (1)   To condominium or cooperative apartment buildings or the units within those buildings, except as a condition to conversion to a condominium or cooperative apartment building; or

     (2)   For ten (10) years after acceptance of a test pursuant to this section if partial or no repairs of the lateral were required and any repairs were completed pursuant to permit and inspection by the city; or

     (3)   For ten (10) years after inspection and approval by the city of completed alterations to the lateral, if alterations pursuant to a city permit were made to the location of or connections to the lateral following a test pursuant to this section; or

     (4)   For twenty-five (25) years after acceptance of work if replacement of the complete sewer lateral was performed; or

     (5)   If the city engineer determines testing is unnecessary because the piping has less than three (3) joints and the total length does not exceed ten (10) feet.

     (c)   For purposes of this ordinance, a sewer lateral shall be deemed to be the piping and sewer appurtenances outside a structure or traveling between two (2) or more structures and terminating at a clean out, wye, or manhole acceptable to the city engineer. Any modification to the sewer lateral shall be performed and inspected under the requirements of Titles 15 and 18 of this code and established city procedures. (Ord. 1623 § 2, (2000))

Chapter 15.14 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
15.14.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “City of Burlingame Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance” and may be so cited. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.020 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of city of Burlingame citizens by:

     (a)   Eliminating non-storm water discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer.

     (b)   Controlling the discharge to municipal separate storm sewers from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than storm water.

     (c)   Reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable.

     The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.030 Definitions.
     (a)   Clean Water Act Definitions. Any terms defined in the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, and/or defined in the regulations for the storm water discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency on November 16, 1990 (as may from time to time be amended) as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in that statute or regulations. Specifically, the definition of the following terms included in that statute or regulations are hereby incorporated by reference, as now applicable or as may hereafter be amended: discharge, illicit discharge, pollutant, and storm water. These terms presently are defined as follows:

     “Discharge” means:

     (1)   Any addition of any pollutant to navigable waters from any point source, or

     (2)   Any addition of any pollutant to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft.

     “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the city storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit and discharges resulting from fire fighting and other emergency response activities.

     “Pollutant” means dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or destroyed equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharge into water.

     “Storm Water” means storm water runoff and surface runoff and drainage.

     (b)   Other definitions. When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

     “Authorized enforcement official” means the city manager or his or her designees is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

     “Best management practices” (“BMPs”) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to “waters of the United States.” BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

     “City” means the city of Burlingame.

     “City storm sewer system” includes but is not limited to those facilities within the city by which storm water may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains, which is not part of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR §122.2.

     “Non-storm water discharge” means any discharge that is not entirely composed of storm water except those noted within an NPDES Permit and this chapter.

     “Premises” means any building, lot parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

     “Watercourse” means a natural stream, creek, or man-made uncovered channel through which water flows continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.040 Responsibility for administration.
     This chapter shall be administered for the city by the city manager and his or her designees. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.050 Construction and application.
     This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and NPDES Permit No. CA0029921 and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.060 Severability and validity.
     If any portion of this chapter is declared invalid, the remaining portions of this chapter are to be considered valid. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.070 Waiver procedures.
     (a)   It is the intent of this chapter to protect and enhance water quality while respecting the rights of private property owners to economically viable use of land. It is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit all economically viable use of any private lands, nor to result in a confiscatory impact. Accordingly, the purpose of this section is to provide for an administrative procedure for a waiver or modification of a particular provision of this chapter in the event the strict application of this chapter would result in the denial of all economically viable use of real property.

     (b)   An applicant for a waiver of a provision of this chapter shall file a waiver application with the director of the public works department on a form provided by the director identifying the provision sought to be waived or modified. The applicant shall file a complete form and shall provide all documentation and information required by the director to determine whether application of the provision in question will prohibit any economically viable use of the land in question or otherwise have an impermissible confiscatory result.

     (c)   The director may approve, deny or conditionally approve a waiver application upon making all of the following written findings:

     (1)   That the strict application of the provision for which a waiver or modification is sought would result in the denial of all economically viable use of the real property in question;

     (2)   To the maximum extent feasible, conditions have been placed upon such a waiver or modification in order to achieve the goals of this chapter as closely as possible while still allowing economically viable use of the real property in question;

     (3)   Approval of such a waiver will not result in a public nuisance which would constitute a significant and direct threat to public health or safety.

     (d)   Any decision of the director shall be appealable to the city council. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.110 Discharge of pollutants.
     The discharge of non-storm water discharges to the city storm sewer system is prohibited. All discharges of material other than storm water must be in compliance with a NPDES Permit issued for the discharge (other than NPDES Permit No. CA0029921) and this chapter.

     (a)   Exceptions to Discharge Prohibition. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 9:

     (1)   The prohibition on discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations.

     (2)   Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to waters of the United States when properly managed: water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources, municipal street cleaning, municipal park maintenance, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, infiltration to separate storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, or flows from fire fighting and other emergency response activity, and accordingly are not subject to the prohibition on discharges. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

15.14.120 Discharge in violation of permit.
     Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of NPDES Permit No. CA0029921, the terms of which are incorporated herein by reference, and which is on file in the office of the city clerk, and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.130 Illicit discharge.
     It is prohibited to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the city storm sewer system. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.140 Reduction of pollutants in storm water.
     Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the city storm sewer system shall undertake all practicable measures to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include ownership and use of facilities which may be a source of pollutants such as parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, commercial facilities, stores fronting city streets, etc. The following minimal requirements shall apply:

     (a)   Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, place, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except in containers or in lawfully established dumping grounds.

     The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the city of Burlingame in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of litter to the maximum extent practicable.

     No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city.

     (b)   Standards for Parking Lots and Similar Structures. Persons owning or operating a parking lot, gas station pavement or similar structure shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the city storm sewer system.

     (c)   Best Management Practices for New Developments and Redevelopments. Any construction contractor performing work in the city shall endeavor, whenever possible, to provide filter materials at the catch basin to retain any debris and dirt flowing in to the city’s storm sewer system. City may establish controls on the volume and rate of storm water runoff from new developments and redevelopments as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants.

     (d)   All solid waste and recyclable materials hauled by any person over public streets in the city shall be securely tied and covered during hauling thereof so as to prevent leakage, spillage, or blowing. No person shall allow any solid waste or recyclable materials of any kind whatsoever to leak, blow, or drop from any vehicle on any public street within the city.

     (e)   Compliance with Best Management Practices. Where best management practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by the city for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such guidelines or requirements as identified by the public works director. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1896 § 2, (2014))

 

15.14.150 Watercourse protection.
     Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee or tenant, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles which would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse; shall maintain existing privately owned structures within a watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse; and shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for said maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.210 Authority to inspect.
     Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the official by this chapter; provided that: (i) if such building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and (ii) if such building premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.

     Any such request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.

     Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, illicit discharges, discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, or similar factors.

     (a)   Authority to Sample and Establish Sampling Devices. The city shall have the right to establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all inspections as provided herein, the official may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on site.

     (b)   Notification of Spills. As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed release of materials, pollutants, or waste which may result in pollutants or non-storm water discharges entering the city storm sewer system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and clean up of such release and shall notify the city of the occurrence by telephoning (415) 696-7230 and confirming the notification by correspondence to the director of public works.

     (c)   Requirement to Test or Monitor. Any authorized enforcement official may request that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, undertake such monitoring activities and/or analysis and furnish such reports as the official may specify. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analysis and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analysis and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analysis and/or reports requested. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.220 Continuing violations.
     Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable accordingly as herein provided. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.230 Concealment.
     Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.240 Civil actions.
     In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:

     (a)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction.

     (b)   Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection.

     (c)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation, including reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs.

     (d)   Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this subsection shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing storm water discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.250 Administrative enforcement powers.
     In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, any authorized enforcement official has the authority to utilize administrative remedies. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.260 Remedies not exclusive.
     Remedies under this Article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

 

15.14.310 Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program.
     The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the city’s hazardous materials inventory and response program shall include a program for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions on non-storm water discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce storm water pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 1503 § 1, (1994))

Chapter 15.15 MANAGEMENT OF PCBS DURING BUILDING DEMOLITION PROJECTS
Note
 

Sections:

15.15.010           Purpose.

15.15.020           Definitions.

15.15.030           Applicability.

15.15.040           Exemptions.

15.15.050           PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment.

15.15.060           Agency notification, abatement, and disposal for identified PCBs.

15.15.070           Compliance with California and federal PCBs laws and regulations.

15.15.080           Information submission and applicant certification.

15.15.090           Recordkeeping.

15.15.100           Obligation to notify city of Burlingame of changes.

15.15.110           Liability.

15.15.120           Enforcement.

15.15.130           Fees.

 

15.15.010 Purpose.
     (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to accomplish the following purposes:

     (1)   Require permit applicants (applicants) for projects that include the complete demolition of an applicable structure to conduct a PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment and submit information documenting the results of the screening. Such documentation to include: (A) the results of a determination whether the building proposed for demolition is high priority for PCBs-containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction; and (B) the concentration of PCBs in each priority building material present; and (C) for each priority building material present with a PCBs concentration equal to or greater than fifty (50) ppm, the approximate amount (linear feet or square feet) of that material in the building.

     (2)   Inform applicants with PCBs present in one or more of the priority building materials (based on the above screening assessment) that they must comply with all related applicable federal and state laws. This may include reporting to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board (Regional Water Board), and/or the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC). Additional sampling for and abatement of PCBs may be required.

     (3)   Meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and the Municipal Regional Stormwater Permit Order No. R2-2015-0049.

     (b)   The requirements of this chapter do not replace or supplant the requirements of California or federal law, including, but not limited to, the Toxic Substances Control Act, 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 761, and California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 22. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.020 Definitions.
     The following terms shall have the meanings when used in this chapter:

     (a)   “Applicable structure” means buildings constructed or remodeled from January 1, 1950 to December 31, 1980. Wood framed buildings and single-family residential buildings are not applicable structures regardless of the age of the building.

     (b)   “Applicant” means a person applying for a building permit as required by Chapter 25.20 Permits and Licenses, or a demolition permit as required by Section 18.07.065.

     (c)   “Building” means a structure with a roof and walls standing more or less permanently in one place. Buildings are intended for human habitation or occupancy.

     (d)   “Demolition” means the wrecking, razing, or tearing down of any structure. This definition is intended to be consistent with the demolition activities undertaken by contractors with a C-21 Building Moving/Demolition Contractor’s License.

     (e)   “DTSC” means the state of California Department of Toxic Substances Control.

     (f)    “EPA” means The United States Environmental Protection Agency.

     (g)   “PCBs” means polychlorinated biphenyls.

     (h)   “PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment” means the two-step process used to: (1) determine whether the building proposed for demolition is high priority for PCBs-containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction; and if so (2) determine the concentrations (if any) of PCBs in priority building materials revealed through existing information or representative sampling and chemical analysis of the priority building materials in the building. Directions for this process are provided in the PCBs in the priority building materials screening assessment applicant package.

     (i)    “PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment applicant package” (“applicant package”) means a document package that includes an overview of the screening process, Applicant instructions, a process flow chart, a screening assessment form, and the Protocol for Evaluating Priority PCBs-Containing Materials before Building Demolition (BASMAA 2018, prepared for the Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association, August 2018).

     (j)    “Priority building materials” means the following:

     (1)   Caulking: e.g., around windows and doors, at structure/walkway interfaces, and in expansion joints;

     (2)   Thermal/fiberglass Insulation: e.g., around HVAC systems, heaters, boilers, heated transfer piping, and inside walls or crawl spaces;

     (3)   Adhesive/mastic: e.g., below carpet and floor tiles, under roofing materials, and under flashing; and

     (4)   Rubber window gaskets: e.g., used in lieu of caulking to seal around windows in steel-framed buildings.

     (k)   “Public works director” means the public works director or authorized designee.

     (l)    “Regional Water Board” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region.

     (m) “Remodel” means to make significant finish and/or structural changes that increase utility and appeal through complete replacement and/or expansion. A removed area reflects fundamental changes that include multiple alterations. These alterations may include some or all of the following: replacement of a major component (cabinet(s), bathtub, or bathroom tile), relocation of plumbing/gas fixtures/appliances, significant structural alterations (relocating walls, and/or the addition of square footage). (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.030 Applicability.
     This chapter applies to applicants for buildings constructed or remodeled from January 1, 1950 to December 31, 1980. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.040 Exemptions.
     Single-family residential and wood frame structures are exempt. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.050 PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment.
     Every applicant shall conduct a PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment, a two-step process used to:

     (a)   Determine whether the building proposed for demolition is high priority for PCBs containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction (i.e., whether the building is an applicable structure); and if so

     (b)   Demonstrate the presence or absence and concentration of PCBs in priority building materials through existing information or representative sampling and chemical analysis of the priority building materials in the building. Applicants shall follow the directions provided in the PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment applicant package (applicant package), which includes an overview of the process, Applicant instructions, a process flow chart, a screening assessment form, and the Protocol for Evaluating Priority PCBs-Containing Materials before Building Demolition. Per the applicant package, for certain types of buildings built within a specified date range, the applicant must conduct further assessment to determine whether or not PCBs are present at concentrations ≥ fifty (50) ppm. This determination is made via existing data on specific product formulations (if available), or more likely, via conducting representative sampling of the priority building materials and analyzing the samples for PCBs at a certified analytical laboratory. Any representative sampling and analysis must be conducted in accordance with the Protocol for Evaluating Priority PCBs-Containing Materials before Building Demolition. The applicant package provides additional details. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.060 Agency notification, abatement, and disposal for identified PCBs.
     When the PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment identifies one or more priority building materials with PCBs, the Applicant must comply with all related applicable federal and state laws, including potential notification of the appropriate regulatory agencies, including EPA, the Regional Water Board, and/or the DTSC. Agency contacts are provided in the applicant package. Additional sampling for and abatement of PCBs may be required.

     Depending on the approach for sampling and removing building materials containing PCBs, the applicant may need to notify or seek advance approval from EPA before building demolition. Even in circumstances where advance notification to or approval from EPA is not required before the demolition activity, the disposal of PCBs waste is regulated under Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). Additionally, the disposal of PCBs waste is subject to California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 22 Section 66262. Additional information is provided in the applicant package. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.070 Compliance with California and federal PCBs laws and regulations.
     Applicants must comply with all federal and California laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, health, safety, and environmental laws and regulations, that relate to management and cleanup of any and all PCBs, including, but not limited to, PCBs in priority building materials, other PCBs-contaminated materials, PCBs-contaminated liquids, and PCBs waste. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.080 Information submission and applicant certification.
     (a)   The applicant shall conduct a PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment and submit the associated information and results as part of the building permit application, including the following (see applicant package for more details):

     (1)   Owner and project information, including location, year building was built, description of building construction type, and anticipated demolition date.

     (2)   Determination of whether the building proposed for demolition is high priority for PCBs-containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction.

     (3)   If high priority for PCBs-containing building materials based on the structure age, use, and construction, the concentration of PCBs in each priority building material present. If PCBs concentrations are determined via representative sampling and analysis, include a contractor’s report documenting the assessment which includes the completed QA/QC checklist from the Protocol for Evaluating Priority PCBs-Containing Materials before Building Demolition and the analytical laboratory reports.

     (4)   For each priority building material present with a PCBs concentration equal to or greater than fifty (50) ppm, the approximate amount (linear feet or square feet) of that material in the building (see applicant package for more details).

     (5)   Applicant’s certification of the accuracy of the information submitted.

     (b)   The public works director may specify a format for the submission of the information. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.090 Recordkeeping.
     Those applicants conducting a building demolition project must maintain documentation of the results of the PCBs in priority building materials screening assessment for a minimum of five (5) years after submittal. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.100 Obligation to notify city of Burlingame of changes.
     The applicant shall submit written notifications documenting any changes in the information submitted in compliance with this chapter.

     The applicant shall submit the revised information to the city of Burlingame when changes in project conditions affect the information submitted with the permit application. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.110 Liability.
     The applicant is responsible for safely and legally complying with the requirements of this chapter. Neither the issuance of a permit under the requirements of Chapter 25.20 Permits and Licenses or Section 18.07.065, nor the compliance with the requirements of this chapter or with any condition imposed by the issuing authority, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the city of Burlingame for damages to persons or property. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.120 Enforcement.
     Failure to submit the information required in this chapter or submittal of false information will result in denial of the building permit. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

 

15.15.130 Fees.
     In addition to the fees required under the city of Burlingame Master Fee Schedule, all applicants subject to this chapter shall deposit funds with the city of Burlingame, pay a fee sufficient to reimburse the city of Burlingame costs for staff time or consultant staff as applicable required to implement this chapter. (Ord. 1963 § 2, (2019))

Title 16 (RESERVED)

Title 17 FIRE
Chapter 17.04 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE

Chapter 17.04 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1208, 1285, 1315, 1413, 1463, 1536, 1614, 1695, 1749, 1793, 1800, 1808, 1814 and 1855.

 

17.04.010 Adoption of text of the California Fire Code and the International Fire Code.
     There is adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, explosion, or wildfire that certain codes which contains building standards known as the 2019 California Fire Code (International Fire Code, 2018 Edition as amended by the state of California), and the non-building standards known as the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, together with all appendices, except Appendices A, D, and J, and the state of California amendments thereto, and the Public Resources Code, Division 4, Section 4291. (Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.020 Amendments to the California Fire Code and International Fire Code.
     The California Fire Code and the International Fire Code are amended or modified as follows. (Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.025 Chapter 1, Division II, Section 102.2, IFC is amended—Administrative, operational and maintenance provisions.
     Section 102.2 is amended to delete item #2 of this section. (Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.030 Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.3.3, IFC and 105.4.1.1, IFC is amended—Occupancy prohibited before approval and examination of documents.
     Section 105.3.3 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

 

Section 105.3.3. No final inspection by the Building Official as to all or any portion of a development shall be deemed complete, and no certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the installation of the prescribed fire protection facilities and access ways have been completed and approved by the Fire Chief.

 

     Section 105.4.1.1 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

 

Section 105.4.1.1. When required by the fire code official, plans submitted to the Building Official for a permit shall be reviewed by the Fire Chief to determine compliance with the California Fire Code and the International Fire Code. Upon review a written report shall be returned to the Building Official listing deficiencies or compliance with the Code.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.035 Chapter 1, Sections 106.1 and 106.3, CFC are amended as follows.
     Section 106.1.2, CFC is added to this code and shall read as follows:

 

Section 106.1.2. Permits and Fees

        a.        The fees for the permits and other services shall be as established by resolution of the Central County Fire Department Fire Board as amended from time to time. The fee shall be set to cover the cost of the Fire Department to review and inspect the intended activities, operations or functions. The fees must be applied to the appropriate agency, City of Burlingame or Central County Fire Department, depending on the type of service.

 

        EXCEPTION: (1) The applicant for a given permit shall be exempt from the payment when the work to be conducted is for the City of Burlingame under written contract to the City or for events sponsored or co-sponsored by the City.

 

        b.        In the case of multiple permits for an applicant, the permit applicant will be charged the single highest listed rate of all the permits required. The other permitable items will be charged at a rate of 50% of the listed fee as long as the permits are for the same address.

        c.        Where processes or materials are inherent with a permitable item, subsequent fees may be waived at the discretion of fire chief.

        d.        All fire permits and fire construction permits shall have a set number of inspections per permit as set forth by the Central County Fire Department Fee Schedule. Additional inspections and additional re-inspections will be billed at an hourly rate consistent with the Central County Fire Department Fee Schedule.

        e.        Application for “event” type permits (i.e.: Assembly, Pyrotechnic, Tents, etc.) shall be submitted 14 days prior to the event date. Applications submitted within 13 days prior to the event date shall be charged double the regular permit rate as established by the Central County Fire Department Fee Schedule.

        f.        “After Hours” inspections shall be invoiced at a rate of one and one-half time the normal hourly rate. “After Hours” inspections will be billed at a rate of three hours minimum. “After Hours” inspections are defined as follows: Inspections conducted outside of normal business hours for the Fire Prevention Division, as defined on the Central County Fire Department website.

        g.        Any person, group, organization, institution or business failing to pay the applicable fees under this Article shall after 30 days of the due date, for either existing or new permit applicants, shall be issued a citation for non-payment of the required permit fee. The penalty for all permit payments delinquent after 30 days shall be a doubling of the original fee.

 

     Section 106.3, CFC is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

 

Section 106.3. Investigation and Fee.

        Section 106.3. Investigation—Work without a permit.

        Investigation. Whenever construction or work for which a permit is required by this code and has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for the work. All work done without a required permit, including demolition of all or part of a structure or system shall be subject to the investigation and fees imposed by this section.

 

     Section 106.3.1 is added to this code and shall read as follows:

 

Section 106.3.1. Fee – Work without a permit

        In the event work is done without an issued permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected as a civil penalty, whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be up to 10 times the fire permit fee. The investigation fee shall be determined by the Fire Chief and shall be based on the staff time reasonably required to resolve all of the issues related to the work that has been performed without a permit. No construction work permit shall be issued until the investigation fee has been paid in full.

     Nothing in this section shall relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this code, in the execution of the work, or from any other fees or penalties prescribed by law. (Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.040 Chapter 1, Section 109, CFC is amended—Board of Appeals.
     Section 109, CFC is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

 

Section 109. Appeal and Review.

        (a)       The chief of the fire department shall be charged with the duty and responsibility of administering the provisions of this chapter.

        (b)      Whenever it is provided herein that certain actions shall be done in accordance with an order of the fire department, such order shall be complied with. Any person aggrieved thereby, may appeal to the fire chief in writing within ten (10) days after the date of such order, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The fire chief shall issue a written decision to affirm, modify or reverse the order within two (2) business days of the receipt of the appeal. The fire chief’s written decision may be appealed to the City Council no later than ten (10) days from the date of the fire chief’s written decision. The City Council’s decision shall be final and conclusive. Except in the cases of immediate hazard, the enforcement of the order shall be suspended until such person has exhausted the appeal process as described above.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.045 Reserved.
(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

17.04.050 Sections 315, CFC—General storage.
     Section 315.2, CFC is amended and Section 315.3.5 is added to read as follows:

 

Section 315.2 Permit Required. A permit for miscellaneous combustible materials shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6.

 

Exception: Storage of combustible materials other than motorized vehicles or vessels shall not be permitted in a public parking garage or in a garage or carport serving a Group R, Division 1 or Group R, Division 2 Occupancy, unless the method of storage is approved by the Fire Code Official.

 

     Section 315.3.5, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 315.3.5. Designation of Storage Heights. Where required by the fire code official, a visual method of indicating the maximum allowable storage height shall be provided in accordance with Section 315.3.5.1, CFC.

 

     Section 315.3.5.1, CFC added to read as follows:

 

Section 315.3.5.1. The approved visual method of indicating maximum allowable storage shall be a four (4″) inch wide line in contrasting color along a wall or storage rack.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.055 Section 503.3, IFC—Marking.
     Section 503.3, IFC is amended by adding Section 503.3.1 to read as follows:

 

Section 503.3.1 Fire Lane Designation. Designation of fire lanes shall be by one of the following means:

1.    By white signs measuring at least 12 inches by 18 (12″ x 18″) inches posted immediately adjacent thereto and clearly visible. It should clearly state, in red letters not less than one inch (1″) in height, that the space is a fire lane and parking is prohibited.

2.    By outlining and hash marking the area in contrasting colors clearly marking it with the words “Fire Lane—No Parking.”

3.    By identifying the space with a red curb upon which the words “Fire Lane—No Parking” are stenciled every 15 feet.

a.       Both sides of fire lanes shall be red curbed when the fire lane is twenty (20) to twenty-eight (28) feet in width.

b.       At least one side of a fire lane shall be red curbed and stenciled when the fire lane is over twenty-eight (28) and up to thirty-six (36) feet in width.

c.       Curbs need not be painted red nor stenciled when the fire lane is more than thirty-six (36) feet in width.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.060 Sections 505.1 through 505.1.3, CFC—Premises identification.
     Section 505.1.1 is added to read as follows:

 

Section 505.1.1 Size of numbers shall be as follows:

1.    When the structure is thirty-six (36) to fifty (50) feet from the street or fire apparatus access, a minimum of one-half-inch (½″) stroke by six inches (6″) high is required.

2.    When the structure is more than fifty (50) feet from the street or fire apparatus access, a minimum of one-inch (1″) stroke by nine inches (9″) high is required.

 

     Sections 505.1.2, 505.1.3, and 505.1.4 CFC are added to read as follows:

 

Section 505.1.2 Multi-Tenant Buildings. Numbers or letters shall be designated on all occupancies within a building. Size shall be a minimum of one-half inch (1/2″) stroke by four inches (4″) high and on a contrasting background. Directional address numbers or letters shall be provided. Said addresses or numbers shall be posted at a height no greater than 5 feet, 6 inches (5′ 6″) above the finished floor and shall be either internally or externally illuminated in all new construction.

 

Section 505.1.3 Rear Addressing. When required by the chief, approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the fire apparatus road at the back of a property or where rear parking lots or alleys provide and acceptable vehicular access. Number stroke and size shall comply with 505.1.1.

 

Section 505.1.4 ADU Addressing. Address for Residential Accessory Dwelling Units shall meet City of Burlingame specifications.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.065 Sections 506.1, CFC—Key boxes.
     Section 506.1, CFC is amended and 506.1.1.1, CFC is added to read as follows:

     Section 506.1 is modified to include:

 

Section 506.1 Where Required. The key box shall be of an approved type and shall contain contents as established in Section 506.1.1.1. A key box shall be installed in accordance with Fire Department standards for all new buildings. For existing buildings equipped with key box, it shall be upgraded to current Fire Department standards at time of Building permit issuance including modifications or alterations to front entrance of building.

 

An emergency gate key switch shall be installed on all new electronic driveway or entryway gates. The key switch shall conform to current Fire Department standards.

 

     Section 506.1.1.1, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 506.1.1.1 Key Box Contents Requirements. Required keys include, but are not limited to: a master entry key, elevator control, fire alarm control panels, fire sprinkler control valve access, and building utilities. Based on specific site conditions, the fire department may notify the property owner of additional required keys. Contents inside key box shall follow approved fire department standards. If the business/operation is required to have a Hazardous Material Inventory Statement (HMIS), the HMIS shall be included in the key box. Electronic key cards or keyless remotes may be provided as long as the locking system has a failsafe feature at loss of building power and doors are operational without a key or special knowledge.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.070 Section 507—Fire protection water supplies.
     Section 507.5.4.1 CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 507.5.4.1. Private Hydrants. Whenever any on-site fire protection equipment or access ways have been installed as provided in this section, the following provision shall apply:

 

With respect to hydrants located along private access ways where curbs exist, said curbs shall be painted red or otherwise appropriately marked by the owner, lessee or other person in charge of the premises, to prohibit parking for a distance of 10 feet in either direction from such hydrant. In such cases where curbs do not exist, there shall be appropriate markings painted on the pavement, or signs erected, or both giving notice that parking is prohibited for a distance of 10 feet from any such hydrant. Hydrant caps shall be color-coded in accordance with NFPA 291 (National Fire Protection Association). The base of the hydrant shall be painted either reflective red or yellow.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.075 Section 508—Fire command center.
     Section 508.1.1.1 CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 508.1.1.1. Requirements. Fire command center shall be equipped with an exterior door and be located at the exterior of the building at a location approved by the Fire Chief.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.080 Section 603, CFC—Fuel-fired appliances.
     Section 603.6.6, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 603.6.6 Spark Arrestors. Every chimney shall have an internally or externally mounted spark arrestor. Any spark arrestor to be mounted internally shall not be installed until installation plans for such arrestor have been submitted to and approved by the building department. All chimneys as described in Section 603.6 shall be retroactively protected when one or more of the following conditions exist:

1.    Upon the sale or transfer of the real property on which any chimney is located.

a.       The transfer of title shall not be made until each such chimney contains the required spark arrestor, properly installed and in proper working order.

2.    In the event of any construction on such property for which a building permit is required.

a.       The final building permit sign off shall not be made until each such chimney contains the required spark arrestor, properly installed and in proper working order.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

17.04.085 Section 606.8.5, CFC—Shunt trip.
     Section 606.8.5 is deleted and replaced in its entirety with the following:

 

Section 606.8.5. Shunt Trip Prohibited. Where elevator hoistways and/or elevator machine rooms containing elevator control equipment are located within buildings equipped with automatic fire sprinklers, the following is required in lieu of a shunt trip:

1.    The elevator machine room shall be constructed with the minimum fire rating as the hoistway. For non-rated hoistways, the minimum rating shall be one hour throughout in accordance with Section 707 of the California Building Code for fire barriers.

2.    Fire sprinklers at the top of the hoistway and inside the elevator machine room shall not be installed.

3.    Means for elevator shutdown shall not be installed.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.090 Section 903.1.2, CFC—Additions and alterations.
     Section 903.1.2, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 903.1.2 Additions and Alterations. The standard for calculating the size of addition and/or alteration for determining the threshold for fire sprinkler systems shall be:

1.    The square footage of every room being added or altered shall be included in the calculation of total square footage of addition or alteration.

2.    The entire square footage of an individual room shall be considered added or altered when at least fifty percent (50%) or greater of the linear length of interior wall sheeting or ceiling of any one wall within the room is new, removed, or replaced.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.091 Section 903.1.3, CFC—Provisions for all sprinklered buildings.
     Section 903.1.3, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 903.1.3, Provisions for all sprinklered buildings:

1.    When a commercial building is partially retrofitted with an approved automatic sprinkler fire extinguishing system pursuant to this section, the building owner shall complete the fire extinguishing system retrofit throughout the unprotected building interior areas within six (6) years of completing the initial partial retrofit or within every tenant space where a building permit is obtained, whichever is less.

2.    When a residential building is partially retrofitted with an approved automatic sprinkler fire extinguishing system pursuant to this section, the building fire extinguishing system retrofit shall be completed throughout the unprotected building interior areas within two (2) years from completing the initial partial retrofit.

3.    When a property owner or responsible party of a commercial or residential building chooses option 1 or 2 from above, the property owner shall file a deed restriction with San Mateo County Assessor’s Office and obtain a performance bond to ensure compliance with Section 17.04.091. The bond shall be in an amount equal to or greater than the estimated cost of completion, as determined by Central County Fire Department.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.092 Section 903.2, CFC is amended—Where required.
     Section 903.2, CFC shall be deleted and replaced as follows:

 

Section 903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all new occupiable and/or habitable buildings and structures. In addition, approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be provided in locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.21.

Exceptions:

1.    When approved by the fire chief, canopy structures used solely for vehicular parking which have a photovoltaic system attached are not required to be equipped with a fire sprinkler system as long as the structure meets distance requirements to other structures and property lines.

2.    Group U occupancies less than 1,200 square feet.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.093 Sections 903.2.21 and 903.2.22 CFC are added—Existing buildings and structures.
     Section 903.2.21 is added to read as follows:

Section 903.2.21, CFC Existing Buildings and Structures. All existing buildings and structures shall be retroactively protected by an approved automatic extinguishing system when the following conditions exist:

a. Commercial and multi-family residential buildings with a total building floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet or more than two stories in height, and when additions or alterations for which a building permit is required will exceed 1,200 square feet in area.

Exception: Group U occupancies less than 1,200 square feet.

b. Residential one- and two-family dwellings and structures with a total building floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet or more than two stories in height, and when additions or alterations for which a building permit is required will exceed 750 square feet in area.

Exceptions:

1.    Additions or alterations of commercial and multi-family residential buildings that do not exceed 20% of the completed building’s total replacement cost calculation. The replacement cost calculations for the additions/alterations and the completed building shall be calculated utilizing the latest Building Valuation Data (BVD) published by the International Code Council.

2.    Additions or alterations to residential one- and two-family dwellings and structures that do not exceed 20% of the total square footage of the entire completed building.

3.    The cost of additions and alterations used in calculating the replacement cost value formula shall be exclusive of the cost to design and install an automatic fire sprinkler extinguishing system pursuant to this section; building roof repair/replacement; fire damage repair; building heating and/or cooling unit repair/replacement; and any other federal, state and local construction code upgrade requirements including but not limited to the seismic retrofit requirements, asbestos, and other hazardous material abatement.

 

     Section 903.2.22, CFC is added with the following:

 

Section 903.2.22 Aggregate. The size or cost of additions and alterations used in calculating the size or replacement cost value formula shall not be cumulative with regard to individual additions or alterations in a building unless the following circumstance applies:

a)    Where more than one (1) addition or alteration for which building permits are required are made within a two (2) year period from the final date of the initial permit, the sum of the square footage or replacement costs of these additions or alterations during this two (2) year period shall be aggregated for the purpose of determining calculations in Section 17.04. 090.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.094 Section 903.3.1.4, CFC amended—Inspector’s test.
     Section 903.3.1.4, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 903.3.1.4 Inspectors Test Valves. Single-family residential fire sprinkler systems within buildings greater than 3600 square feet shall be equipped with an inspectors test valve for each system and located the furthest point away from the sprinkler riser.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.095 Section 903.3.1.5 and 903.3.1.6, CFC is added—Additional sprinkler locations.
     Section 903.3.1.5, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 903.3.1.5 Additional Residential Sprinkler Locations. The installation of a residential fire sprinkler system shall conform to the following:

1.    Sprinklers shall be required throughout carports and garages.

Exception: Detached carports and garages less than 2,000 square feet in area and separated from residential buildings complying with Section 503.1.2 and Table 602 of the building code and assuming a property line between all other structures.

2.    Sprinkler coverage shall be provided in the following locations:

a.       Attic access openings

b.       Areas of attics and crawl spaces containing storage, mechanical and/or electrical equipment.

 

     Section 903.3.1.6, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

Section 903.3.1.6 Additional Commercial and Multi-family Dwelling Sprinkler Locations. Rooms or spaces which contain vehicle parking lifts or vehicle stacking systems shall be designed as an Extra-High Hazard Classification. Sprinkler design to include sidewall sprinkler heads designed at minimum Ordinary Group 2 in between each level.

Exception: Buildings classified as single-family dwellings.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.096 Section 903.4.1 CFC is amended—Fire sprinkler monitoring systems.
     Section 903.4.1 CFC is amended by adding the following

 

903.4.1 Monitoring. For new fire sprinkler monitoring systems, the approved supervisory station shall be defined as a UL approved central receiving station.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.097 Section 905.4 CFC is amended—Location of Class I standpipe hose connections.
     Section 905.4 CFC, subsection 1 is deleted and replaced with the following:

 

        1.        In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate floor level landing between floors, when such a landing exists. See Section 909.20.2.3 of the California Building Code for additional provisions in smoke-proof enclosures.

(Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.100 Section 5003.5, CFC is amended—Hazard identification signs.
     Section 5003.5.2, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

5003.5.2 Sign Size and Locations. Two NFPA 704 diamonds shall be placed on buildings so that they are clearly visible from at least two directions of travel.

1.    The signs shall be at least fifteen inches by fifteen inches (15″ x 15″). The signs shall not be placed on windows.

2.    When NFPA 704 diamonds are required for the interior doors, the signs shall be applied to the doors at a level no higher than the doorknob. The signs for the interior doors shall be at least six inches by six inches (6″x 6″).

3.    The Fire Code Official may require fewer or more NFPA diamonds if the building configuration or size makes it reasonably necessary.

(Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

 

17.04.101 Section 5707, CFC, On-demand mobile fueling operations.
     Section 5707.4.3 is added to read as follows:

 

Section 5707.4.3 Adequate Lighting. Adequate site lighting shall be provided for all mobile fueling operations which are performed in dim or dark outdoor conditions. Acceptable means of lighting are flood or box lights which are self-standing or mountable.

(Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

 

17.04.105 Deposits of hazardous materials and unlawful burning—Liability for costs.
     (a)   The fire department is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous material deposited upon or into property or facilities of the city. Any person who intentionally or negligently caused such deposit shall be liable for the payment of all cleanup or abatement costs incurred by the fire department. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.

     (b)   For the purposes of this section, “hazardous materials” shall be defined as any substances or materials, in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief or his authorized representative, poses an imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, and shall include, but not be limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases; poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives.

     (c)   Any person in violation of Sections 17.04.010 and 17.04.020 which results in fire damage to persons or property shall be charged as unlawfully burning and is liable for costs incurred by the fire department and other responding county or state fire agencies for suppression activities.

     (d)   For purposes of this section, costs incurred by the fire department shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of city personnel, including workers’ compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead; cost of equipment operation, cost of materials obtained directly by the city; and cost of any contract labor and materials. (Ord. 1888 § 4, (2013); Ord. 1932 § 4, (2016); Ord. 1974 § 4, (2020))

Title 18 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 18.05 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
Chapter 18.06 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
Chapter 18.07 UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Chapter 18.08 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 18.09 MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 18.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 18.11 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
Chapter 18.12 PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 18.13 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 18.16 ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 18.17 WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPE
Chapter 18.18 RADIO AND TELEVISION ANTENNAS
Chapter 18.19 INDOOR WATER CONSERVATION
Chapter 18.20 GRADING, EXCAVATION, FILLS
Chapter 18.22 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 18.24 CREEK ENCLOSURE PERMITS
Chapter 18.28 UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDING HAZARD REDUCTION PROGRAM
Chapter 18.30 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE

Chapter 18.05 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
18.05.010 Adoption of the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
     The rules, regulations and requirements published by the International Code Council (ICC) under the title “2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, are adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards for swimming pools and spas within this city as to all matters therein contained with the following amendments. (Ord. 1969 § 5, (2019))

 

18.05.020 Section 302.1 amended—Electrical.
     Section 302.1 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended to read as follows:

 

302.1 Electrical. Electrical requirements for aquatic facilities, pools, and spas shall be in accordance with the 2019 California Electrical Code.

 

Exception: Internal wiring for portable residential spas and portable residential exercise spas.

(Ord. 1969 § 5, (2019))

 

18.05.030 Section 302.2 amended—Water service and drainage.
     Section 302.2 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended to read as follows:

 

302.2 Water service and drainage. Piping and fittings used for water service, makeup and drainage piping for pools and spas shall comply with the 2019 California Plumbing Code. Fittings shall be listed and approved by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Official (IAPMO) or an equivalent recognized agency and be approved for installation with the piping installed.

(Ord. 1969 § 5, (2019))

 

18.05.040 Section 302.5 amended—Backflow protection.
     Section 302.5 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended to read as follows:

 

302.5 Backflow protection. Water supplies for pools and spas shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the 2019 California Plumbing Code.

(Ord. 1969 § 5, (2019))

 

 

18.05.050 Section 303 amended—Energy.
     Section 303 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended to read as follows:

 

303 Energy. The energy consumption of pools and permanent spas shall be controlled by the requirements in sections 303.1.1 through 303.1.3 and comply with the 2019 California Energy Code.

(Ord. 1969 § 5, (2019))

Chapter 18.06 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
18.06.010 Adopted.
     The 1997 Uniform Housing Code is hereby incorporated as part of the Burlingame Municipal Code. (Ord. 1969 § 6, (2019))

Chapter 18.07 UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
18.07.010 Adoption of the Uniform Administrative Code.
     The rules, regulations and requirements published by the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) in one volume under the title “Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition,” hereinafter called “administrative code,” are adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained, except as provided in this chapter. The fee schedules in this code shall supersede and replace those published in the building code, plumbing code, mechanical code and electrical code except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1538 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999))

 

18.07.020 Section 102.2 amended—Aggregate additions, alterations or repairs.
     The following sentence is added as the second sentence of the first paragraph of Section 102.2:

 

     However, when additions, alterations or repairs within any twelve (12) month period exceed fifty (50) percent of the current replacement value of an existing building or structure, as determined by the building official, such building or structure shall be made in its entirety to conform with the requirements for new buildings or structures.

(Ord. 1538 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999))

 

18.07.030 Section 102.6 amended—Moved buildings.
     Section 102.6 is to read as follows:

 

        102.6  Moved buildings.

        102.6.1 Permit Required. Before any building or structure is moved on or along any street within the city, a permit shall first be obtained from the building official for such moving. The permit application shall describe the streets and route over which the building will travel, the location of final installation if within the city, and the hours during which building will be moved. The building official will collect a fee as established by resolution of the council from time to time for required investigations and inspections. This fee shall be separate from any construction permit-related fees.

        Prior to issuance of permit, the building official shall notify all affected city officials and, in the event that any such officials object to route or time of travel, changes shall be made to meet such objections.

        102.6.2 Bond Required. In addition to all other requirements of the building code relating to the moving of buildings and structures, no permit for such moving shall be issued until the applicant shall have filed with the building official a corporate surety bond in favor of the city or a cash deposit in lieu of such bond. The bond shall be conditioned that the applicant will strictly comply with all provisions of the building code relating to the moving of buildings and structures and that the applicant will pay for any and all damage which may result by reason of such moving to any fence, hedge, tree, pavement of streets or sidewalks, pipes, poles and wires, or to any public or private property, and to hold harmless the city against any costs or expense which may accrue in consequence of such moving.

        The bond shall be in such amount as determined by the building official and approved by the city attorney, but in no case less than one thousand dollars. At the op-tion of the applicant, a cash deposit in the same amount may be deposited with the city finance director/treasurer.

(Ord. 1538 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999); Ord. 1823 § 19, (2008))

 

18.07.040 Section 204 amended—Appeals.
     Section 204 is amended to read as follows:

 

        An appeal may be taken to the Planning Commission from a denial of or a refusal to issue a building permit or from any other decision or determination of the building official (1) in order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction, or (2) to provide for reasonable interpretations of the Building Code.

        The decisions of the Planning Commission shall be written and shall be final and shall not be subject to appeal. Copies of the decision shall be furnished to the building official and the appellant.

        The Planning Commission may conduct investigations of the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction. It shall adopt reasonable rules regulating the conduct of such investigations and of the appeals herein provided for and may recommend to the City Council any new legislation deemed desirable.

(Ord. 1545 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999))

 

18.07.050 Section 301.2.1 amended—Building permits—Exempted work.
     Subsection 1 of Section 301.2.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

        1.        One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet.

(Ord. 1545 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999); Ord. 1975 § 1, (2020))

 

18.07.060 Section 302.3 amended—Information on plans and specifications.
     Section 302.3 is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:

 

        A plot plan shall be included showing location of the proposed building with respect to property lines; lot, block and subdivision of the property: any existing building or buildings that will remain on the property; existing and proposed driveways, utilities, fire hydrants, power poles or any other fixed object between property lines and curb; and an indication of the finished grades at various points about the building and at property lines relative to an established datum such as curb or sidewalk.

(Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999))

 

18.07.065 Section 303.1 amended—Issuance.
     A fourth paragraph is added to Section 303.1 to read as follows:

 

        Demolition permits will only be issued after all approvals required by Title 25 of this code and the California Environmental Quality Act are granted for the overall project for which the demolition is intended, and in any event, will only be issued simultaneously with the construction permits for the project.

        Exceptions:

        a.        If a property owner does not intend to construct anything on the property following demolition in the foreseeable future, the property owner shall file a declaration under penalty of perjury to that effect, and the building official may issue the demolition permit on the condition that the property where the demolition is to occur will be properly secured and landscaped.

        b.        If the city has ordered the demolition of the structure because it is an imminent danger to public health or safety, the building official may issue the demolition permit on the condition that the property where the demolition is to occur will be properly secured and landscaped even though the property owner has not applied for any construction permits.

        c.        If a property owner of a non-residential project:

        1.        Has been granted all project approvals required under Title 25 of this code and under the California Environmental Quality Act; and

        2.        Produces evidence, to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director, that special circumstances exist to warrant early demolition; and

        3.        Produces evidence, to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director, that he/she is preparing or is having prepared, plans for the project for which the demolition is intended; and

        4.        Declares under penalty of perjury that he/she will submit said plans together with a building permit application for the project to the City’s building division no later than ninety (90) days after obtaining a demolition permit; then the Community Development Director may authorize the Building Official to issue the demolition permit with appropriate terms and conditions to ensure safety, security and cleanliness of the property.

 

        In the event the property owner fails to obtain a building permit for the project within sixty (60) days of submitting a building permit application to the building division, pursuant to item (c)(4), the property owner shall, within thirty (30) days remove all debris from the site, permanently secure the property and install landscaping to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director. A decision to deny such a request for early demolition may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the Community Development Director’s decision.

        d.        If a building or structure is declared a public nuisance under Section 1.16.015, the Community Development Director may issue a demolition permit for said structure on the condition that the property where the demolition is to occur will be properly secured and landscaped. The owner of a building or structure which currently is or may be subject to enforcement proceedings under Section 1.16.015, but which has not been formally declared a nuisance under that provision, may apply to the Community Development Director to obtain a demolition permit for the structure. If granted, such permit shall be conditioned on appropriate securing and landscaping of the property. The decision whether to grant or deny a demolition permit under this subsection (d) shall rest within the discretion of the Community Development Director in light of the conditions present on the property in question.

(Ord. 1795 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1837 § 2, (2009); Ord. 1913 § 2, (2015))

 

18.07.070 Section 303.4 amended—Permit expiration—Failure to complete.
     Section 303.4 is amended to read as follows:

 

        303.4 Expiration. All work to be performed under a building permit shall be completed within the maximum time allowed for the construction as follows:

 

Total Estimated Cost                                       Total Time Allowed

Up to and including $50,000                                             12 months

Over $50,000 to and including $1,000,000                    18 months

Over $1,000,000 to and including $2,000,000               24 months

Over $2,000,000 to and including $10,000,000            30 months

Over $10,000,000                                                                36 months

 

        Failure to complete the work within the time allowed, unless an extension of time has been specifically approved by the building official, will cause the permit for such work to become null and void. Failure to commence work on any permit within twelve (12) months of issuance will cause the permit for such work to become null and void. Abandonment of the work authorized by the permit will also cause the permit to immediately become null and void. In each instance, a new permit requiring compliance with all current codes and payment of all fees shall be required to recommence work. The request for an extension of time must be submitted in writing prior to the expiration of the time allowed.

        The time limit allowed to complete the work and obtain a building final for any permit that has been extended shall be 180 days from the date of the extension. Failure to complete the work within the time allowed by a first permit extension will cause the permit for such work to become null and void, unless a second extension has been specifically approved by the building official. A new permit requiring compliance with all current codes and payment of all fees shall be required to recommence work. Prior to expiration of a first extension of a building permit, an owner may apply for a second extension. The request for a second extension of time must be submitted in writing prior to the expiration of the time allowed under the first extension. All extension requests shall be made in writing, and must demonstrate justifiable cause for the extension.

        Every permit extension issued by the Building Official under the provisions of the technical codes shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit extension is not recommenced within 120 days from the date of such permit extension, or if the building or work authorized by such permit extension is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is recommenced for a period of 120 days. The building or work shall be considered suspended or abandoned if a substantial inspection has not been conducted. The following are considered substantial inspections when all corrections have been performed and that portion of the work has been signed off by a city inspector:

        1.        Foundation;

        2.        Underground plumbing, electrical, and mechanical;

        3.        Underfloor framing, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical;

        4.        Shear walls, hold downs, roof diaphragm, and connectors;

        5.        Rough framing, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical;

        6.        Insulation;

        7.        Sheetrock; and

        8.        Final.

        After suspension or abandonment and before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee therefore shall be the amount required for the original permit.

        The expiration of a building permit without an extension pursuant to this section shall result in the expiration of any approvals under Chapter 25 (Zoning) of the Burlingame Municipal Code and the California Fire Code, including local amendments.

        The fees for the first extension shall be the amount required for the original permit. If no changes in plans or specifications have been made, no additional plan checking fees will be required. The fee for any additional extension following the first extension shall be two (2) times the original building permit fee.

        Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if a building permit was issued for part or all of a project or building which was required to obtain a special permit, variance or traffic allocation, the building permit shall expire and such special permit, variance or traffic allocation shall be null and void if substantial progress has not occurred within one year from the issuance of the building permit. Substantial progress shall be when the total foundation has been formed, inspected and poured. The Council may grant an extension of a permit upon the showing by the permittee of hardship or unforeseen circumstances.

(Ord. 1545 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999); Ord. 1603 § 12, (1998); Ord. 1802 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1975 § 1, (2020))

 

18.07.075 Short time extension to a building permit.
     (a)   The building official shall have the authority to issue a single short time extension of a building permit if all of the following conditions are met:

     (1)   No other extensions for the project have been previously granted; and

     (2)   The request for a short time extension is received in writing; and

     (3)   The person requesting a short time extension must present the original or a copy of the original construction plans that were approved by the city; and

     (4)   There is a record showing that the project has passed all required inspections, except for the final inspection; and

     (5)   A fee generally equal to two (2) hourly inspections as set by city council resolution is paid at the time the short time extension is issued.

     (b)   The short time extension shall expire thirty (30) days after issuance. Failure to complete the work within the time allowed by the short time extension will cause the permit for such work to become null and void. A new permit requiring compliance with all current codes and payment of all fees shall be required to recommence work. (Ord. 1802 § 4, (2007)

 

18.07.080 Section 304.2 amended—Permit fees.
     (a)   The first sentence of the first paragraph of Section 304.2 is amended to read as follows:

 

The fee for each permit shall be as established by resolution or ordinance adopted by the city council, plus any additional fees which may be established or mandated by state or federal law or city ordinance.

 

     (b)   The second sentence of the second paragraph of Section 304.2 is amended to read as follows:

 

The minimum valuation shall be as set forth as the “Building Valuation Data” in the most recent edition of the Building Safety Journal® as published by the International Code Council (ICC).

(Ord. 1545 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999); Ord. 1795 § 3, (2006); Ord. 1813 § 5, (2007))

 

18.07.090 Section 304.3 amended—Plan review fees.
     Section 304.3 is amended by adding a new second and third paragraphs:

 

        When the submittal documents require review for compliance with State access regulations, an access plan review fee shall also be paid at the time of submittal. This fee shall be as established by resolution or ordinance adopted by the city council.

        When the submittal documents require review for compliance with State energy regulations, an energy plan review shall also be paid at the time of submittal.

        This fee shall be as established by resolution or ordinance adopted by the city council.

(Ord. 1545 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999); Ord. 1795 § 4, (2006))

 

18.07.100 Section 304.5 amended—Investigation fees—Work without a permit.
     (a)   The first sentence of Section 304.5.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

304.5.1 Investigation. Whenever construction or work for which a permit is required by this code, or any other code adopted or incorporated by reference as a part of this code, has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for the work. Demolition of all or any part of a structure without a required permit shall be subject to the investigation and fees imposed by this section.

 

     (b)   Section 304.5.2 is amended to read as follows:

 

304.5.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition, to the permit fee, shall be collected as a civil penalty, whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be up to ten times the building permit fee. The investigation fee shall be determined by the building official and shall be based on the staff time reasonably required to resolve all of the issues related to the work that has been performed without a permit. No construction permit shall be issued until the investigation fee has been paid in full.

        Any person assessed such a fee may file an appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after written notice to such person of the assessment. A hearing upon such appeal shall thereafter be held by the city council; its decisions thereon shall be final.

        Nothing in this section shall relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this code, or with any codes incorporated by reference and made a part of this code in the execution of the work, or from any other fees or penalties prescribed by law.

(Ord. 1545 § 1; July 1, 1996; Ord. 1613 § 5, (1999); Ord. 1795 § 5, (2006))

 

18.07.110 Section 305.1 amended—General.
     A new first sentence is added to Section 305.1 to read as follows:

 

        No person shall erect (including excavation and grading), demolish, alter or repair any building or structure other than between the hours of eight a.m. and seven p.m. on weekdays, and nine a.m. and six p.m. on Saturdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with written approval from the building official, which approval shall be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days for projects including structures with a gross floor area of less than 40,000 square feet; and when reasonable to accomplish the erection, demolition, alteration or repair, not to exceed twenty (20) days for projects including structures with a gross floor area of 40,000 square feet or greater. No person shall erect (including excavation and grading), demolish, alter or repair any building or structure on Sundays or on holidays. For the purpose of this section, holidays are the days set forth in Section 13.04.100 of this code. The restrictions stated in this section shall not apply to work that does not require a permit under any applicable law or regulation.

(Ord. 1852 § 2, (2010); Ord. 1930 § 1, (2016))

 

18.07.120 Section 108 added—Safety assessment placards.
     Section 108 of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code is added to read as follows:

 

108 Safety assessment placards.

        Intent. This section establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The Section further authorizes the Chief Building Official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.

        Application of Provisions. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of Burlingame. The City Council may extend the provisions as necessary.

        Definition. Safety assessment is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy.

        Placards.

        (a)       The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached.

 

INSPECTED - Lawful Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. (Green)

 

RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. (Yellow)

 

UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the Chief Building Official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered. (Red or Orange)

 

        (b)      The name of the jurisdiction, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.

        (c)       Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the Chief Building Official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover, or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section.

 







(Ord. 1889 § 5, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 5, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 7, (2019))

 

 

18.07.130 Streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar systems.
     Section 130 of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code is added to read as follows:

 

130   Streamlined permitting process for small rooftop solar system installations.

 

Purpose. The purpose of the section is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The section encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City of Burlingame, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. The section allows the City of Burlingame to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety.

        Definitions.

        A.       Solar energy system means either of the following:

        1.        Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

        2.        Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

        B.       Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following:

        1.        A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

        2.        A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City of Burlingame, and all state and City of Burlingame health and safety standards including paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code.

        3.        A solar energy system that is installed on a single-family or duplex-family dwelling.

        4.        A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City of Burlingame

        C.       Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following:

        1.        Email; or

        2.        The Internet.

        D.       Association means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

        E.       Common interest development means any of the following:

        1.        A community apartment project; or

        2.        A condominium project; or

        3.        A planned development; or

        4.        A stock cooperative.

        F.        Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

        G.       Reasonable restrictions on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

        H.       Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance means:

        1.        For Water Heater Systems or Solar Swimming Pool Heating Systems: an amount exceeding 10 percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10 percent, as originally specified and proposed.

        2.        For Photovoltaic Systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10 percent as originally specified and proposed.

        Applicability. This section applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City of Burlingame. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section are not subject to the requirements of this section unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit.

        Solar energy system requirements. All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the City of Burlingame and the Central County Fire Department.

 

        Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing Code and California Mechanical Code.

        Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.

        Submittal requirements. All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the City of Burlingame website.

        Electronic submittal of the required permit application and associated documents for small, residential rooftop solar energy system permits shall be by email, or the Internet. As an alternative an applicant may submit a permit application and associated documents at the Building Division front counter during regular business hours.

        An applicant’s electronic signature will be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

        The City of Burlingame shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply to be eligible for expedited review.

        The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and the checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

        All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply with Government Code Section 65850.55, Government Code Section 66015, Government Code Section 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951.

        Plan review, permit, and inspection requirements. The Building Division shall provide an administrative, nondiscretionary plan check review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems within 30 days of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section.

        The Building Division shall process, review, and approve the application for the installation or use of a solar system in the same manner as an application for review of an architectural modification to the property, and shall not be willfully avoided or delayed.

        If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

        If an application for the installation of a solar system is not denied in writing within 45 days of receipt of a complete application the application shall be deemed approved, unless the delay is the result of a reasonable request for additional information.

        The City of Burlingame Planning Division may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the Planning Division finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to City of Burlingame Planning Commission.

        Review of the permit application shall be limited to the Building Division’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. If a use permit is required, the building official may deny an application for the use permit if the building official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the City of Burlingame Planning Commission. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

        A “feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the City of Burlingame on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The City of Burlingame shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

        The City of Burlingame shall not condition approval of an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

        Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. During the required inspection, if it is found that the installation does not conform to the approved plans and/or comply with the current California Building Code requirements then an additional, follow-up inspection shall be required.

        If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized and required but need not conform to the requirements of this section.

        A separate fire inspection may be performed by the Central County Fire Department, if required.

        The inspection shall be done within three business days and may include consolidated inspections.

(Ord. 1920 § 2, (2015))

 

18.07.140 Permit process for electric vehicle charging stations.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to adopt an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations that complies with California Government Code Section 65850.7 to achieve timely and cost-effective processing of applications for the installation of electric vehicle charging stations. The provisions encourage the use of electric vehicle charging stations by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install electric vehicle charging stations. The provisions allow the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety.

     B.     Definitions.

     1.     “Electric vehicle charging station(s)” or “charging station(s)” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with California Code of Regulations, Title 24 Part 3 California Electrical Code Article 625, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section or as it may be amended, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

     2.     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

     C.     Applicability. This section applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the city. Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section are not subject to the requirements of this section unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a pre-existing charging station in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit.

     D.    Electric Vehicle Charging Station Requirements. All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city.

     Electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission and other applicable laws and regulations regarding safety and reliability.

     E.     Submittal Requirements. All documents required for the submission of an electric vehicle charging station application shall be made available on the city’s website. Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by facsimile shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants. Because the city does not have an adopted electronic signature protocol as of the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, an electronic signature cannot be accepted in lieu of a wet signature on the application. However, as soon as the city adopts such a protocol, electronic signatures will be accepted on charging station applications, and the city’s website and application materials will be updated accordingly.

     The city’s building division shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which the electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The electric vehicle permit process, standard(s), and checklist(s) may substantially conform to recommendations for permitting, including the checklist and standards contained in the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the California State Office of Planning and Research.

     For purposes of calculating permit fees under the city’s adopted master fee schedule, the value to be used in computing the electric vehicle charging station permit and plan review shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as any other equipment. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this section shall be made by the building official.

     F.     Plan Review, Permit, and Inspection Requirements. The building official shall implement an administrative review process to expedite approval of electric vehicle charging stations. Only permits or approvals that conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter and Title 18, including design review, shall be issued. The building official or designated staff members shall make determinations of conformance. Where the application meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standards and there are no specific, adverse impacts upon public health or safety, the building division shall complete the building permit approval process, which is nondiscretionary. Review of the application for electric vehicle charging stations shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

     The building official may require an applicant to apply for an “electric vehicle charging station use permit” if the building official makes written findings that the proposed electric vehicle charging stations could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. The building official’s decision may be appealed to the city planning commission.

     If an electric vehicle charging station use permit is required, the building official may only deny an application for the electric vehicle charging station use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. The building official’s decision may be appealed to the city planning commission.

     If the building official issues an electric vehicle charging station use permit, the permit may include conditions designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

     A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit.

     If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. A separate fire inspection may be performed by the Central County Fire Department, if required. (Ord. 1946 § 1, (2017))

Chapter 18.08 BUILDING CODE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1813 and 1856.

 

18.08.005 Adoption of 2019 California Building Code, Part 2. Volume 1.
     The rules, regulations and requirements published by the International Code Council (ICC) under the title “2018 International Building Code Volume 1” and adopted as the “2019 California Building Code Volume 1” including Appendix Chapters I and J and state of California amendments thereto, are adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained with the following amendments. (Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.010 Section 406.1.1 added—Car stacking system back up power.
     Section 406.1.1 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

406.1.1 Commercial and Multi-Family Dwelling car stacking systems shall be provided with back-up power to allow access to and egress from such systems during a power outage. The back-up power shall comply with the manufacture specifications and the 2019 California Electrical Code.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.015 Sections 502.1 amended—Address identification.
     Section 502.1 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

502.1. Address identification.

Address numbers. Size of numbers shall be as follows:

1.    When the structure is thirty-six (36) to fifty (50) feet from the street or fire apparatus access, a minimum of one-half inch (½″) stroke by six inches (6″) high is required.

2.    When the structure is more than fifty (50) feet from the street or fire apparatus access, a minimum of one inch (1″) strike by nine inches (9″) high is required.

Multi-Tenant Buildings. Numbers or letters shall be designated on all occupancies within a building. Size shall be a minimum of one-half inch (1/2″) stroke by four inches (4″) high and on a contrasting background. Directional address numbers or letters shall be provided. Said addresses or numbers shall be posted at a height no greater than 5 feet, 6 inches (5′ 6″) above the finished floor and shall be either internally or externally illuminated in all new construction.

 

Rear addressing. When required by the chief, approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the fire apparatus road at the back of a property or where rear parking lots or alleys provide and acceptable vehicular access. Number stroke and size shall comply with Section 502.1.

 

ADU Addressing. Address for Residential Accessory Dwelling Units shall meet the City of Burlingame specifications.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.020 Section 502.2 added—Utility identification.
     Section 502.2 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

502.2 Utility identification. In multi-unit commercial and residential buildings, gas and electric meters, service switches and shut off valves shall be clearly and legibly marked to identify the unit or space that they serve.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.030 Section 903.1.2 added—Additions and alterations.
     Section 903.1.2 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

903.1.2 Additions and alterations. The standard for determining the size of addition and/or alteration for determining the threshold for fire sprinkler systems shall be determined by the following:

1.    The square footage of every room being added or altered shall be included in the calculation of total square footage of addition or alteration.

2.    The entire square footage of an individual room shall be considered added or altered when at least fifty percent (50%) or greater of the linear length of interior wall sheeting or ceiling of any one wall within the room is new, removed, or replaced. (Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.035 Section 903.1.3 added—Applicable to all sprinklered buildings.
     Section 903.1.3 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

903.1.3 Applicable to all sprinklered buildings.

1.    When a commercial building is partially retrofitted with an approved automatic sprinkler fire extinguishing system pursuant to this section, the building owner shall complete the fire extinguishing system retrofit throughout the unprotected building interior areas within six (6) years of completing the initial partial retrofit or within every tenant space where a building permit is obtained, whichever is less.

2.    When a residential building is partially retrofitted with an approved automatic sprinkler fire extinguishing system pursuant to this section, the building fire extinguishing system retrofit shall be completed throughout the unprotected building interior areas within two (2) years from completing the initial partial retrofit.

3.    When a property owner or responsible party of a commercial or residential building chooses option 1 or 2 from above, the property owner shall file a deed restriction with San Mateo County Assessor’s Office and obtain a performance bond with Central County Fire Department to ensure compliance with Section 18.08.040. The bond shall be equal to or greater than the estimated cost of completion, as determined by Central County Fire Department.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.040 Section 903.2 amended—Where required.
     Section 903.2 of the 2019 California Building Code is deleted and replaced with the following:

 

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all new occupiable and/or habitable buildings and structures. In addition, approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be provided in locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.21.

 

Exceptions:

1.    When approved by the fire chief, canopy structures used solely for vehicular parking which have a photovoltaic system attached are not required to be equipped with a fire sprinkler system as long as the structure meets distance requirements to other structures and property lines.

2.    Group U occupancies less than 1200 square feet.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.045 Section 903.2.21 added—Existing buildings and structures.
     Section 903.2.21 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

903.2.21 Existing buildings and structures. All existing buildings and structures shall be retroactively protected by an approved automatic extinguishing system when the following conditions exist:

1.    Commercial and multi-family residential buildings with a total building floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet or more than two stories in height, and when additions or alterations for which a building permit is required will exceed 1,200 square feet in area.

       Exception: Group U occupancies less than 1200 square feet.

2.    Residential one- and two-family dwellings and structures with a total building floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet or more than two stories in height, and when additions or alterations for which a building permit is required will exceed 750 square feet in area.

 

       Exceptions:

a.       Additions or alterations of commercial and multi-family residential buildings that do not exceed 20% of the completed building’s total replacement cost calculation. The replacement cost calculations for the additions/alterations and the completed building shall be calculated utilizing the latest Building Valuation Data (BVD) published by the International Code Council (ICC).

b.       Additions or alterations to residential one- and two-family dwellings and structures that do not exceed 20% of the total square footage of the entire completed building.

c.       The cost of additions and alterations used in calculating the replacement cost value formula shall be exclusive of the cost to design and install an automatic fire sprinkler extinguishing system pursuant to this section; building roof repair/replacement; fire damage repair; building heating and/or cooling unit repair/replacement; and any other federal, state and local construction code upgrade requirements including but not limited to the seismic retrofit requirements, asbestos, and other hazardous material abatement.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.050 Section 903.2.22 added—Aggregate.
     Section 903.2.22 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

903.2.22 Aggregate. The size or cost of additions and alterations used in calculating the size or replacement cost value formula shall not be cumulative with regard to individual additions or alterations in a building unless the following circumstance applies:

1.    Where more than one (1) addition or alteration for which building permits are required are made within a two (2) year period from the final date of the initial permit, the sum of the square footage or replacement costs of these additions or alterations during this two (2) year period shall be aggregated for the purpose of determining calculations in Section 18.08.050.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.055 Section 903.3.1.4 added—Inspector’s test valves.
     Section 903.3.1.4 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

903.3.1.4 Inspector’s test valves. Single-family residential fire sprinkler systems within buildings greater than 3600 square feet shall be equipped with an inspector’s test valve for each system and located the furthest point away from the sprinkler riser.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.060 Sections 903.3.1.5 and 903.3.1.6 added—Additional sprinkler locations.
     Section 903.3.1.5 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

903.3.1.5 Additional residential sprinkler locations. The installation of a residential fire sprinkler system shall conform to the following:

1.    Sprinklers shall be required throughout carports and garages.

       Exception: Detached carports and garages less than 2,000 square feet in area and separated from residential buildings complying with Section 503.1.2 and Table 602 of the building code and assuming a property line between all other structures.

2.    Sprinkler coverage shall be provided in the following locations:

a.       Attic access openings

b.       Areas of attics and crawl spaces containing storage, mechanical and/or electrical equipment.

 

     Section 903.3.1.6, CFC is added to read as follows:

 

903.3.1.6 Additional commercial and multi-family dwelling sprinkler locations. Rooms or spaces which contain vehicle parking lifts or stacking systems shall be designed as an Extra Hazard Classification. Sprinkler design to include sidewall sprinkler heads designed at minimum Ordinary Group 2 in between each level.

Exception: Buildings classified as single-family dwellings.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.065 Section 903.4.1 Amended—Monitoring.
     Section 903.4.1 CBC is amended by adding the following:

 

903.4.1 Monitoring. For new fire sprinkler monitoring systems, the approved supervisory station shall be defined as a UL approved central receiving station.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.070 Section 1505.1 amended—Fire classification.
     The first paragraph of Section 1505.1 of the 2019 California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

 

1505.1 General. Roof assemblies shall be divided into the classes defined below. Class A or Class B roof assemblies and roof coverings required to be listed by this section shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL 790. In addition, fire-retardant-treated wood roof coverings shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D 2898. The minimum roof coverings installed on buildings shall comply with the Table 1505.1 as amended.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.075 Table 1505.1 amended—Roof minimum fire retardant classes.
     Table No. 1505.1 of the 2019 California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Table 1505.1 Roof minimum fire retardant classes.

 

TABLE NO. 1505.1a

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

Type

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

Roof Covering

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

a.      Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A.

 

18.08.080 Section 1505.1.3 amended—Roof covering within all other areas.
     Section 1505.1.3 of the 2019 California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

 

1505.1.3 Roof covering within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.085 Section 1502.4.1 added—Roof drainage requirements.
     Section 1502.4.1 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

1502.4.1 Roof drainage requirements. In all zones other than R-1, the water from the roof of any building and from any paved area which would flow by gravity over public sidewalk shall be carried by means of conductors under the sidewalk and through the curb to the gutter, or other approved location.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.090 Section 1502.4.2 added—Surface drainage requirements.
     Section 1502.4.2 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

1502.4.2 Surface drainage requirements. No storm water or underground water draining from any lot, building, or paved area shall be allowed to drain to adjacent properties nor shall this water be connected to the city’s sanitary sewer system. Regardless of the slope of the source property, such water shall drain to either artificial or natural storm drainage facilities by gravity or pumping.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.095 Adoption of 2019 California Building Code, Part 2, Volume 2.
     The rules, regulations and requirements published by the International Code Council under the title “2018 International Building Code Volume 2” and adopted as the “2019 California Building Code Volume 2” are adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city and as to all matters therein contained with the following amendments:

 

18.08.100 Section 1807.2.1 amended—Retaining walls.
     Section 1807.2.1 of the 2019 California Building Code is amended by adding the following paragraphs at the end of the section:

 

1807.2.1 General. When a structure is to support a lateral load which retains fill which supports another structure, supports the toe of a slope which is over four feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing, or is required by the city engineer, it shall be designed by a licensed architect or engineer and approved by the city engineer.

        The following types of retaining walls shall be of concrete or other material which shall have a minimum service life of 75 years for all major support systems and 50 years for all replaceable support systems: Walls that are engineered, support a lateral load over 18” at property line, support an engineered surcharge, support a structure, or support a toe of a slope. A fence structure may not be substituted for a retaining wall.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.105 Section 3005.5 amended—Shunt trip.
     Section 3005.5 of the 2019 California Building Code is amended by adding the following:

 

3005.5 Shunt trip prohibited. Where elevator hoist ways and/or elevator machine rooms containing elevator control equipment are located within buildings equipped with automatic fire sprinklers, the following is required in lieu of a shunt trip:

1.    The elevator machine room shall be constructed with the minimum fire rating as the hoist way.

2.    Fire sprinklers at the top of the hoist way and inside the elevator machine room shall not be installed.

3.    Means for elevator shutdown shall not be installed.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.110 Section 3202 amended—Encroachments.
     Section 3202 of the 2019 California Building Code is deleted and replaced with the following. (Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.115 3202.1—Encroachments below grade.
3201.1 Encroachments below grade. Encroachments below grade that act as temporary support to build the structure shall be allowed per the City Fee Schedule under “Special Encroachment Permits” at the time of the building permit issuance. An agreement for the encroachments shall be in place prior to the commencement of the construction work.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.120 Section 3202.2 is amended—Encroachments above grade and below eight feet in height.
3202.2 Encroachments above grade and below 8 feet in height. Encroachments into the public right-of-way above grade and below 8 feet in height shall comply with the City Municipal Code Chapter 22.26 Awning, Canopy and Marquee signs. Doors and windows shall not open or project into the public right-of-way.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.125 Section 3202.3 is amended—Encroachments 8 feet or more above grade.
3202.3 Encroachments 8 feet or more above grade. Encroachments into the public right-of-way 8 feet or more above grade shall comply with the City Municipal Code Chapter 22.26 Awning, Canopy and Marquee signs. All other encroachments such as, but not limited to, windows, balconies, architectural features and mechanical equipment shall not project into the public right-of-way.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

 

18.08.130 Section 501.6 added—Suspended ceiling upgrade required.
     Section 501.6 of the 2019 California Existing Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

501.6 Suspended ceiling upgrade required. When an addition, alteration or repair is performed on an occupancy in which there is an existing suspended ceiling, such suspended ceilings shall be modified throughout to comply with the provisions of ASTM C 635 and ASTM C 636.

(Ord. 1889 § 6, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 6, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 8, (2019))

Chapter 18.09 MECHANICAL CODE
18.09.010 Adoption of 2019 California Mechanical Code.
     The rules, regulations and standards printed in one volume and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), under the title “2018 Uniform Mechanical Code” and adopted as the “2019 California Mechanical Code,” including the appendices and state of California amendments thereto, hereinafter called “mechanical code,” is adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The appendices to the mechanical code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the code. (Ord. 1033 § 12, (1975); Ord. 1128 § 28, (1978); Ord. 1208 § 18, (1981); Ord. 1285 § 28, (1984); Ord. 1381 § 18, (1988); Ord. 1462 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1538 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 7, (1999); Ord. 1694 § 6, (2002); Ord. 1813 § 7, (2007); Ord. 1856 § 6, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 7, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 7, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 9, (2019))

 

18.09.020 Section 1101.1 amended—Appeals.
     An appeal of a denial of or a refusal to issue a permit or from any other decision of the building official may be taken as set forth in Section 18.07.040. (Ord. 1361 § 20, (1988); Ord. 1538 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 7, (1999))

Chapter 18.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
18.10.010 Adoption of 2019 California Residential Code.
     The rules, regulations and standards printed in one volume and published by the International Code Council under the title “2018 International Residential Code” and adopted as the “2019 California Residential Code”, including appendices H, J, K, O, Q, S, V, and X are adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to matters therein contained except as provided in this chapter. The mandatory requirements of any adopted appendices to the code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the code. (Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.015 Section R111.4 added—Utility identification.
     Section R111.4 of the 2019 California Residential Code is added to read as follows:

 

R111.4 Utility identification. In all residential buildings, gas and electric meters, service switches and shut off valves shall be clearly and legibly marked to identify the unit or space that they serve.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.020 Section R309.6 deleted—Fire sprinklers exception.
     Section R309.6 Exception of the 2019 California Residential Code is deleted in its entirety.

     R309.6 Fire sprinklers. The exception for fire sprinklers in garages and carports is deleted in its entirety. (Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.025 Section R313.1 amended—Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems.
     Section R313.1 Exception of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended by replacing with the following paragraph:

 

R313.1. Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems.

        An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses.

 

R.313.1.1 Existing Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems.

        An automatic residential fire sprinkler system is required when additions and/or alterations to existing townhouse buildings with a total building floor area more than 2,000 square feet or more than two stories in height, and when additions or alterations for which a building permit is required exceeds 750 square feet in area or 20% of the total square footage of the entire completed building.

 

Exception: Detached structures classified as an Accessory Dwelling Unit in accordance with Burlingame Municipal Code Chapter 25.59 and no work has occurred in the main residence to require an automatic residential fire sprinkler system.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.030 Section R313.2 amended—One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems.
     Section R313.2 Exception of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended by replacing with the following:

 

R313.2. One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one- and two-family dwellings.

 

Exception: Detached structures located in excess of 10 feet from the main house. For the purposes of fire sprinklers, detached structures shall be considered as portions of the main home when buildings are not separated in accordance with Section 705.3 of the California Building Code.

 

R313.2.1 Existing One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system is required when additions and/or alterations to existing townhouse buildings with a total building floor area more than 2,000 square feet or more than two stories in height, and when additions or alterations for which a building permit is required exceeds 750 square feet in area or 20% of the total square footage of the entire completed building.

 

Exception:

1.    Detached structures located in excess of 10 feet from the main house. For the purposes of fire sprinklers, detached structures shall be considered as portions of the main home when buildings are not separated in accordance with Section 705.3 of the California Building Code.

2.    Detached structures classified as an Accessory Dwelling Unit in accordance with Burlingame Municipal Code Chapter 25.59 when no work has occurred in the main house in a two-year period in excess of 750 square feet in area or 20% of the total square footage of the entire completed building as determined by Section R313.3.2.7

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.035 Section R313.3.1.2 amended—Required sprinkler locations.
     Section R313.3.1.2 of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended by replacing with the following:

 

R313.3.1.1 Required sprinkler locations.

1.    Sprinklers shall be installed to protect all areas of a dwelling unit.

       Exceptions:

a.       Clothes closets, linen closets and pantries not exceeding 24 square feet (2.2m2) in area, with the smallest dimension not greater than 3 feet (915 mm) and having wall and ceiling surfaces of gypsum board.

b.       Detached carports and garages less than 2,000 square feet in area and separated from residential buildings complying with Section R302.1.

2.    Sprinkler coverage shall be provided in the following locations:

a.       Attic access openings

b.       Areas of attics and crawl spaces containing storage, mechanical and/or electrical equipment.

3.    Inspector Test Valves shall be provided for each system and located the furthest point away from the sprinkler riser for buildings greater than 3,600 square feet.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.040 Section R313.3.2.7 added—Additions and alterations.
     Section R313.3.2.7 of the 2019 California Residential Code is added to read as follows:

 

R313.3.2.7 Additions and Alterations.

1.    The standard for determining the size of addition and/or alteration for determining the threshold for fire sprinkler systems shall be determined by the following:

a.       The square footage of every room being added or altered shall be included in the calculation of total square footage of addition or alteration.

b.       The entire square footage of an individual room shall be considered added or altered when at least fifty percent (50%) or greater of the linear length of interior wall sheeting or ceiling of any one wall within the room is new, removed, or replaced.

2.    The size or cost of additions and alterations used in calculating the size shall not be cumulative with regard to individual additions or alterations in a building unless the following circumstance applies:

       Where more than one (1) addition or alteration for which building permits are required are made within a two (2) year period from the final date of the initial permit, the sum of the size of these additions or alterations during this two (2) year period shall be aggregated for the purpose of determining calculations in Section 18.10.025 or Section 18.10.030.

3.    The cost of additions and alterations used in calculating the replacement cost value formula shall be exclusive of the cost to design and install an automatic fire sprinkler extinguishing system pursuant to this section; building roof repair/replacement; fire damage repair; building heating and/or cooling unit repair/replacement; and any other federal, state and local construction code upgrade requirements including but not limited to the seismic retrofit requirements, asbestos, and other hazardous material abatement.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.045 Section R313.3.2.8 added—All sprinklered buildings.
     Section R313.3.2.8 of the 2019 California Residential Code is added to read as follows:

 

R313.3.2.8 All sprinklered buildings.

1.    When a building is partially retrofitted with an approved automatic sprinkler fire extinguishing system pursuant to this section, the building fire extinguishing system retrofit shall be completed throughout the unprotected building interior areas within two (2) years from completing the initial partial retrofit.

2.    When a property owner or responsible party of a residential building chooses option 1 above, the property owner shall file a deed restriction with San Mateo County Assessor’s Office and obtain a performance bond with Central County Fire Department to ensure compliance with Section 18.10.025 or 18.10.030. The bond shall be equal to or greater than the estimated cost of completion, as determined by Central County Fire Department.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.050 Section R313.3.3.1 amended—Nonmetallic pipe and tubing.
     Section R313.3.3.1 of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

 

R313.3.3.1 Nonmetallic pipe and tubing. Nonmetallic piping and tubing, such as CPVC, shall be listed for use in residential fire sprinkler systems.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.055 Table R313.3.6.2 (9) deleted—Table R313.3.6.2 (9) Allowable pipe length for 1-inch PEX tubing.
     Table R313.3.6.2 (9) of the 2019 California Residential Code is deleted in its entirety.

     Table R313.3.6.2 (9) Allowable Pipe Length for 1-inch PEX tubing is deleted. (Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.060 Section R313.3.6.2.2 amended—Calculation procedure. Step 8—Determine the maximum allowable pipe length.
     Section R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure. Step 8 of the 2019 California Residential Code is replaced with the following:

 

R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure. Step 8—Determine the maximum allowable pipe length. Use Tables R313.3.6.2(4) through R313.3.6.2(8) to select a material and size for water distribution piping. The piping material and size shall be acceptable if the developed length of pipe between the service valve and the most remote sprinkler does not exceed the maximum allowable length specified by the applicable table. Interpolation of Pt between the tabular values shall be permitted.

 

The maximum allowable length of piping in Tables R313.3.6.2(4) through R313.3.6.2(8) incorporates an adjustment for pipe fittings, and no additional consideration of friction losses associated with pipe fittings shall be required.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.065 Section R313.3.8.1 amended—Pre-concealment inspection #4.
     Section R313.3.8.1—Pre-concealment inspection #4 of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended by replacing with the following:

 

R313.3.8.1 #4. The pipe size equals or exceeds the size used in applying Tables R313.3.6.2(4) through R313.3.6.2(8) or, if the piping system was hydraulically calculated in accordance with Section R313.3.6.1, the size used in the hydraulic calculation.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.070 Section R313.3.8.1 amended—Pre-concealment inspection #5.
     Section R313.3.8.1—Pre-concealment inspection #5 of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended by replacing with the following:

 

R313.3.8.1 #5. The pipe length does not exceed the length permitted by Tables R313.3.6.2(4) through R313.3.6.2(8) or, if the piping system was hydraulically calculated in accordance with Section R313.3.6.1, pipe lengths and fittings do not exceed those used in the hydraulic calculation.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.075 Section R319.1 amended—Address numbers.
     Section R319.1 of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

 

R319.1 Address numbers. Size of numbers shall be as follows:

1.    When the structure is thirty-six (36) to fifty (50) feet from the street or fire apparatus access, a minimum of one-half inch (½″) stroke by six inches (6″) high is required.

2.    When the structure is more than fifty (50) feet from the street or fire apparatus access, a minimum of one inch (1″) strike by nine inches (9″) high is required.

 

Multi-tenant buildings. Numbers or letters shall be designated on all occupancies within a building. Size shall be a minimum of one-half inch (1/2″) stroke by four inches (4″) high and on a contrasting background. Directional address numbers or letters shall be provided. Said addresses or numbers shall be posted at a height no greater than 5 feet, 6 inches (5′ 6″) above the finished floor and shall be either internally or externally illuminated in all new construction.

 

Rear addressing. When required by the chief, approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the fire apparatus road at the back of a property or where rear parking lots or alleys provide and acceptable vehicular access. Number stroke and size shall comply with Section R319.1.

 

ADU Addressing. Address for Residential Accessory Dwelling Units shall meet City of Burlingame specifications.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.080 Section R902.1 amended—Roof covering materials.
     Section R902.1 of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

 

R902.1 Roof covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Class C roofs shall not be allowed in the City of Burlingame. Classes A and B roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.085 Section R902.1.3 amended—Roof covering in all other areas.
     Section R902.1.3 of the 2019 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

 

R902.1.3 Roof covering in all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.090 Section R903.4.2 added—Roof and surface drainage.
     Section R903.4.2 of the 2019 California Residential Code is added to read as follows:

 

R903.4.2 Roof and surface drainage.

1.    In all zones other than R-1, the water from the roof of any building and from any paved area which would flow by gravity over public sidewalk shall be carried by means of conductors under the sidewalk and through the curb to the gutter, or other approved location.

2.    No storm water or underground water draining from any lot, building, or paved area shall be allowed to drain to adjacent properties nor shall this water be connected to the city’s sanitary sewer system. Regardless of the slope of the source property, such water shall drain to either artificial or natural storm drainage facilities by gravity or pumping.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

 

18.10.095 Section R1003.9.2.1 added—Spark arrestors.
     Section R1003.9.2.1 of the 2019 California Residential Code is added to read as follows:

 

R1003.9.2.1 Spark arrestors. Every chimney shall have a spark arrestor, either internally or externally mounted. Any spark arrestor to be mounted internally shall not be installed until installation plans for such arrestor have been submitted to and approved by the building division. All chimneys as described in Section 603.6 of the 2019 California Fire Code shall be retroactively protected when one or more of the following conditions exist:

1.    Upon the sale or transfer of the real property on which any chimney is located the transfer of title shall not be made until each such chimney contains the required spark arrestor, properly installed and in proper working order.

2.    In the event of any construction on such property for which a building permit is required the final building permit signoff shall not be made until each such chimney a spark arrestor has been installed and is in proper working order.

(Ord. 1856 § 7, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 8, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 8, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 10, (2019))

Chapter 18.11 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
18.11.010 Adoption of Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
     The rules, regulations and standards printed in one volume and published by the International Conference of Building Officials under the title “1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,” hereinafter called “dangerous buildings code,” is adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1033 § 14, (1975); Ord. 1128 § 30, (1978); Ord. 1208 § 20, (1981); Ord. 1285 § 30, (1984); Ord. 1361 § 21, (1988); Ord. 1462 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1538 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 8, (1999))

 

18.11.020 Chapter 6 amended—Appeals.
     An appeal of a denial of or a refusal to issue a permit or from any other decision of the building official may be taken as set forth in Section 18.07.040. (Ord. 1033 § 14, (1975); Ord. 1538 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1613 § 8, (1999))

Chapter 18.12 PLUMBING CODE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1033, 1128, 1208, 1285, 1538, 1613, 1684, 1710 and 1813.

 

18.12.010 Adoption of 2019 California Plumbing Code.
     The rules, regulations and standards printed in one volume and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), under the title “2018 Uniform Plumbing Code” and adopted as the “2019 California Plumbing Code” including the Appendices A, D, H, I and state of California amendments thereto, hereinafter called “plumbing code,” is adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The appendices specified herein shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the plumbing code. (Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.020 Section 310.13 added—Exterior pipes.
     Section 310.13 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is added to read as follows:

 

310.13 Exterior pipes. No plumbing drain vent pipe nor water, soil, waste, or gas pipe shall be installed on, or attached to, the outside face of an exterior wall of a residential building without the prior written permission of the building official. Such installation shall be enclosed in such a way as to be obscured from view.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.030 Section 507.5 amended—Water heater safety pans.
     Section 507.5 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

507.5 Water heater safety pans. Each water heater located in an attic, furred space, living area or other location where leakage would result in damage to the building or its contents shall have a safety pan with drain. Safety pans shall be metal and be nominal two inches in diameter larger than the water heater, with a minimum depth of two inches. The drain pipe shall be three-quarter inch trade size minimum; shall terminate outside the building foundation or, where this is not practical or possible, at another location approved by the building inspector; and shall have a continuous minimum slope throughout its length of one-quarter inch, per foot away from the water heater.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.040 Section 606.3.1 added—Water supply shutoff valves.
     Section 606.3.1 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is added to read as follows:

 

606.3.1 Water supply shutoff valves. A gate shutoff valve shall be installed on each water supply pipe at an accessible point where such supply enters a building. In multi-unit residential buildings, a gate shutoff valve shall be installed on each water supply pipe at an accessible point where such supply enters each apartment or dwelling unit; or, where an apartment or dwelling unit is supplied by a vertical riser, a separate accessible shutoff valve may be provided at each plumbing fixture in the unit in lieu of the shutoff valve on the main supply to the unit.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.050 Section 609.3 amended—Water piping installed in or under a concrete slab.
     The first paragraph of Section 609.3 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

609.3 Water piping installed in or under a concrete slab. Water piping shall not be installed in or under a concrete floor slab within a building without prior written approval of the building official. When such approval is obtained, such piping shall be installed in accordance with requirements (1) and (2).

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.060 Section 610.8.1 added—Water service over two inches.
     Section 610.8.1 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is added to read as follows:

610.8.1 Water services over two inches. Design details, methods and materials for construction of water services over 2 inches in diameter shall conform with the specifications for the construction of such work as compiled by the city engineer. These specifications may be changed from time to time at the option of the city engineer, but such changes shall in no way effect the validity of the regulations or requirements contained therein or the regulations and requirements of this code.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.070 Section 710.1 amended—Drainage of fixtures below the next upstream manhole or below the main sewer level.
     Section 710.1 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

710.1 Drainage of fixtures below the next upstream manhole or below the main sewer level.

1.    Drainage piping serving fixture(s) which have flood level rim(s) less than twelve inches (12″) above the elevation of the next upstream manhole and/or flushing inlet cover at the public sewer system serving such drainage piping shall be protected from backflow of sewage as follows:

a.       In new buildings and in buildings modified to the extent described in Burlingame Municipal Code section 18.07.020, these fixtures shall discharge by means of a sewage ejector or pump in accordance with Section 710.2.

b.       In existing buildings, protection from backflow shall be by means of a backwater valve approved by the building official supplemented by an approved sewer relief valve installed with its outlet at least six inches (6″) below the flood level rim of the lowest installed drainage unit fixture. Fixtures above that elevation shall not discharge through the backwater valve without prior written approval of the building official. As an alternative, the system may be protected by installation of an approved sewage ejector or pump.

c.       Cleanouts for drains that pass through a backwater valve shall be clearly identified with a permanent label stating “Backwater Valve Downstream.”

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.080 Section 719.7 added—Building sewer cleanout.
     Section 719.7 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:

 

719.7 Building sewer cleanout. When a building sewer is located under a street, alley or easement, there shall be provided a cleanout, installed flush with the sidewalk level next to curb; or, if no curb or sidewalk exist, then the cleanout must be located outside of the lot line. The cleanout riser shall be of materials specified by the city engineer, shall be the same size as the drain it serves, shall be connected to the building drain by a wye, shall be brought up to the level of the ground, and shall be terminated at the top with a cleanout fitting as specified by the city engineer. If the riser terminates at concrete sidewalk a cast iron sidewalk box with loose cover fitting with brass screws shall be installed. The minimum size for a cleanout riser shall be four inch trade size pipe.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.090 Section 807.4 added—Condensate waste water disposal.
     Section 807.4 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is added to read as follows:

 

807.4 Condensate wastewater disposal. Condensate from air cooling coils and comfort cooling equipment not intended to be used for the storage or handling of food or drink shall be collected and discharged to a storm sewer or other point of disposal approved by the building official.

        Termination of such drains shall be made by an air break. Condensate drain lines in sizes of one and one-quarter inch and larger shall be assembled using approved drainage pipe and fittings.

        Condensate waste water shall not drain over or upon a sidewalk, pedestrian ramp or the like, or a public way.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.100 Section 812.2 added—Disposal of rainwater drainage.
     Section 812.2 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is added to read as follows:

 

812.2 Disposal of rainwater drainage. Rainwater from roof or other approved areas exposed to rainwater may be drained into the storm drainage system, but shall not drain into any sewer intended for sanitary sewage.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.110 Section 812.3 added—Rainwater drainage to paved gutter.
     Section 812.3 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is added to read as follows:

 

812.3 Rainwater drainage to paved gutter. Rainwater from roofs and other approved areas exposed to rainwater may drain into a public street gutter, provided that such gutter is paved and runs to a catch basin connected to a public storm drain, and provided further that such drainage has the approval of the city engineer or other public authority having jurisdiction over public streets or public storm drains.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

 

18.12.120 Section 812.4 added—Rainwater drainage across public sidewalk prohibited.
     Section 812.4 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is added to read as follows:

 

812.4 Rainwater drainage across public sidewalk prohibited. No rainwater from roofs, or other rainwater drainage of premises, shall discharge upon a public sidewalk. When it is desired to conduct rainwater from a building or premises to a public street gutter, the outside underground drainage piping shall be vitrified clay pipe, ABS, PVC, galvanized wrought iron pipe, galvanized steel pipe, approved concrete pipe, asbestos cement sewer pipe, cast iron pipe or other materials approved by the building official. When clay pipe, ABS, PVC, asbestos cement sewer pipe or approved concrete pipe is used, such pipe shall be a minimum of two feet horizontally from the building and one foot below the official grade. Water leaders connected to such background drainage pipe which are on the outside of the building wall that abuts on a public thoroughfare, shall be constructed of galvanized wrought iron pipe, galvanized steel pipe, or cast iron pipe for a distance of not less than five feet vertically above the Official grade. See Section 18.08.090 for exception for such drainage in R-1 districts.

 

18.12.130 Section 812.5 added—Elimination of nonconforming rainwater drainage required.
     Section 812.5 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is added to read as follows:

 

812.5 Elimination of nonconforming rainwater drainage required. Every existing system that allows the drainage of rainwater into a sanitary sewer in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be altered or terminated or replaced so as to conform to the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1854 § 8, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 9, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 9, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 11, (2019))

Chapter 18.13 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
18.13.010 Adoption of 2019 California Existing Building Code.
     The rules, regulations and requirements published by the International Code Council (ICC) under the title “2015 International Existing Building Code” and adopted as the “2019 California Existing Building Code” including Appendix Chapters 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 13, 15, 16 and state of California amendments thereto, are adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained. (Ord. 1969 § 12, (2019))

Chapter 18.16 ELECTRICAL CODE
18.16.010 Adoption of 2019 California Electrical Code.
     The rules, regulations and standards printed in one volume and published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), under the title “2017 National Electrical Code” with amendments as contained in the “2019 California Electrical Code,” including the appendices, are adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to matters therein contained except as provided in this chapter. The mandatory requirements of the appendices to the code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the code. (1941 Code § 2300.01, Ord. 815, (1964); Ord. 926 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1128 § 33, (1978); Ord. 1208 § 28, (1981); Ord. 1285 § 34, (1984); Ord. 1361 § 33, (1988); Ord. 1462 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1613 § 10, (1999); Ord. 1694 § 8, (2002); Ord. 1813 § 9, (2007); Ord. 1856 § 9, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 10, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 10, (2016) ; Ord. 1969 § 13, (2019))

 

18.16.020 Section 230.70(A)(1) amended—Main switch accessible from exterior.
     Section 230.70(A)(1) of the 2019 California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows:

 

230.70(A)(1) Main switch accessible from exterior. The service disconnecting means location shall be accessible from the exterior of a building. If, due to structural or architectural conditions, it is not possible to make the service disconnecting means accessible from the building exterior a shunt trip disconnecting all active electrical conductors shall be installed at an accessible exterior location.

(Ord. 1613 § 10, (1999); Ord. 1694 § 8, (2002); Ord. 1813 § 9, (2007); Ord. 1856 § 9, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 10, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 10, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 13, (2019))

 

18.16.030 Section 410.10(G) added—Exterior lighting restricted.
     Section 410.10(G) of the 2019 California Electrical Code is added to read as follows:

 

410.10(G) Exterior lighting restricted.

1.    Exterior lighting on all residential and commercial properties shall be designed and located so that the cone of light and/or glare from the lighting element is kept entirely on the property or below the top of any fence, edge or wall.

2.    On all residential properties exterior lighting outlets and fixtures shall not be located more than nine (9) feet above adjacent grade or required landing; walls or portions of walls shall not be floodlit; only shielded light fixtures which focus light downward shall be allowed, except for illuminated street numbers required by the fire department.

3.    Variances to the provisions of this section may be approved by the planning commission, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 25.16 of this code, except that notice of the application for the variance shall only be given to property owners within fifty feet.

4.    This section shall not apply to signs having an approved permit for an illuminated sign pursuant to Title 22 of this code.

(Ord. 1613 § 10, (1999); Ord. 1694 § 8, (2002); Ord. 1813 § 9, (2007); Ord. 1856 § 9, (2010); Ord. 1889 § 10, (2013); Ord. 1933 § 10, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 13, (2019))

Chapter 18.17 WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPE
18.17.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the city of Burlingame “Water Conservation in Landscape Ordinance.” (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.020 Applicability.
     (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

     (1)   Tier 1 Landscapes. All new construction and rehabilitated landscapes with irrigated landscape areas between one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review, or requiring new or expanded water service.

     (2)   Tier 2 Landscapes. All new construction and rehabilitated landscapes with irrigated landscape areas equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review or requiring new or expanded water service.

     (3)   Existing landscapes, including existing cemeteries, shall only be subject to the provisions for existing landscapes provided for in Section 18.17.130, Provisions for existing landscapes over one acre in size; and

     (4)   New and rehabilitated cemeteries shall only be subject to the provisions of Section 18.17.080, Water budget calculations, Section 18.17.100, Landscape audit report, and Section 18.17.110, Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.

     (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

     (1)   New construction and rehabilitated landscapes with irrigated landscape areas less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or that do not require a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review, or new or expanded water service;

     (2)   Landscapes or portions of landscapes that are only irrigated for an establishment period;

     (3)   Registered local, state or federal historical sites where landscaping establishes a historical landscape style, as determined by a public board or commission responsible for architectural review or historic preservation;

     (4)   Ecological restoration or mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

     (5)   Community gardens or plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public, agricultural uses, commercial nurseries and sod farms. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.030 Definitions.
     (a)   “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

     (b)   “Automatic irrigation controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

     (c)   “Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

     (d)   “Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Designer Certification Program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer Program.

     (e)   “Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Auditor Certification Program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor Program.

 

     (f)    “Certified professional” or “authorized professional” means a certified irrigation designer, a certified landscape irrigation auditor, a licensed landscape architect, a licensed landscape contractor, a licensed professional engineer, or any other person authorized by the state to design a landscape, an irrigation system, or authorized to complete a water budget.

     (g)   “Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

     (h)   “Drip irrigation” means any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

     (i)    “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

     (j)    “Effective precipitation” or “usable rainfall” (Eppt) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

     (k)   “Establishment period” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

     (l)    “Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 18.17.080, Water budget calculations.

     (m)  “ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.7, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0. ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated landscapes shall not exceed 0.8.

     (n)   “Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

     (o)   “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

     (p)   “Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and nonpervious).

     (q)   “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated.

     (r)    “Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. “Noxious weeds” means any weed designated by the Weed Control Regulations in the Weed Control Act and identified on a regional district noxious weed control list. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.

     (s)    “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.

     (t)    “Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is seventy (70) percent. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well-designed and maintained systems.

     (u)   “Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

     (v)   “Irrigation water use analysis” means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

     (w)  “Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in California as further defined by the California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615.

     (x)   “Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation), agricultural uses, commercial nurseries and sod farms.

     (y)   “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

     (z)   “Landscape project” means the total area comprising the landscape area, as defined in subsection (x).

     (aa) “Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

     (bb) “Local agency” means the city of Burlingame which is responsible for the adoption, implementation and enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project.

     (cc) “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, district or private water company that provides retail water service.

     (dd) “Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers.

     (ee) “Low water use plant” means a plant species whose water needs are compatible with local climate and soil conditions. Species classified as “very low water use” and “low water use” by WUCOLS, having a regionally adjusted plant factor of 0.0 through 0.3, shall be considered low water use plants.

     (ff)  “Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 18.17.080, Water budget calculations.

     (gg) “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

     (hh) “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

     (ii)   “Native plant” means a plant indigenous to a specific area of consideration. For the purposes of these guidelines, the term shall refer to plants indigenous to the coastal ranges of central and northern California, and more specifically to such plants that are suited to the ecology of the present or historic natural community(ies) of the project’s vicinity.

     (jj)   “New construction” means the construction of a new building or structure containing a landscape or other new land improvement, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

     (kk) “No water-using plant” means a plant species with water needs that are compatible with local climate and soil conditions such that regular supplemental irrigation is not required to sustain the plant after it has become established.

     (ll)   “Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

     (mm)  “Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

     (nn) “Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.

     (oo) “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

     (pp) “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

     (qq) “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants.

     (rr)  “Precipitation rate” means the rate of application of water measured in inches per hour.

     (ss)  “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a project landscape application required under Section 18.17.060, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

     (tt)   “Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shutoff device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

     (uu) “Recreational area” means areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses where turf provides a playing surface.

     (vv) “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants.

     (ww)   “Rehabilitated landscape” means any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, design review, or requires a new or expanded water service application.

     (xx) “Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area.

     (yy) “Soil moisture sensing device” or “soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

     (zz) “Special landscape area (SLA)” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

     (aaa)   “Sprinkler head” means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

     (bbb) “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

     (ccc)   “Turf’ means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum,

St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

     (ddd) “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

     (eee) “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied).

     (fff) “WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2000. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.040 Water conservation in landscaping requirements.
     (a)   All owners of new construction and rehabilitated landscapes of applicable sizes shall:

     (1)   Complete the Landscape Project Application (Section 18.17.060); and

     (2)   Comply with the landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (Section 18.17.110) requirements of this chapter.

     (b)   All owners of existing landscapes over one acre in size, even if installed before enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall:

     (1)   Comply with city programs that may be instituted relating to irrigation audits, surveys and water use analysis; and

     (2)   Shall maintain landscape irrigation facilities to prevent water waste and runoff. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.050 Compliance with provisions.
     (a)   The city shall:

     (1)   Provide the project applicant with the ordinance codified in this chapter and landscape project application requirements and the procedures for permits, plan checks, design reviews, or new or expanded water service;

     (2)   Review the landscape project application submitted by the project applicant;

     (3)   Approve or deny the project applicant’s landscape project application submittal;

     (4)   Issue or approve a permit, plan check or design review that complies with the approved landscape project application or approve a new or expanded water service application that complies with the approved landscape project application.

     (b)   The project applicant shall:

     (1)   Prior to construction, submit all portions of the landscape project application, except the landscape audit report, to the city;

     (2)   Construct the project in compliance with the minimum water use efficiency standards for indoor fixtures and appliances provided for in the Indoor Water Use Efficiency Table and checklist;

     (3)   After construction, submit the landscape audit report portion of the landscape project application to the city. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.060 Landscape project application.
     (a)   The elements of a landscape must be designed to achieve water efficiency and will comply with the criteria described in this chapter. In completing the landscape project application, project applicants may choose one of two options to demonstrate that the landscape meets this chapter’s water efficiency goals. Regardless of which option is selected, the applicant must complete and comply with all other elements of this chapter. The options include:

     (1)   Planting Restrictions.

     (A)  The turf area may not be more than twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape area, and

     (B)   At least eighty (80) percent of the plants in non-turf landscape areas shall be native plants, low-water using plants, or no-water using plants; or the

     (2)   Water budget calculation option (Section 18.17.080).

     (b)   The landscape project application shall include the following elements:

     (1)   Project information;

     (2)   Outdoor water use efficiency checklist (Section 18.17.070);

     (3)   Water budget calculations, if applicant selects to use a water budget approach rather than comply with the turf area limitations or specified plant type restrictions (Section 18.17.080);

     (4)   Landscape and irrigation system design plans (Section 18.17.090);

     (5)   Landscape audit report (Section 18.17.100). (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.070 Outdoor water use efficiency checklist.
     The city of Burlingame has developed an outdoor water use efficiency checklist (checklist), based on the criteria described below. For Tier 1 projects, either the project applicant or a certified or authorized professional shall complete the checklist and submit it to city along with the landscape and irrigation design plan. For Tier 2 projects, a certified or authorized professional shall complete and submit the checklist to city along with the landscape and irrigation design plan.

     (a)   Plant Material.

     (1)   Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use that are selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site.

     (2)   The turf area shall not be more than twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape area, unless the project applicant develops a site-specific water budget and the ETWU of the landscape area does not exceed the MAWA.

     (3)   Turf shall not be planted on slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent or in areas that are less than eight (8) feet wide, unless irrigated with subsurface irrigation or a low volume irrigation system.

     (4)   At least eighty (80) percent of the plants in nonturf landscape areas shall be native plants, low-water using plants, or no water-using plants, unless the project applicant develops a site-specific water budget and the ETWU of the landscaped area does not exceed the MAWA.

     (5)   Fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches should be avoided.

     (6)   The use of invasive and/or noxious plant species is strongly discouraged.

     (7)   The architectural guidelines of a common interest development shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

     (b)   Mulch. A minimum two (2) inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas, although a three (3) inch layer is recommended.

     (c)   Irrigation System. An irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance.

     (1)   Dedicated landscape water meters shall be required for landscape areas greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet and are highly recommended for landscape areas greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

     (2)   Tier 2 landscapes are required to have automatic irrigation controllers that utilize either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data for irrigation scheduling.

     (3)   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems.

     (4)   The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions.

     (5)   Low volume irrigation required in mulched areas, in areas with slope greater than twenty-five (25) percent, and within twenty-four (24) inches of a nonpermeable surface, or in narrow or irregularly shaped areas that are less than eight (8) feet in width in any direction.

     (6)   Average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be seventy (70) percent. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed an average landscape irrigation efficiency of seventy (70) percent.

     (7)   Irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., unless unfavorable weather prevents it or otherwise renders irrigation unnecessary.

     (d)   Hydrozone.

     (1)   Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

     (2)   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

     (3)   Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf.

     (4)   Individual hydrozones that mix plants with different water uses may be allowed if a water budget is performed, and the plant factor calculation is based on the proportion of the respective plant water uses or the plant factor of the higher water using plant is used.

     (e)   Water Features.

     (1)   Recirculating water systems will be used for water features.

     (2)   The surface area of a water feature will not exceed ten (10) percent of the landscape area and will be counted as a high water-using plant for purposes of a water budget calculation.

     (3)   Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.

     (f)    Soil Amendments. Soil amendments, such as compost, shall be incorporated according to the soil conditions at the project site and based on what is appropriate for the selected plants. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.080 Water budget calculations.
     The project applicant may elect to complete a water budget calculation for the landscape project. A Tier 1 water budget may be developed and completed by the project applicant. A Tier 2 water budget calculation must be completed by a certified or authorized professional. Water budget calculations, if prepared, shall adhere to the following requirements:

     (a)   The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor ranges from 0.0 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water-use plants.

     (b)   All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone.

     (c)   All special landscape areas (SLA) shall be identified and their water use included in the water budget calculations.

     (d)   The reference evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for SLA shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for all other landscaped areas shall not exceed 0.7.

     (e)   Irrigation system efficiency shall be greater than or equal to seventy (70) percent.

     (f)    Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) shall be calculated using the equation below:

 

MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]

 

Where:

     MAWA = Maximum applied water allowance (gallons per year)

     Eto = Reference evapotranspiration (inches per year)

     0.62 = Conversion factor (to gallons)

     0.7 = Reference evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF)

     LA = Landscape area including SLA (square feet)

     0.3 = Additional water allowance for SLA

     SLA = Special landscape area (square feet)

 

     (g)   A local agency or project applicant may consider effective precipitation (twenty-five (25) percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate the MAWA:

 

MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]

 

     (h)   Estimated total water use (ETWU) will be calculated using the equation below. The sum of the ETWU calculated for all hydrozones will not exceed the MAWA.

 

ETWU = (ETo)(0.62) [(PF x HA)\IE] + SLA

 

Where:

     ETWU = Estimated total water use per year (gallons)

     ETo = Reference evapotranspiration (inches)

     PF = Plant factor from WUCOLS (see Section 491)

     HA = Hydrozone area [high, medium, and low water use areas] (square feet)

     SLA = Special landscape area (square feet)

     0.62 = Conversion factor

     IE = Irrigation efficiency (minimum 0.70)

 

(Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.090 Landscape and irrigation design plans.
     (a)   Tier 1 Landscapes. The landscape and irrigation design plan may be prepared by, and bear the signature of, the project applicant, or that of a certified or authorized professional.

     (b)   Tier 2 Landscapes. The components of the landscape and irrigation design plan shall be prepared as follows:

     (1)   The landscape design portion shall be prepared by, and bear the signature of, a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or that of a certified or authorized professional; and

     (2)   The irrigation design portion shall be prepared by, and bear the signature of, a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or that of a certified or authorized professional.

     (c)   The landscape design portion of the landscape and irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall:

     (1)   Delineate and label each hydrozone;

     (2)   Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use;

     (3)   Identify special landscape areas (i.e., recreational areas; areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants; areas irrigated with recycled water);

     (4)   Identify type of mulch and application depth;

     (5)   Identify type and surface area of water features;

     (6)   Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious); and

     (7)   Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the Water Conservation in Landscaping Ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the Landscape and Irrigation Design Plan.”

     (d)   The irrigation design portion of the landscape and irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

     (1)   Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

     (2)   Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

     (3)   Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

     (4)   Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

     (5)   Irrigation schedule;

     (6)   The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the Water Conservation in Landscaping Ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the Landscape and Irrigation Design Plan.”

     (e)   Grading. If the landscape project will be graded, then the grading shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. All grading should be conducted to:

     (1)   Maintain all irrigation and normal rainfall within property lines and avoid drainage on to nonpermeable hardscapes;

     (2)   Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil;

     (3)   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas; and

     (4)   Be consistent with city and county grading requirements. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.100 Landscape audit report.
     (a)   Tier 1 Landscapes. Landscape irrigation audits for new or rehabilitated landscapes installed after March 18, 2010 shall be conducted after the landscaping and irrigation systems have been installed. The audit may be conducted by the project applicant or by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.

     (b)   Tier 2 Landscapes. Landscape irrigation audits for new or rehabilitated landscapes installed after the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor after the landscaping and irrigation system have been installed.

     (c)   The landscape audit report shall include, but is not limited to: inspection to confirm that the landscaping and irrigation system were installed as specified in the landscape and irrigation design plan, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.

     (d)   The landscape audit report shall include the following statement: “The landscape and irrigation system has been installed as specified in the Landscape and Irrigation Design Plan and complies with the criteria of the Ordinance and the permit.”

     (e)   The city shall administer on-going programs that may include, but not be limited to, post-installation landscape inspection, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, irrigation surveys and water budget calculations to evaluate compliance with the MAWA. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.110 Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.
     Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency.

     (a)   A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas; and removing obstructions to emission devices.

     (b)   Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents.

     (c)   A project applicant is encouraged to implement sustainable or environmentally-friendly practices for overall landscape maintenance. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.120 Stormwater management.
     Stormwater best management practices shall be implemented into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site retention and infiltration and should be consistent with city, county, state and federal stormwater management requirements. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.130 Provisions for existing landscapes over one acre in size.
     This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before March 18, 2010 and are over one acre in size.

     (a)   Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis.

     (1)   For landscapes that have a water meter, the city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the MAWA for existing landscapes. The MAWA for existing landscapes shall be calculated as:

 

MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62)

 

     (2)   For landscapes that do not have a meter, the city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.

     (3)   All landscape irrigation audits for existing landscapes that are greater than one acre in size shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.

     (b)   Water Waste Prevention. The city shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.140 Violations, penalties and enforcement.
     (a)   Violation Notice of Correction. It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation subject to the requirements of this chapter to fail to comply with the outdoor water use efficiency requirements of this chapter.

     (b)   Notice of Correction. Whenever the city determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city may serve a notice of correction on the owner(s) of the property on which the violation is situated. The owner(s) of record shall have ninety (90) days to take corrective action.

     (c)   Enforcement. If the owner of the property which is the subject of the violation fails to take corrective action within ninety (90) days, the city may enforce this chapter according to the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

 

18.17.150 Public education.
     (a)   The city shall provide information to all applicants regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water-efficient landscapes and irrigation systems.

     (b)   All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water-efficient landscapes that are described in this chapter. (Ord. 1845 § 3, (2010))

Chapter 18.18 RADIO AND TELEVISION ANTENNAS
18.18.010 Purpose.
     (a)   Satellite Antennas. Most homes in Burlingame are either built on flat lots or on hillsides. The flat lots are typically of relatively small size with substantial lot coverage. Hillside developments are visible from a wide area. Placement of satellite antennas can interfere with views of streetscape, natural vegetation and scenery in both flat and hillside areas. Therefore, in order to maintain the aesthetic objective of minimal intrusion into views of neighborhood streetscape, existing landscaping, long distance views and other natural effects, it is necessary that satellite antennas in residential zones be placed in the least obtrusive location upon residential properties while still allowing access to satellite signals. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish criteria for the location of satellite antennas consistent with federal standards, as amended in March 1996.

     (b)   Ham and CB Antennas. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish criteria for the location, height and bulk of ham radio and CB antennas that will reasonably accommodate amateur radio activities and create the minimum interference with those activities consonant with promoting local safety and aesthetic interests.

     (c)   Other Antennas. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish locational restrictions that will mitigate the visual impact of other types of antennas. (Ord. 1327 § 1, (1986), Ord. 1513 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1549 § 1, (1996))

 

18.18.020 Definitions.
     “Antenna” means any combination of wood, metal, wire or other substance, which either alone or in combination with any supports, is erected or constructed for the purpose of receiving or transmitting radio, television or any other electronic or other type of signal.

     “Ham” or “CB antenna” is a radio receiving and transmitting antenna for amateur radio and citizens band operation.

     “Satellite antenna” is an antenna capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. Satellite antennas are sometimes referred to as “satellite earth station antennas,” and “satellite dish antennas.” (Ord. 1327 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1513 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1519 § 1, (1995); Ord. 1549 § 1, (1996))

 

18.18.025 Placement of satellite antennas.
     Satellite antennas shall be installed in compliance with the following standards:

     (a)   Any satellite antenna that is forty (40) inches or less in diameter may be installed without restriction in any zone.

     (b)   Any satellite antenna that is larger than forty (40) inches but less than seven (7) feet in diameter may be installed in any residential zone in compliance with the following standards:

     (1)   No part of the antenna shall exceed seven (7) feet in height from the ground level directly beneath it;

     (2)   The antenna shall be installed in the rear yard and not within the side setbacks, extended to the rear property line;

     (3)   The antenna shall be made of non-reflective material or painted with a non-reflective paint;

     (4)   The antenna shall be screened by walls, fences, vegetation or other materials from view of the first floor of buildings on adjacent properties and from any public right-of-way within one hundred (100) feet.

     (c)   Any satellite antenna that is seven (7) feet or less in diameter may be installed in any nonresidential zone. Any satellite antenna located in the C-1 zone must be screened by walls, fences, vegetation or other materials from view of the first floor of buildings on adjacent properties and from any public right-of-way within one hundred (100) feet.

     (d)   Any satellite antenna that does not comply with the size and locational restrictions of this section shall not be installed without obtaining an antenna exception as provided in section 18.18.040. (Ord. 1549 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1552 § 10, (1996))

 

18.18.030 Ham, CB and other regulated antennas.
     Any antenna, other than a satellite dish antenna, shall comply with the following standards in any zone:

     (a)   If the antenna is mounted on the ground:

     (1)   No part of the antenna shall be more than twenty five (25) feet in height from the ground level directly beneath it; and

 

     (2)   The antenna shall be installed in the rear yard and no portion of the antenna shall be located within or extend into the side setbacks, extended to the rear property line; or

     (b)   If the antenna is mounted on the roof:

     (1)   No part of the antenna shall be more than ten (10) feet above the closest portions of the roof on which it is mounted or exceed eight feet (8′) in length; and

     (2)   No part of the antenna shall be located or extend within three (3) feet of any roof edge.

     (c)   Any antenna that does not comply with these standards shall obtain an antenna exception, as provided in Section 18.18.040. (Ord. 1327 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1513 § 1, (1994); Ord 1549 § 1, (1996))

 

18.18.040 Antenna exception.
     (a)   Any person may apply for an exception from the antenna ordinance by applying for an antenna exception in accordance with the provisions of this section.

     (b)   Application for an antenna exception shall be made upon forms provided by the director of community development and shall include the following information:

     (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

     (2)   Address and zoning district of the property on which the antenna is to be attached or erected;

     (3)   Description of the proposed antenna, including location, height and width or diameter, and general description of the proposed installation;

     (4)   Description of any existing antenna, including location, height and width or diameter;

     (5)   Site plan which shall include the dimensions of the property, setbacks, and location of the proposed antenna and all structures, including any existing antennas.

     (c)   When the application requests an exception for a satellite antenna, the applicant shall provide the following additional information, in addition to the information required pursuant to subsection (b) of this section:

     (1)   The applicable circumstances and conditions existing on the property which materially limit transmission or reception if the antenna is placed according to the standards in section 18.18.025(b);

     (2)   Locations on the property where the antenna can be located so that satellite signals can reasonably be received, including both placement and height. The director of community development, planning commission or city council shall have discretion to require the applicant to submit a site study, prepared at the applicant’s cost, identifying the locations where an antenna can be installed without materially limiting transmission.

     (3)   The cost of purchase and cost of proposed installation of the proposed antenna;

     (4)   The cost of trimming trees or removing other obstacles to reception at locations that meet the standards set forth in Section 18.18.025(b);

     (5)   Ways in which vegetation could be planted or trimmed to both provide screening and maintain a line of sight to satellites.

     (d)   When the applicant requests an exception for a ham or CB antenna, the applicant shall provide the following additional information, in addition to the information required pursuant to subsection (b) of this section:

     (1)   The location and design of an antenna that will reasonably accommodate the amateur’s right to engage in ham radio transmissions while having the least visual intrusion on the surrounding properties;

     (2)   The nature and extent of amateur communications in which the applicant engages, including time, duration, places contacted and so forth;

     (3)   The director of community development, planning commission, or city council shall have discretion to require the applicant to submit a site reception study, prepared at the applicant’s cost, to identify the locations and design of the antenna that will have the least visual impact on surrounding properties, maximize public safety, and reasonably accommodate the applicant’s right to engage in amateur communications.

     (e)   When the applicant requests an exception for an antenna, other than a satellite, ham or CB antenna, the applicant shall provide, in addition to the information required pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, any other information relating to antenna configuration, network design and site selection which affects the aesthetic impact of the antenna.

     (f)    The director of community development shall charge a fee for an antenna exception which shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1513 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1549 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1806 § 9, (2007))

 

18.18.060 Planning Commission action on antenna exceptions.
     (a)   An application for an antenna exception shall be processed pursuant to the procedures for granting a conditional use permit in Chapter 25.16 of this code.

     (b)   In granting or denying an antenna exception for a satellite antenna, the Planning Commission shall consider the following:

     (1)   Locations where the satellite dish antenna can be installed without materially limiting reception;

     (2)   Whether installing the satellite dish in such locations imposes costs of screening or pruning vegetation or other costs that exceed the price of purchasing and installing the antenna;

     (3)   The maximum extent to which the antenna can comply with the standards in Section 18.18.025(b) for size, location and screening while achieving reasonable reception of preferred programming.

     (c)   In granting or denying an antenna exception for a ham, CB or other antenna, the planning commission shall consider the following:

     (1)   The maximum extent to which the antenna can comply with the standards in Section 18.18.030(a) and (b) for size, location and screening while reasonably transmitting and receiving radio and television signals;

     (2)   Whether or not the antenna may be reasonably accommodated based on considerations of public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics.

     (d)   If the information in the record before the commission demonstrates that the antenna can be redesigned or relocated to reduce potential safety or visual impacts, the commission may impose conditions requiring the redesign or designating the relocation of the antenna. As an alternative, the commission may direct the applicant to redesign the antenna or designate a different location that will be less visually intrusive and resubmit the revised proposal for further consideration. (Ord. 1513 § 1, (1994); Ord 1549 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1603 § 13, (1998))

 

18.18.070 Engineering report required.
     Where the total weight of an antenna exceeds five hundred (500) pounds or where the total height of the pole and antenna exceeds twenty-five (25) feet measured from the adjacent grade or, when built upon a building, where the total height of the roof mount and the antenna, exceeds fifteen (15) feet above the surface of the roof, the building official shall require that a plan and engineering calculations for wind load, bracing and foundation be prepared by a licensed civil or structural engineer. Such plans and specifications shall be prepared to meet or exceed the applicable requirements for such construction as set forth in Chapter 18.08 of this code as adopted or as it may be subsequently amended. (Ord. 1513 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1549 § 1, (1996))

 

18.18.080 Antennas existing on the effective date of this chapter.
     Antennas existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and constructed or installed in accordance with codes that were applicable at the time of construction or installation may remain in place. Any such antennas that would not be allowed under this ordinance shall be deemed non conforming. Any antenna that was constructed or installed in violation of any prior ordinance shall either be removed or an application for an antenna exception shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1513 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1549 § 1, (1996))

Chapter 18.19 INDOOR WATER CONSERVATION
18.19.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the city of Burlingame “Indoor Water Conservation Ordinance.” (Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

 

18.19.020 Coordination with the plumbing code.
     The code of rules and regulations printed in one volume and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, under the title “California Plumbing Code, 2007 Edition,” and the appendices printed therein, and all supplements subsequently issued thereto, hereinafter collectively called the “plumbing code,” prescribing regulations for the installation of all plumbing fixtures, was adopted as amended, by the city of Burlingame, in Chapter 18.12 of the Burlingame Municipal Code, on November 7, 2007. Printed in book form and filed in the office of the city clerk and the chief building official, the Burlingame plumbing code establishes the rules, regulations, and standards within the city of Burlingame as to all matters therein contained; subject however, to the amendments, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter. The mandatory requirements of the adopted appendix to the California Plumbing Code, 2007 Edition, shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the plumbing code. One copy of the plumbing code shall at all times be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. To the extent the provisions of this chapter conflict with any provisions in the existing plumbing code, the California Building Standards Code, or any other municipal codes in conflict, then the provisions of this chapter shall supersede and control with regard to the indoor fixture requirements described herein. (Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

 

18.19.030 Applicability.
     (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following projects:

     (1)   All new construction, regardless of building classification, requiring a building permit, plan check or design review, or requiring new or expanded water service;

     (2)   All kitchen and bathroom remodels requiring a building permit, plan check, design review, new or expanded water service, except that the provisions of this chapter will only apply to the fixtures normally included in the kitchen or bathroom, as the case may be, to be remodeled.

     (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

     (1)   Existing buildings not seeking a building permit, plan check or design review;

     (2)   Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

     (3)   Remodels where, in the discretion of the city, the unique configuration of the building, its drainage system or portions of the public sewer, or both, are incompatible with efficiency standards listed in the Indoor Water Use Efficiency Table and require a greater quantity of water to flush the system in a manner that is consistent with public health. (Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

 

18.19.040 Definitions.
     (a)   “Certified professional” means a licensed contractor, licensed architect or licensed professional engineer.

     (b)   “Energy star qualified” means that a given fixture meets the United States Environmental Protection Agency standard for an energy efficient product.

     (c)   “Gal/cycle” means gallons per cycle.

     (d)   “Gal/100 lbs ice” means gallons per hundred pounds of ice.

     (e)   “Gpf” means gallons per flush.

     (f)    “Gpm” means gallons per minute.

     (g)   “Local agency” means the city of Burlingame which is responsible for adopting, implementing and enforcing this chapter, including, but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project.

     (h)   “LSI” means Langlier Saturation Index providing an indication of the degree of saturation of water with respect to calcium carbonate related to cooling tower efficiency.

     (i)    “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

     (j)    “Permit” means the document issued by the city in connection with new construction, remodels or renovations and which authorizes the lawful initiation of construction, improvements or repairs to a building or structure.

     (k)   “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting an indoor water use efficiency checklist as required under Section 18.19.060(b) and requesting a permit, plan check, design review, or new or expanded water service application from the local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

     (l)    “RMF” means residential multifamily.

     (m)  “Sq. ft.” means square feet. (Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

 

18.19.050 Minimum indoor fixture requirements.
     All new construction and applicable remodels will have, at a minimum, fixtures that comply with the efficiency standards listed in the Indoor Water Use Efficiency Table.

 

Indoor Water Use Efficiency Table

 

Fixture

Residential

Nonresidential

Toilets

< 1.28 gpf, and > 350 grams

< 1.28 gpf, and > 350 grams

Urinals

< 0.5 gpf

< 0.5 gpf

Showers

< 2.0 gpm

< 2.0 gpm

Bathroom faucets

< 1.5 gpm

< 0.5 gpm

Kitchen faucets

< 2.2 gpm

< 2.2 gpm

Clothes washers

< 6.0 water factor

< 6.0 water factor

Dishwashers

< 6.5 gal/cycle, or energy star qualified

energy star qualified

Cooling towers

> 5—10 cycles, or > 2.5 LSI

> 5—10 cycles, or > 2.5 LSI

Food steamers

--

Boiler less, or self-contained

Ice machines

--

< 25 gal/100 lbs ice, or air-cooled

Pre-rinse spray valves

--

< 1.15 gpm

Automatic vehicle wash facilities

--

> 50% of water that is recycled on site

Commercial refrigeration

--

Closed loop, or air-cooled

Meters

Submeters for RMF, and separate meter for outdoor if landscape >5000 sq. ft.

Submeters, and separate meter for outdoor if landscape > 5000 sq. ft.

(Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

 

18.19.060 Compliance with provisions.
     (a)   The city shall:

     (1)   Provide the project applicant with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and an indoor water use efficiency checklist form when it provides the applicant with the procedures for permits, plan checks, design reviews or new or expanded water service applications;

     (2)   Review the indoor water use efficiency checklist submitted by the project applicant;

     (3)   Approve or deny the project applicant’s indoor water use efficiency checklist submittal as part of the application review process;

     (4)   Upon approval of the indoor water use efficiency checklist, and after all other required permits and approvals have been obtained by the applicant, issue a permit or approve the plan check, design review or new or expanded water service application for the project applicant;

     (5)   In its discretion, inspect the installation of the water efficient fixtures and appliances to verify that they have been installed and are performing at the required use levels;

     (6)   Provide a copy of the complete indoor water use efficiency checklist to the city.

     (b)   The project applicant shall:

     (1)   Meet the minimum water use efficiency standards for indoor fixtures and appliances provided for in the indoor water use efficiency table and checklist;

     (2)   Prior to construction, submit all portions of the indoor water use efficiency checklist to the city’s (appropriate official) for verification;

     (3)   Construct the project in compliance with the minimum water use efficiency standards for indoor fixtures and appliances provided for in the indoor water use efficiency table and checklist. (Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

 

18.19.070 Components of the indoor water use efficiency checklist.
     The indoor water use efficiency checklist shall require, at a minimum:

     (a)   Project information;

     (b)   Quantity and unit water use factors of all indoor fixtures and appliances relative to the standards listed in the Indoor Water Use Efficiency Table and checklist;

     (c)   Contain the following statement to be completed by the project applicant: “I certify that the subject project meets the specified requirements of the Indoor Water Use Efficiency Ordinance”; and

     (d)   Bear the signature of the project applicant, or that of a certified professional. (Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

 

18.19.080 Violations, penalties and enforcement.
     (a)   Violation. It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation subject to the requirements of this chapter to fail to comply with the water use efficiency requirements or to alter or replace the fixtures and appliances required by this chapter with other noncompliant fixtures or appliances after the completion of construction or remodel.

     (b)   Notice of Correction. Whenever the city determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city may serve a notice of correction on the owner(s) of the property on which the violation is situated. The owner(s) of record shall have ninety (90) days to take corrective action.

     (c)   Enforcement. If the owner of the property which is the subject of the violation fails to take corrective action within ninety (90) days, the city may enforce this chapter according to the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

 

18.19.090 Public education.
     The local agency shall provide information to all applicants regarding the installation of water efficient fixtures and appliances. (Ord. 1846 § 2, (2010))

Chapter 18.20 GRADING, EXCAVATION, FILLS
18.20.010 Intent of chapter.
    It is the purpose and policy of this chapter to promote the public welfare and safety by establishing minimum standards and requirements relating to excavation, grading and fills; to lessen the exposure to or probability of earth slides or flooding; and to establish procedures by which such requirements may be enforced. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Excavation” is any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed or relocated and shall include the condition resulting therefrom.

     “Fill” is any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, pushed, pulled or transported to a place other than the place from which it was excavated and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.

     “Grading” is an excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.030 Requirements for grading permits.
     (a)   No person shall fill, excavate or grade any site for any purpose nor change existing natural or previously prepared slopes without first obtaining a grading permit. A permit shall be required for each site upon which grading is to be done.

     (b)   Each application for a grading permit shall be made to the city engineer by the owner of record or his or her authorized agent. The required fee and any necessary deposits shall accompany the application.

     (c)   Plot plans shall be prepared for the purpose of any grading permit, whether for and in connection with a building permit or for any changes in the natural land grade for future use or subdivision. The plot plan shall show the location of existing and proposed structures, if any; the location of all existing and proposed streets, driveways and easements; the present contours of the site in dashed lines and the proposed finished contours in solid lines.

     (d)   When the grading permit is part of a building permit application, a plot plan shall be submitted showing location of the proposed building on the site and elevations of building above and below grade. Proposed disposition of surface drainage water shall be indicated on the plans. All plot plans shall be drawn by a licensed civil engineer, architect or land surveyor. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.040 Exceptions.
     A grading or site development permit shall not be required for any of the following purposes except that encroachment, building or other types of required permits must be obtained:

     (1)   Excavations below finished grade for tanks, vaults, basements or footings for buildings or structures, except as limited in the sections following;

     (2)   Excavation by public utility companies in public utility easements or in public ways for the purpose of installing or maintaining public utilities;

     (3)   Street improvement work in connection with improvement contracts awarded by the city over which the city exercises inspection authority;

     (4)   Work for the State Division of Highways or other state agencies;

     (5)   Minor changes in grade for the construction of a building where the plan for the finished grade is made a part of the construction plans and is approved by the building inspector or the city engineer. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.050 Application for permit.
     To obtain a permit, the applicant shall file an application therefor in writing upon forms furnished by the city engineer. The application shall be signed by the owner of the property upon which the work is to be performed or by his or her duly authorized agent. Every such application shall contain the following information:

     (1)   The purpose of the work;

     (2)   The amount of material to be excavated or filled in cubic yards;

 

     (3)   The legal description of the property on which the work is to be performed and the street address at the point of access to the property;

     (4)   The name and address of the owner of the property;

     (5)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will have effective control of the work;

     (6)   The estimated dates for starting and completing the work;

     (7)   Plot plans as noted above;

     (8)   Detailed plans of all walls, cribs, drains or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with or as a part of the proposed work. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.060 Criteria for approval of permit by city officials.
     The city engineer, prior to approving a permit for grading, shall consider the following factors:

     (1)   Saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic;

     (2)   Run-off of surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainage ways;

     (3)   Subsurface conditions such as rock strata, faults and springs;

     (4)   Nature and type of soil or rock which, when disturbed by the proposed grading, may create earth movements;

     (5)   Effect upon the visual relationships with other development in the vicinity of the site;

     (6)   Whether the natural landscape and major vegetation is unnecessarily scarred through the proposed grading;

     (7)   Capability of proposed slopes to be landscaped.

     The building inspector, prior to approving a building permit involving grading, shall consider the following factors:

     (1)   Distance from any existing or proposed building to toe of slope;

     (2)   Recommendations for drain tile installation, retaining walls, or other protective devices for disposition of surface and underground water. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.070 Standards.
     The following minimum standards are established except that higher standards may be imposed when the city engineer finds that peculiar or extraordinary conditions on the site require imposition of special treatment to serve the purposes of this chapter:

     (a)   Slope Protection. Any graded slope which may be subject to erosion shall be protected by planting of trees, shrubs or groundcover; by berms, terracing, cribbing or lined ditches; or by a combination of these methods.

     (b)   Fill Compaction. All fills more than one foot in depth intended to support a building and all fills more than five (5) feet in depth shall be compacted to not less than ninety (90) percent density.

     (c)   Cut slopes shall not exceed one and one-half feet horizontally to one foot vertically. Fill slopes shall not exceed two (2) feet horizontally to one foot vertically. If any cut slope disclosed the existence of inclined strata, fault lines, or other condition indicating a possible earth slide, the horizontal dimension must be increased to create a flatter slope.

     (d)   The finished grade shall be so sloped as to carry surface water to the nearest street, storm drain or natural watercourse. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.075 Maintenance of protective devices.
     The owner of any property in hillside areas shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, groundcover and other protective devices which are not on public property. Maintenance shall include necessary repairs, removal of silt deposits and any other required action to insure the intended purpose of the devices. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); (Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.080 Inspections.
     The city engineer, or the building official in applicable cases, shall make an initial inspection of the site after grading and construction stakes have been placed but before grading is commenced. A second inspection shall be made following rough grading. All subsurface drainage pipes or structures shall be inspected prior to backfilling. A final inspection shall be made when all work is completed.

     The city engineer may require that the inspection of cuts or fills be made by a registered civil engineer, specializing in soil mechanics and foundation engineering, and that a report prepared and signed by the engineer be submitted upon completion of the work. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

 

18.20.090 Fees.
     Fees for filing applications and for inspections shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 934 § 1, (1971); Ord. No. 1462, (1992))

Chapter 18.22 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
18.22.010 Findings of fact.
     (a)   The flood hazard areas of the city of Burlingame are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

     (b)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.020 Statement of purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

     (a)   Protect human life and health;

     (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

     (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

     (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

     (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

     (f)    Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

     (g)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

     (h)   Insure that those who occupy the area of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.030 Methods of reducing flood losses.
     In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

     (a)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

     (b)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

     (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

     (d)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

     (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.100 Definitions.
     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

     “A zone.” See “Special flood hazard area.”

     “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

     “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

     “Area of special flood hazard.” See “Special flood hazard area.”

     “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”).

     “Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

     “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

     “Breakaway walls” are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any building to which they might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

     (1)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

     (2)   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of a base flood.

     “Coastal high hazard area” is the area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a flood insurance rate map (FIRM) as zones V1 through V30.

     “Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)” means a comment letter from FEMA that addresses a development that upon construction would affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the base flood elevations, or special flood hazard area.

     “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

     “Flood or flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

     (1)   The overflow of floodwaters;

     (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or

     (3)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

     “Flood boundary and floodway map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

     “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.

     “Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

     “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see “flood”).

     “Floodplain administrator” is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

     “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

     “Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

     “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

     “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

     “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

     “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

     “Letter of map revision (LOMR)” means a letter from FEMA that describes the modification to an effective flood insurance rate map.

     “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.

     “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.

     “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

     “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on flood insurance rate map are referenced.

     “New construction” means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the city.

     “One-hundred-year flood” means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the “base flood,” which will be the term used throughout this chapter.

     “Person” means an individual or his or her agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.

     “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impact may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

     “Riverine” means relating to, performed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

     “Sand dunes” means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

     “Sheet flow area.” See “Area of shallow flooding.”

     “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zones A, AH, A1 through A30 and V1 through V30.

     “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

     “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

     “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either:

     (1)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or

     (2)   If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:

     (3)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

     (4)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.

     “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

     “Violation” means the failure of structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

     “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

     “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1326 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.310 Lands to which this chapter applies.
     This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Burlingame. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.320 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
     The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in “The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Burlingame,” dated March 16, 1981, with an accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs), and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the Public Works Engineering Department, City Hall, 501 Primrose Road, Burlingame, California. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1326 § 2, (1986); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.330 Compliance.
     No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.340 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
     This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.350 Interpretation.
     In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

     (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;

     (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

     (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.360 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
     The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Burlingame, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.410 Establishment of development permit.
     For the purposes of this chapter, “development permit” shall mean a development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 18.22.320. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the building official and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required.

     (a)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all structures;

     (b)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed;

     (c)   All appropriate certifications listed in Section 18.22.433; and

     (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.420 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
     The city engineer is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.430 Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
     Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, those set forth in Sections 18.22.431 through 18.22.435. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.431 Permit review.
     The floodplain administrator shall review all development permits to determine that:

     (a)   The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

     (b)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

     (c)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

     (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the floodway. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

     (e)   All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.432 Use of other base flood data.
     When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 18.22.320, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer this chapter.

     Note: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two (2) methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.433 Information to be obtained and maintained.
     The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed for flood insurance policies:

     (a)   The certification required in Section 18.22.513(a) (floor elevations);

     (b)   The certification required in Section 18.22.513(b) (elevations in areas of shallow flooding);

     (c)   The certification required in Section 18.22.513(c) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

     (d)   The certification required in Section 18.22.513(d)(1) or (2) (wet floodproofing standard);

     (e)   The certified elevation required in Section 18.22.540(b) (subdivision standards);

     (f)    The certification required in Section 18.22.560(1) (floodway encroachments);

     (g)   The information required in Section 18.22.570 (coastal construction standards). (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.434 Alteration of watercourses.
     The floodplain administrator shall:

     (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the department of water resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;

     (b)   Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.435 Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
     The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 18.22.610 et seq. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.510 Standards.
     The following standards are required in all areas of special flood hazards. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.511 Anchoring.
     (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads, including the effect of buoyancy.

     (b)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 18.22.550(a). (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.512 Construction materials and methods.
     (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

     (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize damage.

     (c)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

     (d)   Require within zone AH adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.513 Elevation and floodproofing.
     (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest habitable floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (c) of this section. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest habitable floor including basement shall be determined by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

     (b)   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in zone AH shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (c) of this section. Upon completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     (c)   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection (a) or (b) of this section, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

     (1)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

     (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

     (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     (d)   In all new construction and substantial improvements fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

     (1)   Either a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or

     (2)   Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.

     (e)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 18.22.550. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1326 § 3, (1986); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.520 Standards for storage of materials and equipment.
     (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.

     (b)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.530 Standards for utilities.
     (a)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters;

     (b)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.540 Standards for subdivisions.
     (a)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

     (b)   All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

     (c)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

     (d)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

     (e)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.550 Standards for manufactured homes.
     All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall:

     (a)   Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; and

     (b)   Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.560 Floodways.
     Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 18.22.320 are areas designed as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

     (a)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

     (b)   If subsection (a) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 18.22.510 through 18.22.570. (Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.570 Coastal high hazard area.
     Coastal high hazard areas (V Zones) are located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 18.22.320. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis; therefore the following provisions shall apply. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

18.22.571 Location of structures.
     (a)   All buildings or structures shall be located landward of reach of the mean high tide.

     (b)   The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.572 Construction methods.
     (a)   Elevation. All buildings or structures shall be elevated so that the lowest supporting member (excluding piles and columns) is located no lower than the base flood elevation level, with all space below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided for in subsection (c) of this section.

     (b)   Structural Support.

     (1)   All buildings or structures shall be securely anchored on pilings or columns.

     (2)   Pilings or columns used as structural support shall be designed and anchored so as to withstand all impact forces and buoyancy factors of the base flood.

     (3)   Fill used for structural support will be allowed only with permit from the floodplain administrator.

     (c)   Space Below the Lowest Floor.

     (1)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure started after the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway walls are used as provided in this section.

     (2)   Breakaway walls may be allowed below the base flood elevation provided they are not a part of the structural support of the building and are designed so as to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are to be used.

     (3)   If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation.

     (4)   Prior to construction, plans for any structure that will have breakaway walls must be submitted to the floodplain administrator for approval.

     (d)   The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain the following records:

     (1)   Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with subsections (a) and (b) of this section;

     (2)   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1326 § 4, (1986); Ord. 1351 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.610 Appeals board.
     The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.611 Appeal procedure.
     (a)   The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person may appeal such decision to the city council as provided in Sections 25.16.070 and 25.16.080.

     (b)   In passing upon such appeals, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

     (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

     (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

     (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

     (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

     (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

     (6)   The availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

     (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

     (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

     (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

     (10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

     (11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and bridges. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.612 Variances.
     Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided subdivisions (1) through (11) in Section 18.22.611(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.613 Variance conditions.
     Upon consideration of the factors of Section 18.22.611 and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.614 Variance records.
     The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.620 Conditions for variances.
     (a)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.

     (b)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

     (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

     (d)   Variances shall be issued only upon:

     (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;

     (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

     (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance shall not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or notices. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

 

18.22.621 Notice.
     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. 1211 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1916 § 2, (2015))

Chapter 18.24 CREEK ENCLOSURE PERMITS
18.24.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply

     “Creek” is defined as one of those watercourses so designated on the map attached as Exhibit “A” to the ordinance codified in this chapter and as detailed in the large scale map in the City Engineer’s office titled “1989 Creek Map,” based on said study.

     “Study” means the study entitled Storm Drainage Study, Project #910, prepared for the city of Burlingame by Wilsey and Ham. (Ord. 1412 § 1, (1990))

 

18.24.020 Permit required.
     (a)   No creek shall be enclosed with a pipe or culvert without an enclosure permit. The procedures for the permit shall be those set forth in Chapter 25.16 of this code, except that notice of the application for the permit shall be limited to those property owners adjacent to the creek for a distance of three hundred (300) feet upstream and downstream of the applicant or to the nearest public cross street, whichever is more.

     (b)   Plans submitted for the permit must include at least the following: the creek to scale at least three hundred (300) feet upstream and downstream from the applicant’s property or to the nearest public cross street, whichever is less; the one-hundred-year (100) flow elevation of both banks based on engineering calculations (unless waived by the city engineer); the top of bank; areas of existing natural vegetation including trees and vegetation within the creek; and any structures existing in and over the creek on either side, whether on the applicant’s property or that of others.

     (c)   Criteria for reviewing the permit application shall include, but not be limited to, flow capacity, methods of keeping the structure clear of debris, economical life and ease of repair, horizontal alignment of the pipe or culvert, and length of pipe or culvert. (Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

Chapter 18.28 UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDING HAZARD REDUCTION PROGRAM
18.28.010 Purpose.
     It is found and declared in the event of a strong or moderate local earthquake, loss of life or serious injury may result from damage or collapse of unreinforced masonry buildings in the city. The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety by establishing a set of structural repair standards to be used to strengthen unreinforced masonry buildings and require owners to make their buildings conform to those standards within a reasonable period of time. The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of life loss or injury but will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent earthquake damage to an existing building which complies with these standards. This seismic hazard reduction program is consistent with California Health and Safety Code Sections 19160 through 19168 and Government Code Sections 8875 through 8878 et seq. (Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter the words and phrases set out in this section shall mean as follows.

     “Bearing wall” means any wall supporting a floor or roof where the total superimposed load exceeds one hundred (100) pounds per linear foot, or any unreinforced masonry wall supporting its own weight when over six (6) feet in height.

     “Civil engineer” or “structural engineer” means a licensed civil or structural engineer registered by the state pursuant to the rules and regulations of Title 16. Chapter 5 of the California Administrative Code.

     “Occupant load” means the total maximum number of occupants in the building determined by either 1) Table 33-A of the Uniform Building Code or, 2) the actual maximum number of occupants in the building as certified by the building owner and current tenants.

     “Story” means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.

     “Unreinforced masonry building” means any building containing walls constructed wholly or partially with any of the following materials and containing less than fifty percent of the minimum area of reinforcing steel required by the 1985 Uniform Building Code Section 2407 (h) 4 B:

     1.     Unreinforced brick masonry;

     2.     Unreinforced concrete masonry;

     3.     Hollow clay tile;

     4.     Adobe or unburned clay masonry. (Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.030 Scope of program.
     Applicability. All unreinforced masonry buildings identified by the city, except those used exclusively for residential purposes containing five (5) or less living units. (Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.040 Owner notification.
     The owners of unreinforced masonry buildings determined to be within the scope of this chapter will be notified in writing by the chief building inspector according to the schedule set forth in Section 18.28.050(b). (Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.050 Building categories and implementation schedule.
     (a)   Building Categories. Two (2) categories of unreinforced masonry building are hereby established to define the minimum lateral forces to be used in their strengthening according to formula A-1-1.

     1.     High risk buildings are those which have two (2) or more stories or maximum occupant load of more than one hundred (100) regardless of the number of stories. High risk buildings also include any structure with an unreinforced masonry parapet wall where the remainder of the building does not contain unreinforced masonry walls.

     2.     Medium risk buildings are those one story buildings with a maximum occupant load of one hundred or less.

     (b)   Implementation Schedule. The owners of all buildings within the scope of this chapter must submit plans to obtain a building permit for the structural modifications necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter by January 1, 1995.

     The owners of all buildings within the scope of this ordinance must complete construction of those structural modifications by June 30, 1996.

     Notices providing a copy of the ordinance and stating the schedule for owner action will be sent to each building owner within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990); Ord. 1423 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.060 Extensions.
     Extensions of the time periods set forth in Section 18.28.050(b) may be granted by the city council based upon economic hardship. A request for an extension must be received at least ninety (90) days before the expiration of the time period affected. (Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990); Ord. 1423 § 3, (1990))

 

18.28.070 Structural repair standards.
     The procedures and engineering standards establishing a minimum level of structural strengthening required for all unreinforced masonry buildings within the scope of this chapter are set forth in Section 18.28.080 of this chapter. The Uniform Code for Building Conservation Appendix Chapter One only, published in 1985 by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California, with amendments is hereby adopted as a part of this ordinance and all references in Sections 18.28.080 through 18.28.117 are to that appendix. (Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.080 Section A102 amended—Scope.
     Section A102 is amended to read as follows:

 

        Section A102. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all buildings containing unreinforced masonry bearing walls.

        Exception: This chapter shall not apply to a detached Group R, Division 3 Occupancy nor to a detached Group R, Division 1 Occupancy containing less than five (5) dwelling units used solely for residential purposes.

 

(Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.090 Section A103 amended—Alternate materials.
     Section A103 is amended to read as follows:

 

        Sec. A103. Alternate materials, designs and methods of construction may be approved by the Chief Building Inspector in accordance with this code.

 

(Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.100 Section A105 amended—Historic buildings.
     Section A105 is amended to read as follows:

 

        Sec. A105. (a) General. A historic building may comply with the special provisions set forth in this chapter and the provisions of the State Historical Building Code.

        (b)      Archaic Materials. Allowable stresses for archaic materials not specified in this code shall be based on substantiating research data or engineering judgment with the approval of the Chief Building Inspector.

 

(Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.110 Section A106 amended—Analysis and design.
     (a)   Section A106(a) through (d), (f)1 and (g)3 are amended to read as follows:

 

        Sec. A106. (a) General. Every structure within the scope of this chapter shall be analyzed and constructed to resist minimum total lateral seismic forces assumed to act nonconcurrently in the direction of each of the main axes of the structure in accordance with the following equation:

        V = ZIKCSW  (A1-1)

        The value of KCS need not exceed but shall not be less than .100 for one story buildings with less than 100 occupants; and need not exceed but must not be less than .133 for one story buildings containing 100 or more occupants and buildings over one story above grade. The value of Z and I shall equal 1.0. The value of W shall be as defined in Chapter 23 of the 1985 Uniform Building Code.

        (b)      Lateral Forces on Elements of Structures. Parts or portions of buildings shall be analyzed and designed for lateral loads in accordance with Chapter 23 of the 1985 Uniform Building Code but not less than the value from the following equation:

        Fp = ICpSWp  (A1-2)

        For the provisions of this section, the product of IS shall equal 1.0. The value of Cp shall be in accordance with Table 23-J of the 1985 Uniform Building Code. The value of Wp shall be as defined in Chapter 23 of the 1985 Uniform Building Code.

        Exception: Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not required to be designed as an essential facility may be designed in accordance with Section A107.

        (c)       Regulated Elements of Buildings. The elements of buildings required to be analyzed by this chapter include: 1) Height-to-thickness ratio of masonry walls; 2) Tension bolts in bending; 3) In-plane shear stress; 4) Parapets; 5) Diaphragm stresses and diaphragm chords in floors and roof.

        (d)      Anchorage and Interconnection. Anchorage and interconnection of all parts, portions and elements of the structure shall be analyzed and designed for lateral forces in accordance with the 1985 Uniform Building Code and the Formula (A1-2) of this code. Masonry walls shall be anchored to all floors and roof to resist a minimum force of 200 pounds per linear foot acting normal to the wall at the level of the floor or roof.

        (f)       Required Analysis. 1. General. Except as modified herein, the analysis and design relating to the structural alteration of existing buildings within the scope of this chapter shall be in accordance with the analysis specified in the 1985 Uniform Building Code. In addition the compatibility of the roof diaphragm stiffness with the out-of-plane stability of the unreinforced masonry bearing walls of the story immediately below the roof shall be verified in accordance with the provisions of Section A109.

        Exception: Buildings with rigid concrete or steel and concrete roof diaphragms shall use the h/t values for all other buildings in Table A1-F.

        (g)      3. Unreinforced masonry walls. In addition to the seismic forces required by this chapter, unreinforced masonry walls shall be analyzed as specified in the 1985 Uniform Building Code to withstand all vertical loads as specified in the Building Code. Such walls shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in the Building Code.

        Exception: When calculating shear or diagonal tension stresses due to seismic forces, existing masonry shear walls may be designed to resist 1.0 times the required forces in lieu of the 1.5 factor required by the Building Code.

        No allowable tension stress will be permitted in unreinforced masonry walls. Walls not capable of resisting the required design forces specified in this chapter shall be strengthened or shall be removed and replaced.

        Exceptions: 1. Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not classified as an essential facility may be analyzed in accordance with Section A107.

        2.        Unreinforced masonry walls which carry no design loads other than their own weight may be considered veneer if they are adequately anchored to new supporting elements.

        Substantial changes in wall thickness or stiffness shall be considered in the analysis for out-of-plane and in-plane wall stability, and the wall shall be restrained against out-of-plane instability by anchorage and bracing to the roof or floor diaphragm in accordance with Section A106(d).

        Exception: Variations in wall stiffness caused by nominal openings such as windows and doors need not be considered.

 

(Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.112 Section A107 amended—Materials of construction.
     Section A107(b), (d) and (f) are amended to read as follows:

 

        (b)      Existing Materials. 1. Unreinforced masonry walls. Unreinforced masonry walls analyzed in accordance with this chapter may provide vertical support for roof and floor construction and resistance to lateral loads.

        All units of both bearing and non-bearing walls shall be laid with full shoved mortar joints; all head, bed and wall (collar) joints shall be solidly filled with mortar; and the bonding of adjacent wythes of multi-wythe walls shall be as follows:

        The facing and backing shall be bonded so that not less than 4 percent of the wall surface of each face is composed of headers extending not less than four inches into the backing. The distance between adjacent full-length headers shall not exceed 24 inches either vertically or horizontally. In walls where a single header does not extend through the wall, headers from the opposite sides shall overlap at least four inches, or headers from opposite sides shall be covered with another header course overlapping the header below at least four inches.

        Wythes of walls not bonded as described above shall be considered as veneer. The veneer wythe shall not be included in the effective thickness used to calculate the height-to-thickness ratio and the shear capacity of the wall.

        Tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall may be neglected if the wall does not exceed the height-to-thickness ratio set forth in Table A1-F and the in-plane shear stresses due to seismic loads set forth in Table A1-I. If the wall height-to-thickness ratio exceeds the specified limit, the wall may be supported by vertical bracing members designed to satisfy the requirements of the 1985 Uniform Building Code. The deflection of such bracing members at design loads shall not exceed one-tenth of the wall thickness.

        Exception: The wall may be supported by flexible bracing members designed in accordance with Section A106(b) of this chapter if the deflection at design loads is not less than one-quarter nor more than one-third of the wall thickness at the level under consideration.

        All vertical bracing members shall be attached to floor and roof construction for their design loads independently of required wall anchors. Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not exceed one-half the unsupported height of the wall nor ten feet, whichever is less.

        The wall height may be measured vertically to bracing elements other than a floor or roof. Spacing of bracing elements and wall anchors shall not exceed six feet. Bracing elements shall be detailed to minimize the horizontal displacement of the wall by components of vertical displacements of the floor or roof.

        2.        Veneer. Veneer shall be anchored with approved anchor ties, conforming to the required design capacity specified in Section 3304(c) of the 1985 Uniform Building Code, and placed at a maximum spacing of 24 inches.

        Exception: Existing veneer anchor ties may be acceptable provided the ties are in good condition and conform to the minimum size, maximum spacing and material requirements as indicated below. The veneer anchor ties shall be corrugated galvanized iron strips not less than one inch in width, eight inches in length and one-sixteenth of an inch in thickness and shall be located and laid in every alternate course in the vertical height of the wall at a spacing not to exceed 17 inches on center horizontally. As an alternate, the spacing may be every fourth course vertically at a spacing not to exceed nine inches on center horizontally.

        The existence and condition of existing veneer anchor ties shall be verified as follows:

        1.        An approved testing laboratory shall verify the location and spacing of the ties and shall submit a report to the Chief Building Inspector for approval as a part of the structural analysis.

        2.        The veneer in a selected area shall be removed to expose a representative sample of ties (not less than four) for inspection by the Chief Building Inspector.

        3.        Existing roof, floors, walls, footings, and wood framing. Existing materials, including wood shear walls, may be used as a part of the lateral load resisting system, provided that stresses in these materials do not exceed the values shown in Table No. A1-G.

        (d)      Minimum Acceptable Quality of Existing Unreinforced Masonry Walls. 1. General Provisions. All unreinforced masonry walls utilized to carry vertical loads and seismic forces parallel and perpendicular to the wall plane shall be tested as specified in this subsection. All masonry quality shall equal or exceed the minimum standards established herein or shall be removed and replaced by new materials. The quality of mortar in all masonry walls shall be determined by performing in-place shear tests. The vertical wall joint between wythes (collar joint) shall be inspected at each test location after the in-place shear tests, and an estimate of the percentage of wythe to wythe mortar coverage shall be reported along with the results of the in-place shear tests. Where the exterior face is veneer, the type of veneer, its thickness and its bonding and/or ties to the structural wall masonry shall also be reported.

        Nothing shall prevent the pointing with mortar of all the masonry wall joints before the tests are first made. Prior to any pointing, the mortar joints must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. Mortar for pointing shall be Type S or N except masonry cements shall not be used. All preparation and mortar pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a special inspector.

        At the conclusion of the inspection, the inspector shall submit a written report to the person responsible for the seismic analysis of the building setting forth the results of the work inspected. Such report shall be submitted to the Chief Building Inspector for approval as part of the structural analysis. All testing shall be performed in accordance with the requirements specified in this section by an approved agency. An accurate record of all such tests and their location in the building shall be recorded and these results shall be submitted to the Chief Building Inspector for approval as part of the structural analysis.

        2.        Number and location of tests. The minimum number of tests shall be as follows. At each of both the first and top stories, not less than two per wall line or line of wall elements providing a common line of resistance to lateral forces. At each of all other stories, not less than one per wall element providing a common line of resistance to lateral forces. In any case, not less than one per 1500 square feet of wall surface and a total of eight.

        The shear tests shall be taken at locations representative of the mortar conditions throughout the entire building, taking into account variations in workmanship at different building height levels, variations in weathering of the exterior surfaces, and variations in the condition of the interior surfaces due to deterioration caused by leaks and condensation of water and/or by the deleterious effects of other substances contained within the building.

        Where the higher h/t ratios allowed in footnotes 4 and 5 of Table A1-F are to be utilized, all the in-place shear tests taken at the top story shall be included in the 80 percent of the shear tests used to determine the minimum mortar shear strength. The exact test locations shall be determined at the building site by the person responsible for the seismic analysis of the subject building.

        3.        In-place shear tests. The bed joint of the outer wythe of the masonry wall shall be tested by laterally displacing a single brick relative to the adjacent bricks in the wythe. The head joint opposite the load end of the test brick shall be carefully excavated and removed. The brick adjacent to the loaded end of the test brick shall be carefully removed by sawing or drilling and excavating to provide space for a hydraulic ram and steel loading blocks. Steel blocks the size of the end of the bricks shall be used on each end of the ram and shall not contact the bed joints. The load shall be applied horizontally in the plane of the wythe until either a crack can be seen or a slip occurs. The strength of the mortar shall be calculated by dividing the load at the time of the first crack or movement by the nominal gross area of the sum of the two bed joints.

        (f)       Determination of Allowable Stresses for Design Methods Based on Test Results. 1. Design shear values. Design seismic in-plane shear stresses shall be substantiated by tests performed as specified in Item No. 3 of Subsection (d). The minimum quality mortar in 80 percent of the tests shall not be less than the total of 30 psi when reduced to an equivalent zero axial stress.

        Design stresses shall be related to test results obtained in accordance with Table No. A1-I. Intermediate values between 5 and 10 psi may be interpolated.

 

(Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.113 Section A108 amended—Information required on plans.
     Section A108(b) and (c) are amended to read as follows:

 

        (b)      Construction Details. The following requirements with appropriate construction details shall be made a part of the approved plans:

        1.        All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at the roof and ceiling levels by tension bolts through the wall as specified in Table A1-H, or by an approved equivalent at a maximum anchor spacing of six feet.

        All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at all floors and ceiling with tension bolts through the wall or by existing rod anchors at a maximum anchor spacing of six feet. All existing rod anchors shall be secured to the joists to develop the required forces. Tests conforming to this chapter will be required to verify the adequacy of the embedded ends of existing rod anchors.

        Exception: Walls need not be anchored to ceiling systems that, because of their low mass and or relative location with respect to the floor or roof systems, would not impose significant normal forces on the wall and cause out-of-plane wall failure. Calculations and drawings to verify this exception must be submitted as part of the analysis.

        At the roof and all floor levels, the anchors nearest the building corners shall be combination shear and tension anchors located not more than two feet horizontally from the inside corners of the walls.

        When access to the exterior face of the masonry wall is prevented by proximity of an existing building, wall anchors conforming to Items 5 (a) or (b) in Table No. A1-H may be used.

        Alternative devices to be used in lieu of tension bolts for masonry wall anchorage shall be tested as specified in Section A107(h).

        2.        Diaphragm chord stresses of horizontal diaphragms shall be developed in existing materials or by the addition of new materials.

        3.        Where trusses and beams other than rafters or joists are supported on masonry independent secondary columns shall be installed to support vertical loads.

        4.        Parts and exterior wall appendages not capable of resisting the forces specified in this chapter shall be removed, stabilized, or braced to ensure that the parapets and appendages remain in their original position. The maximum height of an unbraced, unreinforced masonry parapet above the lower of either the level of tension anchors or roof sheathing, shall not exceed one and one-half times the thickness of the parapet wall. If the required parapet height exceeds this maximum height a bracing system designed for the force factors specified in the Table 23-J of the 1985 Uniform Building Code shall support the top of the parapet. Parapet corrective work must be performed in conjunction with the installation of tension roof anchors.

        The minimum height of a parapet above the wall anchor shall be 12 inches.

        Exception: If a reinforced concrete beam is provided at the top of the wall, the minimum height above the wall anchor may be six inches.

        5.        All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall be pointed with Type S or N mortar. Prior to any pointing, the wall surface must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. All preparation and pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a special inspector. At the conclusion of the project, the inspector shall submit a written report to the Chief Building Inspector setting forth the portion of work inspected.

        6.        Repair details for any cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry wall required to resist forces specified in this chapter.

        (c)       Existing Construction. The following existing construction information shall be made part of the approved plans:

        1.        The type and dimensions of existing walls and the size and spacing of floor and roof members.

        2.        The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof.

        3.        The extent and type of any parapet bracing or other structural reinforcement to parts and portions of the building which were previously performed.

        4.        Accurately dimensioned floor plans and masonry wall elevations showing dimensioned opening, piers, wall thickness and heights, veneer locations and existing anchorages.

        5.        The locations of cracks or other damaged portions of unreinforced masonry walls requiring repair.

        6.        The type of interior wall surfaces and ceilings, and if reinstalling or anchoring of existing plaster is necessary.

        7.        The general condition of the mortar joints and if the joints need repointing.

        8.        The location of all in-place shear tests shall be shown on the floor plans and building wall elevations.

 

(Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

 

18.28.114 Section A109 added—Design check.
     Section A109 is added to read as follows:

 

        Design Check for Compatibility of Roof Diaphragm Stiffness to Unreinforced Masonry Wall Out-of-Plane Stability.

        Sec. A109 (a) General. The requirements of this section are in addition to the other analysis requirements of this Chapter. The relative stiffness and strength of a diaphragm governs the amount of amplification of the seismic ground motion by the diaphragm, and therefore, a diaphragm stiffness and strength related check of the out-of-plane stability of unreinforced masonry walls anchored to wood diaphragms shall be made. This section contains a procedure for evaluation of the out-of-plane stability of unreinforced masonry walls anchored to wood diaphragms that are coupled to shear resisting elements.

        (b)      Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to this section.

        Cross Wall. A wood framed wall having a height to length ratio complying with Section 4713(d) or Table 25-I of the 1985 Uniform Building Code and sheathed with any of the materials described in Table A1-J or Table A1-K. The total strength of all cross walls located within any 40 feet length of diaphragm measured in the direction of the diaphragm span shall not be less than 30 percent of the strength of the diaphragm in the direction of consideration.

        Demand Capacity Ratio (DCR). A ratio of the following:

        1.        Demand equals the lateral forces due to 33 percent of the combined weight of the diaphragm and the tributary weight of the wall and other elements anchored to the diaphragm.

        2.        Capacity equals the diaphragm total shear strength in the direction under consideration as determined using the values in Tables No. A1-J or Table A1-K.

        (c)       Notations.

        D = depth of diaphragm, in feet, measured perpendicular to the diaphragm span.

        h/t = height-to-thickness of an unreinforced masonry wall. The height shall be measured between wall anchorage levels and the thickness shall be measured through the wall cross section at the level under consideration.

        L = span of diaphragm between masonry shear walls or steel frames.

 

        Vc = total shear capacity of cross walls in the direction of analysis immediately below the diaphragm level being investigated as determined by using Tables No. A1-J and A1-K.

        vu = maximum shear strength in pounds per foot for a diaphragm sheathed with any of the materials given in Tables No. A1-J or A1-K.

        Wd = total dead load of the diaphragm plus the tributary weight of the walls anchored to the diaphragm, the tributary ceiling and partitions and weight of any other permanent building elements at the diaphragm level under consideration.

        (d)      Design Check Procedure. 1. General. The demand capacity ratio (DCR) for the building shall be calculated using the following equations:

        DCR = 0.33 Wd / 2vu D For building without cross walls or

        DCR = 0.33 Wd / 2vu D + Vc For building with cross walls

        2.        Diaphragm Deflection. The calculated DCR shall be to the left of the curve in Figure No. A1-L. Where the calculated DCR is outside (to the right of) the curve, the diaphragm deflection limits are exceeded and cross walls may be used to reduce the deflection.

        3.        Unreinforced Masonry Wall Out-of-Plane Stability. The DCR shall be calculated discounting any cross wall. If the DCR from this method corresponding to the diaphragm span is to the right of the curve in Figure No. A1-L, the region within the curve at and below the intersection of the diaphragm span with the curve may be used to determine the allowable h/t values per Table No. A1-F.

 

(Ord. 1419 § 1, (1990))

 

18.28.115 Tables deleted and amended.
     Tables No. A1-A, A1-B, A1-C, A1-D and A1-E are deleted and Tables A1-F and A1-H are amended to read as follows:

 


TABLE NO. A1-F

ALLOWABLE VALUE OF HEIGHT-THICKNESS (h/t) RATIO

OF UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS

WITH MINIMUM QUALITY MORTAR 1 2

 

BUILDINGS WITH

COMPLYING CROSS WALLS

ALL OTHER

BUILDINGS

One Story Building Walls

13 — 16 3 4 5

13

First Story of Multi-Story Buildings

16

15

Walls in the Top Story of Multi-Story Buildings

9 — 14 3 4 5

9

All Other Walls

16

13

 

 

 

1 Minimum mortar quality shall be determined by laboratory testing in accordance with this chapter.

2 This table is not applicable to buildings classified as essential facilities. Such building must be analyzed in accordance with Section A106.

3 The minimum mortar shear strengths required in the following footnotes 4 and 5 shall be that shear strength without the effect of axial stress in the wall at the point of the test.

4 The larger height-to-thickness ratio may be used where mortar shear tests in accordance with Section A107(d) establish a minimum mortar shear strength of not less than 100 psi or where the tested mortar shear strength is not less then 60 psi and a visual examination of the vertical wythe-to-wythe wall joint (collar joint) indicates not less than 50 percent mortar coverage.

5 Where a visual examination of the collar joint indicates not less than 50 percent mortar coverage and the minimum mortar shear strength when established in accordance with Section A107(d) is greater than 30 psi but less than 60 psi, the allowable height-to-thickness ratio may be determined by linear interpolation between the larger and smaller ratio values in direct proportion to the mortar shear strength.

 

 

 

TABLES NO. A1-H

ALLOWABLE VALUES OF NEW MATERIALS USED

IN CONJUNCTION WITH EXISTING CONSTRUCTION

 

New Materials or Configuration of Materials1

Allowable Values

1. Horizontal Diaphragms

Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing straight sheathing with ends of plywood sheets bearing on joists or rafters and edges of plywood located within the center 1/3 of individual sheathing boards.

Same as specified in Table 25-J of the 1985 Uniform Building Code for blocked diaphragms.

2. Shear Walls

a. Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing wood studs. (No value shall be given to plywood applied over existing plaster or wood sheathing boards).

Same as values specified in Table No. 25‑K of the 1985 UBC for shear walls.

b. Dry wall or plaster applied directly over existing wood studs.

75 percent of the values specified in Table No. 47-I of the 1985 UBC.

c. Dry wall or plaster applied to plywood sheathing over wood studs.

One-third of the values specified in Table No. 47-I of the 1985 UBC.

3. Shear Bolts

Shear bolts and shear dowels embedded a minimum of 8 inches into unreinforced masonry walls. Bolt centered in a 2-1/2 inch diameter hole with dry-pack or non-shrink grout around the circumference of the bolt.1 3

133 percent of the values for plain masonry specified in Table No. 24-J of the 1985 UBC. No values larger than those given for 3/4 inch diameter bolts shall be used.

4. Tension Bolts

Tension bolts and tension dowels extending entirely through URM walls secured with bearing plates on far side of wall with at least 30 square inches of area.2 3 4

1200 pounds per bolt.

5. Combination Shear and Tension Wall Anchors

 

(a) Bolts extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 2-1/2 inch round plate under the head. Install as specified for shear bolts. Spaced not closer than 12 inches on centers. 1 2 3

600 lbs. per bolt for tension4. See Item 3 (Shear Bolts) for shear values.

(b) Bolts or dowels extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 2-1/2 inch round plate under the head and drill at an angle of 22-1/2 degrees to the horizontal. Install as specified for shear bolts. 1 2 3

1200 lbs. per bolt or dowel for tension4. See Item 3 for shear values.

(c) Through bolt with bearing plate for tension per Item 4. Combined with minimum 8 inch grouted section for shear per Item 3.

See Item 4 (Tension Bolts) for tension values4. See Item 3 for shear values.

6. Infilled Walls

 Reinforced masonry infilled openings in existing un- reinforced masonry walls with keys or dowels to match reinforcing.

Same as values specified for unreinforced masonry walls in this chapter.

7. Reinforced Masonry

Masonry piers and walls re- inforced as specified in Chapter 24 of the 1985 Uniform Building Code.

Same as values specified in Table No. 24‑B of the Uniform Building Code. 1985

8. Reinforced Concrete

Concrete footings, walls and piers reinforced as specified in Chapter 26 and designed for tributary loads.

Same as values specified in Chapter 26 of the 1985 Uniform Building Code

9. Existing Foundation Loads

Foundation loads for structures exhibiting no evidence of settlement.

Calculated existing foundation loads due to maximum dead load plus live load may be increased by 25 percent and may be increased 50 percent for dead load plus seismic loads required by this chapter.

1 Bolts and dowels to be tested as specified in Section A107.

2 Bolts and dowels to be 1/2-inch diameter minimum.

3 Drilling for bolts and dowels shall be done with an electric rotary drill. Impact tools shall not be used for drilling holes or tightening anchor and shear bolt nuts.

4 Allowable bolt and dowel values specified are for installations in minimum three wythe wall. For installations in two wythe walls use 50 percent of the value specified, except that no value shall be given to tension bolts that do not extend entirely through the wall and are secured with bearing plates on the far side.

 

(Ord. 1419 § 1, August 20, 1990).

 

18.28.116 Tables added.
     Table Nos. A1-J and A1-K and Figure A1-L are added to read as follows:

 

TABLE NO. A1-J

ALLOWABLE VALUES FOR EXISTING MATERIALS TO BE USED

ONLY IN THE COMPUTATION OF THE DEMAND CAPACITY RATIO DESIGN CHECK

Existing Materials or

Configuration of Materials 1

Allowable Values

 

 

1. Horizontal Diaphragms

 

a. Roofs with straight sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing.

100 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

 

 

b. Roofs with diagonal sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing.

250 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

 

 

2. Cross Walls 2

Per Side:

a. Plaster on wood or metal lath.

200 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

b. Plaster on gypsum lath.

175 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

c. Gypsum wall board unblocked edges.

75 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

d. Gypsum wall board blocked edges.

125 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

 

 

1 Materials must be sound and in good condition.

2 For cross walls, values of all materials may be combined, except the total combined value shall not exceed 300 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

 

 

TABLE NO. A1-K

ALLOWABLE VALUES FOR NEW MATERIALS USED IN CONJUNCTION WITH EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS TO BE USED ONLY IN THE COMPUTATION OF THE DEMAND
CAPACITY RATIO DESIGN CHECK

New Materials or Configuration of New and Existing Materials1

Allowable Values

1. Horizontal Diaphragms

 

a. Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing straight sheathing with ends of plywood sheets bearing on rafters and edges of plywood located on the center of individual sheathing boards.

225 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

2. Cross Walls 2

 

a. Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing wood studs. No value shall be given to plywood applied over existing plaster or wood sheathing.

1.33 times the values specified in Table 25-K of the 1985 UBC.

b. Drywall or plaster applied directly over existing wood studs.

100 percent of the values specified in Table 47-I of the 1985 UBC.

1 Materials must be sound and in good condition.

2 For cross walls values of all materials may be combined, except the total combined shear value shall not exceed 300 lbs. per foot for seismic shear.

 

 

 

FIGURE A1-L

     1.     Region of demand/capacity ratios where cross walls may be used to increase H/T ratios.

     2.     Region of demand/capacity ratios where H/T ratios of “with cross walls” may be used whether or not they are present.

     3.     Region of demand/capacity ratios where H/T ratios of “all other buildings” must be used even if cross walls are present.

     Demand/capacity ratio = 0.33 Wd / 2 vuD or 0.33 Wd / 2 vuD + Vc.

(Ord. 1419 § 1, August 20, 1990).

 

18.28.117 Remedies.
     It is unlawful for the owner of a building identified as being within the scope of this ordinance to fail to submit plans and obtain a permit for correction of structural deficiencies discovered, or fail to complete the necessary structural corrections within the time period specified in Section 18.28.050(b). The city may invoke all remedies available at law, including but not limited to the following.

     (a)   The city may revoke the building’s certificate of occupancy and cause it to be vacated until such requirements are met.

     (b)   The city may seek injunctive relief on behalf of the public to enjoin a building owner’s violation of this ordinance. (Ord. 1419 § 1, August 20, 1990).

Chapter 18.30 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
18.30.010 Adoption of 2019 California Green Building Standards Code.
     The rules, regulations and standards printed in one volume and published by the International Code Council (ICC), under the title “2019 California Green Building Standards Code” adopted as the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code,” including Appendix Chapter A4 and the state of California amendments thereto, is adopted as and for the rules, regulations and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Appendix Chapter A4 of the Green Building Standards Code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the code. (Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010); Ord. 1933 § 10, (2016); Ord. 1969 § 14, (2019))

 

18.30.015 Section 101.2 amended—Purpose.
     Section 101.2 is amended to read as follows:

 

101.2 Purpose. The purpose of the Burlingame Green Building Ordinance is to enhance public health and welfare by encouraging green building measures in the design, construction, operation and maintenance of buildings. The green building practices referenced in this ordinance are intended to achieve the following goals:

1.    To encourage conservation of natural resources;

2.    To reduce waste in landfills generated by construction projects;

3.    To increase energy efficiency and lower energy usage;

4.    To reduce the operating and maintenance costs for buildings;

5.    To promote a healthier indoor environment; and

6.    To promote use of recycled material.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

 

18.30.020 Section 202 amended—Definitions.
     Section 202 is amended to include the following:

 

202 Definitions.

1.    Build It Green: the non-profit organization that publishes the New Home Construction Green Building Guidelines, the Multi-Family Green Guidelines (Parts 1 & 2), Home Remodeling Green Building Guidelines, the GreenPoint Rated checklists, and any successor entity that assumes responsibility for the programs and operations of Build It Green.

2.    Chief Building Official: means the Chief Building Official or his or her designee.

3.    Green building: a whole systems approach to the design, construction, location and operation of buildings and structures that helps to mitigate the enviromnental, economic, and social impacts of construction, demolition, and renovation. Green building practices recognize the relationship between the natural and built environment, seek to minimize the use of energy, water, and other natural resources, and promote a healthy, productive indoor environment.

4.    GreenPoints: credits assigned under the applicable GreenPoint Checklist for a residential project.

5.    GreenPoint Rated: a residential green building rating system developed by Build It Green.

6.    Green Point Rated Verification: verification of compliance by a certified GreenPoint Rater by Build It Green.

7.    GreenPoint Rater: a person certified by Build It Green.

8.    LEED®: the “Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design” green building rating system developed by the U.S. Green Building Council.

9.    LEED®/USGBC Verification: verification to meet the standards of the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) and resulting in LEED® certification of the project by the USGBC. Minimum level: Certified.

10.  Mixed use: the construction of a building or buildings that include both residential and non-residential uses.

11.  Non-residential project: the construction of retail, office, industrial, warehouse, services, hotels, motels, or similar buildings.

12.  Qualified green building professional: a person trained through the USGBC as a LEED® AP (accredited professional), or through Build It Green as a GreenPoint Rater, or other qualifications when acceptable to the Building Official. A certified green building professional, architect, engineer, designer, builder, or building inspector may be considered a qualified green building professional when determined appropriate by the Chief Building Official.

13.  Remodel: any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than repair or addition.

14.  Repair: the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure for the purpose of maintenance.

15.  Residential project: the construction of R2, R3, R3.1, and R4 buildings, except hotels and motels.

16.  Residential reconstruction: a residential-type project where the building at any time is uninhabitable, including removal of any or all utilities (water, electrical, natural gas, or sewer); or the project provides no permanent kitchen or bathroom facilities; or the project provides no shelter or ability to maintain heat as defined by code; or when over 50% of the foundation is replaced or reinforced other than the repair of a foundation failure; or when over 50% of the framing above the foundation is removed or replaced. Final determination whether a project meets the definition of residential reconstruction shall be made by the Chief Building Official.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

 

18.30.030 Section 4.408.2 amended—Construction Demolition and Recycling Plan.
     Section 4.408.2 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

 

4.408.2 Construction Demolition and Recycling Plan. A Construction Demolition and Recycling Plan must be submitted for any project that has a construction value of $50,000 or more. The Construction Demolition and Recycling Plan must comply with the City of Burlingame Construction and Demolition Recycling Ordinance #1704 as set forth in Chapter 8.17.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

 

18.30.040 Section A4.203.1 amended—Tier 1 Energy Efficiency (Residential-Performance Approach) Adopted as Mandatory Measure.
     Section A4.203.1 is amended as follows:

 

A4.203.1 Tier 1 Energy Efficiency (Residential-Performance Approach) Adopted as Mandatory Measure. The following residential projects must exceed Title 24 Energy Efficiency Standards by 15% as required under this ordinance.

       All residential additions, remodels, alterations, or repairs in which the cost of construction has a total value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more.

        A permit applicant is required to submit a completed checklist of the proposed compliance measures for the project at the initial submittal to the Planning Division for projects requiring Planning Commission approval. If Planning Commission approval is not required prior to Building Code plan check, then an applicant must submit a completed checklist of the proposed compliance measures directly to the Building Division at the time of the initial Building Code plan check submittal.     A GreenPoint Rated checklist, or equivalent, with a minimum of fifty (50) points shall be accepted as one method of meeting compliance with this ordinance. Applicants are encouraged, but not required, to meet with City staff prior to any application submittal to review the green building program and details to achieve compliance with this ordinance.

        The means by which compliance measures are achieved shall be by Build It Green “GreenPoints,” LEED®, Energy Efficiency Standards, other recognized point systems, or equivalent approved methods. LEED® projects must verify that they exceed the 2008 Energy Efficiency Standards by 15% (Title 24, Part 6). Compliance measures shall be approved by the Chief Building Official prior to issuance of a building permit. Projects must show verification of energy savings which exceed the 2008 Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, Part 6) of the California Building Code by 15%.

        Projects using the performance approach may use an Alternative Calculation Method (ACM) approved by the California Energy Commission to show verification of the required energy savings of 15% by comparison of the proposed building to the Title 24 standard or “budget” building.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

 

18.30.045 Section A4.204 amended—Tier 1 Energy Efficiency (Residential-Prescriptive Approach) Adopted as Mandatory Measure.
     Section A4.204 is amended by adding the following:

 

A4.204 Tier 1 Energy Efficiency (Residential-Prescriptive Approach) Adopted as Mandatory Measure. The following residential projects must exceed Title 24 Energy Efficiency Standards by 15% as required under this ordinance.

       All residential additions, remodels, alterations, or repairs in which the cost of construction has a total value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more.

        A permit applicant is required to submit a completed checklist of the proposed compliance measures for the project at the initial submittal to the Planning Division for projects requiring Planning Commission approval. If Planning Commission approval is not required prior to Building Code plan check, then an applicant must submit a completed checklist of the proposed compliance measures directly to the Building Division at the time of the initial Building Code plan check. A GreenPoint Rated checklist, or equivalent, with a minimum of fifty (50) points shall be accepted as one method of meeting compliance with this ordinance. Applicants are encouraged, but not required, to meet with City staff prior to any application submittal to review the green building program and details to achieve compliance with this ordinance.

        The means by which compliance measures are achieved shall be by Build It Green “GreenPoints,” LEED®, Energy Efficiency Standards, other recognized point systems, or equivalent approved methods. LEED® projects must verify that they exceed the 2008 Energy Efficiency Standards by 15% (Title 24, Part 6). Compliance measures shall be approved by the Chief Building Official prior to issuance of a building permit. Projects must show verification of energy savings which exceed the 2008 Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, Part 6) of the California Building Code by 15%.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

 

18.30.050 Section A5.203.1.1 amended—Tier 1 Energy Efficiency (Non-Residential) Adopted as Mandatory Measure.
     Section A5.203.1.1 is amended as follows:

 

A5.203.1.1 Tier 1 Energy Efficiency (Non-Residential) Adopted as Mandatory Measure. The following non-residential projects must exceed Title 24 Energy Efficiency Standards by 15% as required under this ordinance:

1)    All new non-residential buildings 10,000 square feet or more in gross floor area

2)    All non-residential additions 10,000 square feet or more in gross floor area

        A permit applicant is required to submit completed documentation, prepared by a qualified green building professional, of the proposed compliance measures for the project at the initial submittal to the Planning Division for projects requiring Planning Commission approval. If Planning Commission approval is not required prior to Building Code plan check, then an applicant must submit completed documentation, prepared by a qualified green building professional, of the proposed compliance measures directly to the Building Division at the time of the initial Building Code plan check. Applicants are encouraged, but not required, to meet with City staff prior to any application submittal to review the green building program and details to achieve compliance with this ordinance.

        Verification of compliance with Section A5.203.1.1 Tier 1 (15% above Title 24) or LEED® Silver shall be accepted as the methods of meeting compliance with this ordinance. Compliance measures shall be approved by the Chief Building Official prior to issuance of a building permit. Projects must show verification of energy savings which exceed the current 2008 Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, Part 6) of the California Building Code by 15%.

        Projects using the performance approach may use an Alternative Calculation Method (ACM) approved by the California Energy Commission to show verification of the required energy savings of 15% by comparison of the proposed building to the Title 24 standard or “budget” building.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

 

18.30.060 Section 304.1.2 added—Undue Hardship.
     Section 304.1.2 added to read as follows:

 

304.1.2 Undue Hardship. If circumstances, beyond the control of the applicant, exist which make strict compliance with this ordinance an undue hardship, then the applicant may request an exemption as set forth below. In applying for an exemption, the burden is on the applicant to show undue hardship and to show continued compliance with 2008 California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, Part 6) of the California Building Code.

        Application. If an applicant for a covered project believes such circumstances exist, then the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time of the planning application or building permit application submittal. The applicant shall indicate the maximum threshold of compliance that they calculate is feasible and state the circumstances that would create an undue hardship to fully comply with this chapter. For the purposes of this section, an undue hardship exists if:

1)    There is a lack of commercially available green building materials and technologies, or;

2)    The green building compliance requirements do not include enough green building measures that are compatible with the scope and cost of the covered project.

        Granting of Exemption. If the Chief Building Official determines that it is an undue hardship for the applicant to fully meet the requirements of this chapter based upon the information provided, the Chief Building Official shall determine the maximum feasible threshold of compliance reasonably achievable for the project. If a finding of undue hardship is determined, the decision of the Chief Building Official shall be provided to the applicant in writing. If an exemption is granted, the applicant shall be required to comply with this chapter in all other aspects and shall be required to attain, in accordance with this chapter, the threshold of compliance determined to be achievable by the Chief Building Official.

        Denial of Exemption. If the Chief Building Official determines compliance would not constitute an undue hardship, the request shall be denied and the Chief Building Official shall notify the applicant in writing. All decisions of the Chief Building Official under this section shall be final.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

 

18.30.070 Section 102.3.1 added—Final Approval.
     Section 102.3.1 is added to read as follows:

 

102.3.1 Final Approval. Prior to final building inspection and occupancy for projects included under this ordinance, and when required by the Chief Building Official, a qualified green building professional shall provide evidence of adequate green building compliance or documentation to the Chief Building Official to satisfy the requirements of compliance for residential and/or non-residential projects covered under this ordinance. Evidence of green building compliance shall include, but not be limited to, verification or certification by Build It Green GreenPoint Rater or LEED® specialist, or in-progress site inspections and final sign-off by a City of Burlingame building inspector or other designated City employee. Compliance shall not be deemed complete until formal certification has been granted and submitted to the Chief Building Official. The Chief Building Official shall make the final determination whether a project meets green building requirements of this ordinance.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

 

18.30.080 Subsection 101.12 added—Appeals.
     Subsection 101.12 is added to read as follows:

 

101.12 Appeals. An appeal of a denial of or a refusal to issue a permit or from any other decision of the building official may be taken as set forth in Section 18.07.040.

(Ord. 1857 § 5, (2010))

Title 19 (RESERVED)

Title 20 (RESERVED)

Title 21 HISTORIC RESOURCE PRESERVATION
Chapter 21.04 HISTORIC RESOURCE PRESERVATION

Chapter 21.04 HISTORIC RESOURCE PRESERVATION
21.04.010 Historic resources—Purpose.
     A key defining element of Downtown Burlingame is the variety and character of its buildings. They include a range of periods and styles, providing a setting that is unique among area downtown districts. The notion that older buildings or districts can have meaning for cities has been proven in cohesive historic neighborhoods, in renewed commercial districts and in the conservation of landmark structures. The renovation and adaptive reuse of these historic buildings is often a benefit to the community as a whole and the owners of surrounding properties.

     Authority for local governments to establish local historic preservation programs is granted in California Government Code Section 37361(b). The purpose of this title is to implement the policies contained in Chapter 6.0-Historic Preservation of the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan (adopted October 4, 2010) through a voluntary program that provides property owners with fiscal benefits or zoning and code incentives to preserve historic properties in the Downtown area. (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014))

 

21.04.020 Definitions.
     (a)   “Adaptive reuse” means repurposing a designated historic resource for different uses or functions than those for which it was originally designed while retaining the original historic features of the resource.

     (b)   “Alteration” means any change or modification, through public or private action, to the character-defining or significant exterior physical features of properties affected by this title. Such changes may be changes to or modification of structure, architectural details, or visual characteristics, grading, surface paving, the addition of new structures, and the placement or removal of any significant objects such as signs, plaques, light fixtures, street furniture, walls, fences, steps, plantings, and landscape accessories affecting the significant visual and/or historical qualities of the property.

     (c)   “Demolition” means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole an historic resource.

     (d)   “Designated historic resource” means a parcel or part thereof on which an historic resource is situated and any abutting parcel or part thereof constituting part of the premises on which the historic resource is situated, and which has been designated an historic resource in the Burlingame Historic Register, California Register of Historic Places and/or National Register of Historic Places.

     (e)   “Historic resource” means improvements, buildings, structures, signs, or other objects of scientific, aesthetic, educational, cultural, architectural, or historical significance to the owner, citizens of the city and the state of California, the Bay Area region, or the nation which may be eligible for local designation for historic preservation by the city pursuant to the provisions of this title. An historic resource is either included in the Register or may be added in accordance with Section 21.04.080.

     (f)    “Improvement” means any building, structure, fence, gate, landscaping, tree, wall, parking facility, work of art, or other object constituting a physical feature of real property, or any part of such feature.

     (g)   “Inventory” refers to the October 6, 2008 Inventory of Historic Resources – Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan which identifies resources in the city which may be considered historical. Owners of property which were included in the Inventory are eligible to apply to be included on the Burlingame Historic Register.

     (h)   “Ordinary maintenance and repair” means any work, for which a building permit is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration of or damage to a structure or any part thereof and to restore the same to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration or damage.

     (i)    “Preservation” means the identification, study, protection, restoration, or acquisition of historic resources.

     (j)    “Register” refers to the Burlingame Historic Register. Inclusion on the Register results from submittal of an application to the community development department by the property owner, with exception of the two structures and one tree grove in the city which are listed on the California Register of Historic Places and/or National Register of Historic Places, as referenced in Section 21.40.040 of this title.

     (k)   “Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation” means the standards promulgated by the National Park Service that provide guidance for the preservation, rehabilitation, restoration and reconstruction of historic properties.

     (l)    “Significant feature” means the natural or man-made elements embodying style or type of historic resource, design, or general arrangement and components of an improvement, including, but not limited to, the kind, color, and texture of the building materials, and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement. (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014); Ord. 1937 § 2, (2017))

 

21.04.030 Applicability.
     The city of Burlingame’s Historic Resource Preservation Program shall apply only to the geographic area covered by the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan, as shown on the following map:

 

 



(Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014))

 

 

21.04.040 City of Burlingame Historic Architectural Resources Inventory.
     The October 6, 2008 Inventory of Historic Resources-Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan (Inventory) identifies resources in the city which may be considered historical for purposes of this title. The Inventory was developed based on the National Register of Historic Places Guidelines for determining historical resources. The criteria in subsection (j) and at least two (2) of the other criteria were utilized to determine the significance of a property. The criteria utilized in developing the Inventory are detailed below:

     (a)   Buildings, structures, or places that are important key focal or pivotal points in the visual quality or character of an area, neighborhood, or survey district.

     (b)   Structures that help retain the characteristics of the town that was fifty (50) years ago.

     (c)   Structures that contribute to the unique urban quality of a downtown.

     (d)   Structures contributing to the architectural continuity of the street.

     (e)   Structures that are identified with a person or person who significantly contributed to the culture and/or development of the city, state, or nation.

     (f)    Structures that represent an architectural type or period and/or represent the design work of known architects, draftsmen, or builders whose efforts have significantly influenced the heritage of the city, state, or nation.

     (g)   Structures that illustrate the development of California locally and regionally.

     (h)   Buildings retaining the original integrity of and/or illustrating a given period.

     (i)    Structures unique in design or detail, such as, but not limited to, materials, windows, landscaping, plaster finishes, and architectural innovation.

     (j)    Structures that are at least fifty (50) years old or properties that have achieved significance within the past fifty (50) years if they are of exceptional importance.

     The inventory identified two (2) properties that are already included on the California Register of Historic Places; the Burlingame Railroad Station located at 290 California Drive and the Severn Lodge Dairy wallscape located at 220 California Drive. Additionally, the Burlingame Railroad Station and the Howard-Ralston Eucalyptus Tree Rows flanking El Camino Real as it traverses the city, appear on the National Register of Historic Places.

     Resources are not subject to any provisions of this title as result of being included in the Inventory. The intent of the Inventory is only to identify resources which are eligible for inclusion in the city’s Register. Resources are included in the Register only upon request of the property owner.

     Properties identified in the Inventory shall not be prejudiced in any form as result of being included in the Inventory. (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014))

 

21.04.050 City of Burlingame Historic Register.
     (a)   A structure or resource becomes locally designated and included in the Burlingame Historic Resources Register only as result of the property owner submitting a Historical Preservation Application to the community development department and having it approved by the planning commission. Procedures for applying for designation are defined in Section 21.04.080(a) of this chapter.

     (b)   Any properties that are presently included on the California Register of Historic Places and/or the National Register of Historic Places shall automatically be included on the city of Burlingame’s local register.

     (c)   Requests to delete a designated historic resource from the Register shall be submitted in writing to the community development director and shall be processed as provided in Section 21.04.080(b). The community development director shall report the removal of resources from the Register to the planning commission and to the Burlingame city council.

     (d)   The community development director shall periodically propose and process for deletion from the Burlingame Register those designated historic resources which have been lawfully removed, demolished or disturbed to such an extent that, in the community development director’s opinion, they no longer qualify for placement on the Register.

     (e)   The Register shall be maintained by the community development director or designee.

     (f)    Owners who place their historical resource(s) on the Register are eligible for incentives detailed in Section 21.04.120. (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014))

 

21.04.060 City of Burlingame historic preservation commission.
     (a)   The members of the city of Burlingame planning commission shall act as the historic preservation commission, hereinafter referred to as the “commission.”

     (b)   A quorum of the commission shall be defined as four (4) voting members. A majority of the voting members, exclusive of absences and recusals, on any item shall be required to carry a motion.

     (c)   Powers and Duties. The commission shall have the following powers and duties:

     (1)   Adopt procedural rules for the conduct of its business in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     (2)   Recommend in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 21.04.040 the designation of historic resources including historic districts, landmark sites, and landmarks within the city including all information required for each designation.

     (3)   Maintain a local register of historic resources consistent with the National Register of Historic Places criteria including historic districts, landmark sites, and landmarks within the city including all information required for each designation.

     (4)   Adopt prescriptive standards to be used by the commission in reviewing applications for permits to construct, change, alter, modify, remodel, remove, or significantly affect any historic resource.

     (5)   Make recommendations to the city council on the use of various federal, state, local, or private funding sources and mechanisms, such as the Mills Act and State Historic Building Code, available to promote historic resource preservation in the city.

     (6)   Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, or approve with conditions, applications for permits pursuant to Section 21.04.100 (Exterior alteration of designated historic resources).

     (7)   Review all applications for permits, environmental assessments, environmental impact reports, environmental impact statements, and other similar documents, as set forth in this title, pertaining to designated and potential historic resources. The community development department shall forward such documents to the commission for review as appropriate.

     (8)   Review and comment on actions and environmental documentation associated with city-sponsored actions, programs, capital improvements, or activities as they relate to designated and potential historic resources.

     (9)   Cooperate with local, county, state, and federal governments in the pursuit of the objectives of historic resource preservation.

     (10) Provide opportunity for direct public participation in historic resource preservation responsibilities. Commission meetings shall be open to the public with published agenda and minutes in accordance with California law.

     (11) Confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks or property or structures within historic districts by means of certificates, plaques, or markers, and from time to time issue commendations to owners of historic resources who have rehabilitated their property in an exemplary manner.

     (12) Undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the implementation of its powers or duties to fulfill the objectives of historic resource preservation as delineated in this chapter. (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014))

 

21.04.080 Historic resource designation procedures.
     (a)   Historic Resource Designation Procedures.

     (1)   Property owners of resources identified in the October 6, 2008 Inventory of Historic Resources-Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan may request placement on the city of Burlingame Historic Resources Register in the following manner:

     (A)  Owner(s) of resources included in the city’s Inventory may request inclusion in the Register by submitting a Historical Resource Application, along with an historic resource assessment for the property prepared by a qualified architectural historian, to the community development department.

     (B)   Structures which were identified in the Inventory as being potentially eligible for the National Register of Historic Places are, upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, considered locally significant and may be included in the city’s Register when included on the National Register of Historic Places, at the request of the property owner.

     (C)   Historic Resource Applications shall be made to the community development director or designee, who shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of a completed application, prepare and make recommendations for consideration by the historic preservation commission. The application shall be considered at the next commission meeting following receipt of the director’s recommendations for which appropriate notice may be given, or at such later meeting as requested or agreed by the applicant and the director. No fees are required to process the application.

     (D)  The commission shall determine at a regular public meeting based on the documentation provided as to whether the nomination application is appropriate for and shall determine whether to approve the application in whole or in part. Failure to pass a motion approving the application in whole or in part shall constitute a denial of the application.

     (E)   The city council may also initiate such proceedings on their own motion for resources on public property.

     (2)   Owners of property not identified in the Inventory, upon demonstrating achievement of criteria in subsection (j) and two (2) other criteria listed in Section 21.04.040, may submit a Historical Resource Application requesting inclusion in the Register.

     (b)   Deletion from Burlingame Historic Resources Register. The procedure for deletion of a designated historic resource from the Burlingame Register shall be as follows:

     (1)   The owner(s) of a designated historic resource may request deletion of the listed resource from the Burlingame Register.

     (2)   Requests to delete a designated historic resource from the Register shall be submitted in writing to the community development director who shall remove the property from the Register, unless the request to remove the property from the Register must be referred to the commission under subsection (b)(4). The community development director shall report the removal of resources from the Register to the commission, as deemed necessary by the director.

     (3)   The community development director shall periodically propose and process for deletion from the Burlingame Register those designated historic resources which have been lawfully removed, demolished or disturbed to such an extent that, in the community development director’s opinion, they no longer qualify for placement on the Register.

     (4)   Requests to delete a designated historic resource that has benefited from any of the incentives identified in Section 21.04.120 shall be forwarded to the commission for review and action, and may be subject to penalties deemed appropriate by the commission based on the significance of the resource at the time of the proposed deletion. The commission shall have the discretion to grant, grant with conditions, or deny the request for removal for such properties. (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014))

 

21.04.100 Exterior alteration of designated historic resources.
     (a)   Review Process. All applications for a building permit for exterior alteration to any designated historic resource shall be reviewed as follows:

     (1)   The community development director shall review and approve minor exterior alterations that do not materially alter the historic, character-defining elements of the structure. Minor exterior alterations are those that are not subject to discretionary review under Title 25 of the Burlingame Municipal Code (Zoning Ordinance).

     (2)   The commission shall review and determine whether to approve applications involving modifications to any designated historic resource that require discretionary review under Title 25 of the Burlingame Municipal Code (Zoning Ordinance).

     (3)   Application Process. Requests to conduct exterior alterations to a structure included on the Register shall be subject to the appropriate entitlement application required under Title 25 of the Burlingame Municipal Code (Zoning Ordinance).

     (4)   Standards of Review. In evaluating applications, the review body shall consider the project design’s consistency with the Secretary of Interior Standards for Rehabilitation including, but not limited to: architectural style, design, arrangement, texture, materials and color, and any other pertinent factors. The prime concern should be the exterior appearance of the building site. The proposed alterations should not adversely affect the historic, character-defining features or the aesthetic value of the building and its site.

     (5)   Appeals. Any action by the director may be appealed to the commission. Any action by the commission may be appealed by any interested party to the city council. Appeal procedures shall follow those detailed in Title 25 of the Burlingame Municipal Code (Zoning Ordinance). (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014))

 

21.04.120 Preservation incentives.
     (a)   The commission is authorized to develop and implement preservation incentive programs that are consistent with this chapter. Incentives shall be made available for properties listed on the Register that undergo maintenance or alteration consistent with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation.

     (1)   State Historic Building Code. The building official is authorized to use and shall use the California State Historic Building Code (SHBC) for projects involving designated historic resources. The SHBC provides alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of structures designated as historic resources. The SHBC shall be used for any designated historic resource in the city’s building permit procedure.

     (2)   Fee Reduction. Any permit fees for minor or major exterior modifications to historic resources done in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation shall be reduced by twenty-five (25) percent provided that the work is consistent with the historic criteria under which the property was designated an historic resource.

     (3)   Development Standard Flexibility.

     (A)  Parking Standards.

     (i)    Additional floor area may be added to existing single-family residences that are nonconforming due to substandard parking without providing parking according to current standards, provided that the aggregate of all additional floor area constructed following the date of designation of the structure as a historic resource does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area existing as of the date of designation as a resource. For multiple-family developed properties, adding units in accordance with existing zoning standards shall not require the property owner to bring existing nonconforming parking into compliance with current parking requirements, though code-required parking shall be provided for any new units created.

     (ii)   Designated historic commercial structures may add up to an aggregate of fifteen (15) percent of the existing floor area as of the date of designation of the property as a historic resource, not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet, without providing additional parking and without bringing any existing nonconformity into compliance with the current zoning regulations, subject to review and approval by the commission. The addition must be removed or otherwise approved under governing procedures if the historic building is demolished.

     (B)   Historic Variances.

     (i)    Owners of designated properties may apply for variances from development standards applicable to the property in instances where the deviation from the standard is warranted in order to preserve the historic character of the property. The property’s status as a designated historic resource may be used as a basis for determining whether the property owner is denied privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and within the same zoning district. The procedure for requesting approval of an historic variance shall be the same as that required for other forms of variances, as specified in Title 25 of the Burlingame Municipal Code (Zoning Ordinance).

     (4)   Adaptive Reuse. Owners of designated properties may apply for a conditional use permit for any use that is not ordinarily permitted, or conditionally permitted, within the zoning district in which the designated resource is situated, pursuant to the purpose, findings and conditions expressed in Chapter 25.52 Conditional Use Permits of Title 25 of the Burlingame Municipal Code (Zoning Ordinance), and the following additional findings:

     (A)  Use of the property for a purpose other than that for which it was originally designed, and in a manner that would not normally be permitted within the zoning district in which the resource is situated, is necessary in order to enhance the economic viability of retaining the resource and its notable characteristics in a manner that ensures the continued maintenance of the resource; and

     (B)   Any alterations to the resource that are necessary to accommodate the adaptive re-use of the resource shall be designed and completed in a manner consistent with the Secretary of Interior Standards for Rehabilitation, and shall be subject to any discretionary approvals required pursuant to Title 25 of the Burlingame Municipal Code (Zoning Ordinance).

     (5)   Mills Act Contracts.

     (A)  Mills Act contracts granting property tax relief shall be made available by the city of Burlingame only to owners of properties listed in the Burlingame Historic Resources Register, as well as properties located within the city of Burlingame that are listed in the National Register of Historic Places and/or the California Register of Historical Places. Properties that have been previously listed on the above-mentioned register(s), but that have been removed from the register(s) and are no longer listed, shall not be eligible for a Mills Act contract with the city.

     (B)   Mills Act contracts shall be made available pursuant to California law. The community development department shall make available appropriate Mills Act application materials. The Mills Act application may be processed concurrently with the historic resource application.

     (C)   Mills Act contract applications shall be made to the community development director or designee, who shall within thirty (30) days of receipt of a completed application, prepare and make recommendations on the contents of the contract for consideration by the city council. A fee for the application will be required consistent the city’s adopted fee schedule, to cover all or portions of the costs of the preparation of the contract or an amount set by city council resolution may be charged.

     (D)  The city council shall, in public hearing, resolve to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed contract. Failure to pass a motion approving the application shall be deemed a denial. Should the city council fail to act on the proposed contract within one year of its receipt of the proposal, the proposal shall be deemed denied.

     (E)   A Mills Act contract application that has failed to be approved by the city council cannot be resubmitted for one year from the date of city council action, or where the council fails to take action, within one year from the date that the application is deemed denied pursuant to this subsection (4).

     (6)   Preservation Easements. Preservation easements on the façades of buildings designated as an historic resource may be acquired by the city or nonprofit group through purchase, donation, or documentation pursuant to California Civil Code Section 815.

     (7)   Official Recognition/Awards. The commission, on an annual basis, may recognize those projects involving designated historic resources that have demonstrated a high level of commitment to maintaining or restoring the historic integrity of the resource. The community development department may nominate all projects implemented within a calendar year for award consideration by the commission. (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014); Ord. 1937 § 2, (2017))

 

21.04.140 Duty to keep in good repair.
     (a)   The owner, occupant, and any person in actual charge of a designated historic resource or an improvement, building, or structure subject to the provisions of this chapter are jointly and severally obligated to keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement, building, or structure, all of the interior portions thereof when specified in the action declaring the property a historic resource, and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior architectural feature.

     (b)   Maintenance and repair of designated properties shall be in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation.

     (c)   The community development director shall have the authority to enforce this section, concurrently with the code compliance function of the city, as delineated in Title 1 of this code.

     (d)   Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property covered by this section that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance thereof, nor does this chapter prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, or removal of any such architectural feature when the community development director certifies to the commission that such action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition which cannot be rectified through the use of the California State Historic Building Code and when such architectural feature can be replaced.

     (e)   Emergency Demolition. Designated historic resources that have been severely damaged as a result of an earthquake, fire or other disaster, and which require immediate demolition because the building presents an imminent threat to public safety, shall be exempt from the provisions of this title. A determination to demolish an existing building on such grounds shall be made by the commission acting on the advice and recommendation of the building official. In the absence of a quorum of the commission, or if exigent circumstances exist such that public safety requires immediate action, such a determination may be made by the building official in consultation with the community development director.

     (f)    Enforcement and Penalties.

     (1)   Any person who violates a requirement of this section or fails to comply with a condition of approval of any certificate or permit issued under this section shall be subject to the penalties and enforcement provisions of Title 1 of this code.

     (2)   Any person who constructs, alters, removes, or demolishes a designated historic resource in violation of this section shall be required to restore the building, object, site, or structure to its appearance or setting prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this provision may be brought by the city of Burlingame or any other interested party. This civil remedy shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 1899 § 2, (2014))


Title 22 SIGNS
Note
Chapter 22.02 PURPOSE OF TITLE 22
Chapter 22.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 22.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF SIGN CODE
Chapter 22.08 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.10 R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.12 R-3 AND R-4 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.14 C-1, BAC, DAC, CAC AND CR DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.16 C-2 AND CAR DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.18 ECN, TW, HUU, BMU AND MMU DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.20 SL, AA AND APN SIGN DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.22 RR DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.24 IB AND APS DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 22.26 AWNING, CANOPY AND MARQUEE SIGNS
Chapter 22.28 CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS
Chapter 22.30 COMBINATION SIGNS
Chapter 22.32 EXEMPT SIGNS
Chapter 22.34 FREESTANDING SIGNS
Chapter 22.36 NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS AND MESSAGES
Chapter 22.38 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Chapter 22.40 PROHIBITED SIGNS
Chapter 22.42 PROJECTING SIGNS
Chapter 22.44 PROPERTIES WITH NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 22.46 SPECIAL SIGNS
Chapter 22.48 WALL SIGNS

Chapter 22.02 PURPOSE OF TITLE 22
22.02.010 Statement of purpose.
     The purpose of this title is to create the legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of signs that will preserve the right of free speech and expression, provide an easy and pleasant communication between people and their environment, and avoid the visual clutter that can be harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance. With these purposes in mind, it is the intent of this title to authorize the use of signs that:

     (a)   Are well designed, compatible with their surroundings and preserve locally recognized values of community appearance;

     (b)   Provide for consistent signage on adjacent sites;

     (c)   Safeguard and enhance property values in residential, commercial and industrial areas by promoting the use of signs which are aesthetically pleasing, of appropriate scale, and integrated with surrounding buildings and landscape;

     (d)   Protect public investment in and the character of public thoroughfares;

     (e)   Do not detract from the attraction of shoppers and other visitors who are important to the economy of the city;

     (f)    Promote the free flow of vehicular and non-motorized traffic and protect pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists from injury and property damage caused by or attributable to cluttered, distracting, or illegible signage;

     (g)   Are appropriately sized to the activity that displays them;

     (h)   Are expressive of both the identity of individual activities and the community as a whole; and

     (i)    Are legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.04 DEFINITIONS
22.04.010 Above-roof sign.
     “Above-roof sign” means a sign displayed or extending above the peak or parapet of a building. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.020 Activity.
     “Activity” means an individual tenant, business, or other establishment. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.030 Animation or animated.
     “Animation” or “animated” means the movement or the optical illusion of movement of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment, including the movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity, or the automatic changing of all or any part of the facing of a sign. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.040 Architectural detail.
“Architectural Detail” means any projection, relief, cornice, column, change of building material, window, or door opening on any building (See also “ Signable area for wall signs”). (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.050 Awning.
     “Awning” means a cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that either is permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.060 Awning sign.
     “Awning sign” means any sign painted on or affixed to the sides or face of an awning. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.070 Banner.
     “Banner” means a sign composed of a logo or design on a lightweight material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted to allow motion caused by the atmosphere. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.080 Bare-bulb illumination.
     “Bare-bulb illumination” means a light source that consists of light bulbs with a 20-watt maximum wattage for each bulb. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.090 Building.
     “Building” means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.100 Bunting.
     “Bunting” means a lightweight fabric in single or multiple colors used for decoration. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.110 Canopy.
     “Canopy” means a structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal, or other material with frames affixed to a building and supported by a frame that is affixed to or in contact with the ground. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.120 Canopy sign.
     “Canopy sign” means any sign painted on or affixed to the sides or face of a canopy. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.130 Changeable copy sign.
     “Changeable copy sign” means a sign, any part of which moves or flashes at intervals, including a sign with movable or moving letters of any type or a sign that uses video projection, LED, television, or other such technology. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.140 Combination sign.
     “Combination sign” is any sign which has features or characteristics normally found in signs of more than one classification. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.150 Commercial sign.
     “Commercial sign” means any sign with wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.160 Directional sign.
     “Directional Sign” means a sign at the exit or entrance of a premises. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.165 Director of community development.
     “Director of community development” means the city director of community development or the director’s authorized representative or designee. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.170 Erect.
     “Erect” means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, including the painting or otherwise applying of signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.180 Establishment.
     “Establishment” means an organization, family or individual engaged in commercial, industrial, civic, educational, recreational, governmental, religious or residential activities. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.190 External illumination.
     “External illumination” means illumination of a sign that is affected by an artificial source of light not contained within the sign itself. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.200 Façade.
     “Façade” means the side of a building below the eaves or parapet wall (see also “Signable area for wall signs”). (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.210 Façade, blank.
     “Façade, blank” means the side of a building below the eaves that is blank and does not have windows or architectural detail. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.220 Flag.
     “Flag” means a sign made of flexible material, typically cloth, paper or plastic, with a graphic depiction of an emblem, insignia, or logo, including a flag of a country or state. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.230 Flag, decorative.
     “Decorative flag” means any flag which displays an insignia, design or the like, and which does not include any commercial name, message, logo or symbol. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.240 Flashing illumination.
     “Flashing illumination” means illumination in which the artificial source of light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when a sign is illuminated, including illuminated lighting. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.250 Freestanding sign.
     “Freestanding sign” is a sign supported by one or more uprights, posts, or bases placed upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to any part of a building. It includes a pole sign and a monument sign. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.260 Frontage.
     (a)   Building Frontage. “Building frontage” means the distance measured along the wall or walls of the building abutting on a public or private way, including public and private parking lots, from which public access is provided to the premises. Where a building is occupied by more than one establishment, “building frontage” shall be measured separately for each portion of the building so occupied.

     (b)   Parcel Frontage. “Parcel frontage” means the distance along the parcel line or lines abutting upon a street, easement, or public or private parking lots, giving access to the property.

     (c)   A public or private parking lot or alley shall be considered to be a “frontage” for purposes of this title. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.270 Height.
     “Height,” as applied to a sign for the purposes of this title, means the vertical distance measured from the established grade directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.280 Illumination or illuminated.
     “Illumination” or “illuminated” means a source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly from a source of light incorporated in, or indirectly from an artificial source. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.290 Indirect illumination.
     “Indirect illumination” means a source of external illumination, located away from the sign, that lights the sign, but which is itself not visible to persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk or adjacent property. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.300 Internal illumination.
     “Internal illumination” means a light source that is concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness through a translucent surface. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.310 Maintenance.
     “Maintenance” means cleaning, painting, changing copy, general servicing, and repairing as a routine procedure to preserve and keep in working order. Maintenance may include the replacement of parts with like kind parts as such parts fail. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.320 Marquee.
     “Marquee” means a permanent structure, other than a roof, attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection from the elements. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.330 Marquee sign.
     “Marquee sign” means any sign painted on or affixed to the sides or face of a marquee. No sign may be affixed to the roof of a marquee; projecting signs above a marquee shall not be considered a part of a marquee sign and shall be evaluated under the standards for projecting signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.340 Monument sign.
     “Monument sign” means a ground sign permanently affixed to the ground at its base, supported entirely by a solid base structure only. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.350 Movement.
     “Movement” means physical movement or revolution up or down, around, or sideways that completes a cycle of change at intervals of less than six (6) seconds (see also “animation”). (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.360 Neon tube illumination.
     “Neon tube illumination” means a source of light for externally lit signs supplied by a neon tube that is bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.370 Noncommercial sign.
     “Noncommercial sign” means any sign that is not determined by definition to be a commercial sign. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.380 Nonconforming sign.
     “Nonconforming sign” means a sign that was lawfully constructed or installed prior to the adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title and was in compliance with all of the provisions of the prior ordinance then in effect, but which does not presently comply with this title. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.390 Occupant.
     “Occupant” means a use located in a multi-use building or shopping center. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.400 Parcel.
     “Parcel” means a single lot, usually fronting on a street, delineated on an official map on file with the county recorder, with separate legal title. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.410 Person.
     “Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.420 Pole sign.
     “Pole sign” means a freestanding sign that is permanently supported in a fixed location by a structure of poles, uprights, or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or a solid base structure. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.430 Portable sign.
     “Portable sign” means a sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building nor designed to be permanently attached to the ground or a building. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.440 Premises.
     “Premises” means the lot, plot, portion, or parcel of land considered as a unit for a single use or development, whether owned, leased, or held by other property right. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.450 Projecting sign.
     “Projecting sign” means a sign attached to and projecting from the wall of a building and not in the same vertical or horizontal plane as the attachment wall. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.460 Repair.
     “Repair” means to reconstruct, rebuild or undertake restoration after a substantial degree of neglect and deterioration has occurred. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.470 Roof sign.
     “Roof sign” means a sign that is displayed on the roof of the building, above the eaves or above the parapet wall. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.480 Shopping center.
     “Shopping center” means a commercial development under unified control consisting of four (4) or more separate commercial establishments sharing a common building, or which are in separate buildings that share a common entranceway or parking area. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.490 Sign.
     “Sign” means a lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display designed to identify, announce, direct, or inform that is visible from a public right-of-way. The term “sign” includes banners, pennants, streamers, moving mechanisms, and lights. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.500 Sign area.
     “Sign area” means the total face area of a sign. Sign area is measured as follows:

     (a)   Signs painted on a wall or canopy or individual cut-out figures or letters shall be measured as the area of the smallest polygon, not to exceed six (6) straight sides, which will completely enclose all figures, letters, designs, framing and tubing which are parts of such sign.

     (b)   Ground signs, pole signs, monument signs, or box signs shall be measured to include the entire area encompassed by the box described in subsection (a) above, including any framing, trim or molding. For monument signs, the decorative base and any surrounding structure are not included in the sign area. For pole signs, the pole or poles are not included in the sign area unless there are figures or letters on the poles.

     (c)   “Maximum total sign area” means the maximum total sign area of all signs or of a particular type of sign on a frontage or parcel as specified. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.510 Signable area.
     “Signable area” means the area in which a sign can be located.

     (a)   Signable area for a projecting sign or awning is:

     (1)   An area enclosed by a box or outline; or

     (2)   An area within a single continuous perimeter composed of a single rectangle, circle, triangle, or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures.

     (b)   Signable area for a wall sign is an area free of architectural details, including, but not limited, to windows, friezes, corbels, tile and trim, on the facade of a building or part of a building, measured in the same way that sign area for a sign on a wall is measured. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.530 Sign permit.
     “Sign permit” means a permit from the planning department of the city required for all new signs prior to the issuing of a building permit for a sign, under conditions specified in Chapter 22.06. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.540 Sign permit, administrative.
     “Administrative sign permit” means a permit from the city manager required for signs and banners of a civic, charitable, educational or municipal nature. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.550 Sign variance.
     “Sign variance” means a decision by the planning commission to approve a sign permit application, the approval of which requires, after public hearing and findings consistent with Section 22.06.120, a variance from one or more sections of this title. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.570 Sky sign.
     “Sky sign” means any sign attached to, painted on or suspended from a balloon, kite, or similar object secured to real or personal property within the city (see also “Roof sign” and “Above-roof sign”). (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.580 Special sign.
     “Special sign” means a sign, other than a freestanding or wall sign, regulated by Chapter 22.46 of this title. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.590 Structure.
     “Structure” means anything built that requires a permanent location. This term includes a building. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.600 Temporary sign.
     “Temporary sign” means a sign displayed for a limited period of time. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.610 Wall sign.
     “Wall sign” means a sign painted on or attached to a wall of a structure and in the same vertical and horizontal planes as the wall and includes the frame of the sign. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.04.620 Window sign.
     “Window sign” means a sign applied, painted or affixed to or in the window of a building. A window sign may be temporary or permanent. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF SIGN CODE
22.06.010 Administration and enforcement.
     The provisions of this title shall be administered and enforced by the director of community development, and such representatives as the planner may designate. All other officers and employees of the city shall assist and cooperate with the director of community development in administering and enforcing the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.020 Sign permit required.
     No person shall erect or display any sign unless the director of community development has issued a permit for the sign or unless this chapter exempts the sign from the permit requirement. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.030 Sign permit limitations.
     The director of community development shall apply the standards of the sign code, upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, to ensure that the following limitations are observed:

     (a)   Each zoning district in the city has maximum signage limits permitted with a sign permit. These limits are specified in Chapters 22.10 to 22.24 inclusive.

     (b)   Properties that are zoned “unclassified” shall be subject to the standards of the closest adjacent zoning district, as determined by the director of community development.

     (c)   Signs enumerated in Chapter 22.32 are exempt from calculation of maximum signage per frontage.

     (d)   Each sign classification (freestanding sign, wall sign, projecting sign, etc.) has further specifications that are described in succeeding chapters of this title. In no case shall a sign variance be granted to increase the maximum total area of signage to be permitted on a parcel. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.040 Frontage and sign area calculations.
     In the C-1, CR, C-2, ECN, TW, SL, AA and APN, RR, IB, and APS districts, where maximum signage is related to frontage, the following procedures shall determine that frontage for purposes of this title:

     (a)   A distinction shall be observed between parcel frontage and building frontage:

     (1)   Parcel frontage shall be used for freestanding ground signs, or combinations of these signs with any other type.

     (2)   Building frontage shall be used to calculate maximum signage area for signs attached to or wholly supported by a building or major structure.

     (b)   Frontage lengths and sign area limits are determined based on the street classification and are listed in the requirements for each zoning district. Parcel and building frontage are further defined in Section 22.04.260. The length of any frontage shall be the figure used to calculate maximum permitted signage on that frontage, as described in Chapters 22.10 through 22.24 inclusive.

     (c)   Sign area shall be determined as specified in Section 22.04.500.

     (d)   Any freestanding sign which can be viewed from two street frontages and which is so placed that it has equal or nearly equal exposure from each frontage, shall be counted twice, once for each frontage. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.050 Existing signs.
     Each premises shall be entitled to sign area within the limitations set forth in this title. However, the area of all existing signs to remain shall be included with any new signs in calculating the maximum total sign area allowed on a parcel. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.060 Sign permit application—Information required.
     (a)   A person proposing to erect or display a sign shall file an application for a permit with the director of community development. The application shall contain the following:

     (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of sign contractor and the owner and occupant of the premises where the sign is to be erected or displayed;

     (2)   The date on which the sign is to be erected or displayed;

     (3)   Address and zoning district in which the sign is located; and any variance that has been approved;

     (4)   Full description as determined by the director of community development of all existing and proposed signs;

     (5)   Written consent of the owner of property;

     (6)   A drawing to scale that shows:

     (A)  All existing signs displayed on the premises,

     (B)   The location, height, and size of any proposed signs, and

     (C)   The percentage of the signable area covered by the proposed sign;

     (7)   Specifications for the construction or display of the sign and for its illumination and mechanical movement, if any;

     (8)   Application fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time of payment for the building permit fee for installation of the sign(s).

     (b)   Review and Time Limits. The director of community development shall review the application upon the receipt of a completed permit application. The director of community development shall determine if the application complies with the sign code or requires planning commission action within twenty (20) days from the date the application was determined to be complete and permit fee was filed with the director of community development.

     (c)   Approval or Denial. The director of community development shall approve a permit for the sign if it complies with the building, electrical or other adopted codes of the city and with:

     (1)   The regulations for signs contained in this title and any variance that has been granted from these regulations; and

     (2)   Any approved sign variance for the parcel.

     (d)   If the director of community development does not approve a permit for the sign and it is determined that a variance is not an available option, the director of community development shall state the reasons for the denial in writing, and shall mail a certified copy of the reasons for denial to the address of the applicant stated on the application. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.070 Permit fees.
     A sign permit fee shall be charged for every authorized new sign or set of signs within the city. The fees for permit applications are established by the city council by resolution and shall be nonrefundable. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.080 Investigation fees—Work without a permit.
     (a)   Investigation. Whenever a sign is installed for which a permit is required by this code without first obtaining a sign permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for the work.

     (b)   Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the sign permit fee, shall be collected as a civil penalty, whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be up to ten (10) times the sign permit fee. The investigation fee shall be determined by the director of community development and shall be based on the staff time reasonably required to resolve all of the issues related to the work that has been performed without a permit, or removal of an illegal sign or sign installed without a permit. No sign permit shall be issued until the investigation fee has been paid in full.

     (c)   Appeal. Any person assessed such a fee may file an appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after written notice to such person of the assessment. A hearing upon such appeal shall thereafter be held by the city council; its decision thereon shall be final.

     (d)   Nothing in this section shall relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this code, or with any codes incorporated by reference and made a part of this code in the execution of the work, or from any other fees or penalties prescribed by law. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.090 Time limit for exercise of sign permit.
     In all cases where a sign permit has been approved, a building permit shall be obtained and the sign(s) erected within a period not to exceed three (3) months from date of approval, unless the value of the work exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), in which case the schedule specified in Section 18.07.070 shall be observed. In the event such sign or signs are not erected within this period, the permit shall become null and void. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.100 No permit required.
     Signs specifically exempted from the provisions of this chapter as specified in Chapter 22.32 are exempt from the permit requirement. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.110 Severability clause.
     The invalidation of any section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this title by any court of competent jurisdiction shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the title. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.120 Variances.
     (a)   In order to prevent or mitigate significant difficulties and unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the objectives of this title, the planning commission may grant variances from the regulations of this chapter from only the following:

     (1)   Height of placement; or

     (2)   Location; or

     (3)   Within the maximum total sign area allowed on the parcel, the number of signs on a frontage. However, no variance shall be granted to allow the maximum total number of freestanding signs per parcel frontage to be exceeded.

     (b)   Such a variance shall only be granted when all of the following findings are made based on substantial evidence presented to the commission:

     (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property, such as size, shape, topography, street frontage, or surrounding land use, that do not apply generally to other property in the same district; and

     (2)   The granting of the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, and to prevent unreasonable property loss or unnecessary hardship; and

     (3)   The granting of the application will not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare or convenience; and

     (4)   The signage for which the variance is sought will be compatible with the aesthetics, mass, and character of existing and potential signage of properties in the general vicinity.

     (c)   Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the variance authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which the subject property is located. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.130 Building permit required.
     No person shall erect, move, alter, change, repair, replace, suspend or attach any sign, or portion thereof, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining from the building official a permit in writing to do so and paying therefor the fees prescribed for such building permit. Upon receipt of a building permit application, and evidence of a valid sign permit issued by the director of community development, the building official shall then examine the plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure; if it appears that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this title, the California Building Code in effect at that time, and all other applicable laws and ordinances of the city, the building official shall then issue the building permit. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.140 Appeal—Decision of director of community development.
     Any applicant who is denied a permit for the display of a sign under the provisions of this title may file a written appeal to the planning commission within ten (10) days of the date of the director of community development’s decision. The appeal must be made in writing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, include the required appeal and noticing fees, and shall be filed with the community development department. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.150 Appeal—Decision of planning commission.
     A decision of the planning commission shall become final and conclusive ten (10) days after the planning commission decision on an item if no appeal is filed. For a period ten (10) days after the action of the commission, any person may appeal such action to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall include the appeal and noticing fees and shall be filed with the city clerk. During the same period, the council, on its own motion, may suspend the decision of the commission for the purpose of reviewing the action of the commission. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.06.160 Hearing of appeal by council—Finality of decision.
     In the event that an appeal from the action of the commission is taken, the matter shall be referred to the city council which shall hear the appeal. At the conclusion of its hearing, the city council shall make its order approving, modifying or reversing the action of the commission. The council’s determination shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.08 GENERAL REGULATIONS
22.08.010 Only permitted signs to be erected.
     (a)   No person shall erect, reconstruct, alter, relocate or place any sign within the city except such signs as are permitted by this title. All signs, including the frames, braces or supports thereof, shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with this title, the California Building Code and National Electrical Code as adopted by the city, the zoning code, and all other applicable ordinances of the city.

     (b)   Noncommercial signs as defined in Section 22.04.370 are permitted wherever other signage is permitted under this chapter.

     (c)   Noncommercial signage is subject to the same standards and is included within the maximum allowances for signs for the parcel. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.020 Property owner’s consent required.
     It is unlawful for any person to place, attach or maintain any sign, banner, card, sticker, handbill or other advertising device upon or within any property, whether public or private, without securing the written consent of the owner or the owner’s authorized agent. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.030 Maintenance or alteration of existing signs.
     A sign permit shall not be required for the maintenance of an existing sign as defined in Section 22.04.310, which does not result in a change or alteration in the size, shape, or illumination of the affected sign. Any work other than such maintenance shall require a sign permit. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.040 Traffic hazard.
     (a)   No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street, within a triangular area formed by the curblines, and their projection, and a line connecting them at points thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the projected curblines, unless the sign, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, has a clearance of at least ten (10) feet above curb grade.

 



 

     (b)   No signs shall be erected at or near the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign or signal device; or which makes use of the words “stop,” “go,” “caution,” “look,” “danger,” or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.050 Pedestrian hazard.
     All signs or other advertising structures which are erected at any point where pedestrians might be endangered shall have a smooth surface and no nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted to protrude therefrom. Electrical reflectors and devices may extend over the top and in front of the sign or structure but not less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.060 Projection into public right-of-way.
     (a)   Signs supported entirely on private property may extend up to four (4) feet into a public right-of-way; provided that in no event shall any sign be permitted to extend within three (3) feet of any portion of a public right-of-way used principally for vehicular traffic.

     (b)   Portions of signs extending into a public right-of-way shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet between the bottom of the sign or its supporting structure and the surface of the ground or sidewalk below; provided, that the minimum vertical clearance for any part of an awning shall be eight (8) feet. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.070 Public places and objects.
     (a)   No person shall paint, mark or write on, or post or otherwise affix, any handbill or sign to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, street planter, parking meter or post, street lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, electric light or power or telephone or telegraph pole, or wire appurtenance thereof or upon any fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system or upon any lighting system, public bridge, drinking fountain, street sign or traffic sign.

     (b)   Any handbill or sign found posted, or otherwise affixed upon any public property contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by an agent of the police department or the department of public works. The person responsible for any such illegal posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal thereof and the department of public works is authorized to effect the collection of the cost.

     (c)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the painting of house numbers upon curbs done under permits issued by the director of public works under and in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.080 Side wall and rear wall signs.
     Signs erected or painted on the wall of a building or structure which immediately abuts an adjacent parcel privately owned shall require application to and approval by the planning commission. The planning commission’s decision shall be based on the following findings:

     (a)   The placement of the sign does not confuse the public regarding the premises for which the sign is placed;

     (b)   The placement of the sign does not adversely impact the adjacent property; and

     (c)   Adequate clearance is provided for maintenance of the sign. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.090 Removal of sign from city, county or state property upon notice.
     Any sign which was previously permitted to extend over or to be maintained on any property in which the city, county, or the state owns an interest shall be removed or altered by the person maintaining such sign, at the person’s sole expense, on thirty (30) days’ written notice from the director of community development whenever, by reason of changed traffic conditions or the construction or relocation of public improvements, the director of community development finds that the continued existence of such sign is no longer consistent with the purposes for which such public property is to be used. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.100 Clearance from utility lines.
     No sign shall be erected or maintained which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from communication lines and energized electrical power lines than that prescribed by the law of the state of California or rules and regulations duly promulgated by agencies thereof. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.110 Glare from signs.
     All illuminated signs in all zones shall be designed in such manner that any cone of light is retained on the property and to avoid undue glare or reflection of light on private property in the surrounding area or to passersby and shall be erected and located in a manner satisfactory to the director of community development. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.08.120 Obstruction.
     No sign shall be erected, located or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.10 R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22.10.010 Permitted signs.
     No signs shall be erected or maintained in any R-1 or R-2 district except the following:

     (a)   Signs exempted in Chapter 22.32;

     (b)   Noncommercial signs permitted in Chapter 22.36; and

     (c)   Freestanding signs and wall signs, subject to the regulations in this chapter. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.10.020 Sign area.
The maximum total sign area on a parcel shall be as follows:

 

Parcel Area

Maximum Total Sign Area

Less than 10,000 square feet

15 square feet per frontage

10,000 square feet and over

50 square feet per frontage

(Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.10.030 Number.
The maximum total number of signs on a parcel shall be as follows:

 

Parcel Area

Maximum Total Sign Number

Less than 10,000 square feet

1 per frontage

10,000 square feet and over

3 per frontage

(Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.10.040 Lighting.
     (a)   Each sign shall conform to the limitations and restrictions contained in Section 22.08.110 regarding exterior lighting. External illumination shall be directed in such a way so that any light bulb, filament, neon tubing or similar light source is not visible from beyond the property line.

     (b)   On parcels that are ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area or greater, freestanding signs with interior illumination or translucent faces shall be limited to low-level illumination that cannot exceed 0.1 foot-candles at any property line;

     (c)   On parcels that are less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, interior illumination of freestanding signs is prohibited, except for signs less than one square foot in area.

     (d)   Interior illumination of wall signs is prohibited.

     (e)   All sign illumination shall be turned off by an automatic system during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.10.050 Height.
     No portion of any freestanding sign shall exceed seven (7) feet above the established grade below the sign. A sign erected on a building or structure shall not be placed higher than the first story or twelve (12) feet above the established grade below the sign, whichever is lower. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.12 R-3 AND R-4 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22.12.010 Permitted signs.
     No signs shall be erected or maintained in any R-3 or R-4 zoned district except the following:

     (a)   Signs exempted in Chapter 22.32; and

     (b)   Freestanding signs and wall signs subject to the regulations listed in this chapter. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.12.020 Sign area.
     (a)   Signs in an R-3 or R-4 district shall be limited as follows:

 

Parcel Size

Maximum Total Sign Area per
Parcel Frontage

Less than 10,000 square feet

15 square feet per side

30 square feet total sign area

10,000 to 15,000 square feet

0.5 square feet per lineal foot of parcel frontage per side (25 square foot maximum per side)

50 square feet total sign area

15,001 to 30,000 square feet

0.5 square feet per lineal foot of parcel frontage per side (30 square foot maximum)

60 square feet total sign area

More than 30,000 square feet

0.5 square feet per lineal foot of parcel frontage per side (50 square foot maximum per side)

100 square feet total sign area

 

     (b)   Monument Sign Incentive. In order to promote monument signs in this district, two-sided monument signs are considered to be one sign and in measuring total sign area, only one side of the sign is included in the calculation. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.12.030 Number.
     There shall be no more than three (3) signs for each frontage, one of which may be a two-sided monument sign. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.12.040 Lighting.
     (a)   Each sign shall conform to the limitations and restrictions contained in Section 22.08.110 regarding exterior lighting. Exterior illumination shall be directed in such a way so that any light bulb, filament, neon tubing or similar light source is not visible from beyond the property line.

     (b)   On parcels that are ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area or greater, freestanding signs with interior illumination or translucent faces shall be limited to low-level illumination which cannot exceed 0.1 foot-candles at any property line.

     (c)   On parcels that are less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, interior illumination of freestanding signs is prohibited.

     (d)   Interior illumination of wall signs is prohibited.

     (e)   All sign illumination shall be turned off by an automatic system during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.12.050 Height.
     No portion of any freestanding monument sign shall exceed seven (7) feet above the established grade below the sign. A sign erected on a building or structure shall not be placed higher than the first story or twelve (12) feet above the established grade below the sign, whichever is lower. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.12.060 Additional criterion.
     In addition, up to a total of six (6) signs per parcel, not to exceed three (3) feet in height and no larger than three (3) square feet located at driveway entrances and within parking areas shall be exempt from the total square footage calculation. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.14 C-1, BAC, DAC, CAC AND CR DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22.14.010 Permitted signs.
     Awning signs, freestanding monument signs, projecting signs and wall signs are permitted in the C-1, BAC, DAC, CAC and CR districts, as specified in this chapter and as described in Chapters 22.26, 22.34, 22.42 and 22.48, subject also to the size, number and height regulations specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 3, (2012))

 

22.14.020 Prohibited signs.
     In addition to the signs specified in Chapter 22.40, Prohibited Signs, pole signs are prohibited. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 3, (2012))

 

22.14.030 Sign area and placement for wall signs, awning signs, and projecting signs.
     (a)   The maximum total sign area for wall signs, projecting signs and awning signs allowed on each building frontage shall be determined based on the length of the building frontage and calculated in accordance with the following table:

 

Building Frontage Length

Maximum Total Sign Area for Building Frontage

50 feet or less

60 square feet

51 feet to 100 feet

120 square feet

101 feet to 150 feet

180 square feet

Over 150 feet

200 square feet

 

     (b)   Wall signs shall be permitted on any designated frontage subject to the sign area limitations listed above and the placement requirements listed in Chapter 22.48.

     (c)   The maximum height of wall signs shall be limited to the height of the signable area of the wall face as defined in Section 22.04.520.

     (d)   When located below twenty-four (24) feet in height, awning signs and projecting signs, in accordance with the regulations stated in Chapters 22.26 and 22.42, shall be permitted as well as wall signs.

     (e)   Any single sign on any frontage shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 3, (2012))

 

22.14.040 Number.
     There shall be no more than five (5) signs for each building frontage. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 3, (2012))

 

22.14.050 Freestanding monument signs.
     (a)   One two-sided freestanding monument sign shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of one hundred (100) feet or greater based on the following criteria and subject to the standards of Chapter 22.34. Two (2) two-sided freestanding monument sign shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of at least three hundred (300) feet based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34. Three (3) two-sided freestanding monument signs shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of four hundred (400) feet or greater based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34.

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Maximum Height

Maximum Sign Area per Monument Sign for Parcel Frontage

Broadway

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

California Drive

12 feet

100 square feet per side

200 square feet of total sign area

El Camino Real

12 feet

100 square feet per side

200 square feet total sign area

Howard Avenue

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

Rollins Road

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

Trousdale Drive

12 feet

100 square feet per side

200 square feet total sign area

All Other Streets (local)

5 feet

30 square feet per side

60 square feet total sign area

 

     (b)   Monument Sign Incentive. In order to promote monument signs in this district, two-sided monument signs are considered to be a single sign and in measuring total sign area, only one side of the sign is included in the calculation.

     (c)   Freestanding monument signs are prohibited on parcels with a parcel frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1827 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1874 § 3, (2012))

 

22.14.060 Illumination requirements.
     (a)   A permanent sign may be non-illuminated, illuminated by internal, internal indirect, or external indirect illumination. Consistency with Section 22.08.110 is required. Signs that are externally lit shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, down-directed, and shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign.

     (b)   A sign may not be animated, have changeable copy or have flashing illumination.

     (c)   Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 3, (2012))

 

22.14.070 Additional criterion.
     In addition, up to a total of six (6) signs per parcel, not to exceed three (3) feet in height and no larger than three (3) square feet each, located at driveway entrances and within parking areas shall be exempt from the total square footage calculation. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 3, (2012))

Chapter 22.16 C-2 AND CAR DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22.16.010 Permitted signs.
     Awning signs, changeable copy signs, freestanding monument signs, projecting signs and wall signs are permitted in the C-2 and CAR districts, as specified in this chapter and as described in Chapters 22.26, 22.34, 22.42 and 22.48, subject also to the size, number and height regulations specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 4, (2012))

 

22.16.020 Prohibited signs.
     All signs specified in Chapter 22.40, Prohibited Signs, are prohibited. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 4, (2012))

 

22.16.030 Sign area and placement for wall signs, awning signs and projecting signs.
     (a)   The aggregate total sign area for wall signs, projecting signs and awning signs allowed on each building frontage shall be determined based on the length of the building frontage calculated in accordance with the following table:

 

Building Frontage Length

Maximum Total Sign Area Per Building Frontage

50 feet or less

150 square feet

51 to 100 feet

300 square feet

101 to 150 feet

450 square feet

Over 150 feet

500 square feet

 

     (b)   Wall signs shall be permitted on any building frontage subject to the sign area limitations listed above and the placement requirements listed in Chapter 22.48.

     (c)   The maximum height of wall signs shall be limited to the height of the signable area of the wall face as defined in Section 22.04.520.

     (d)   When located below twenty-four (24) feet in height, awning signs and projecting signs, in accordance with the regulations stated in Chapters 22.26 and 22.42, shall be permitted as well as wall signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 4, (2012))

 

22.16.040 Number.
     There shall be no more than five (5) signs for each building frontage. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 4, (2012))

 

22.16.050 Freestanding signs.
     In addition to the wall, awning and projecting signs allowed in Section 22.16.030, the following freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:

     (a)   Monument Signs.

     (1)   One two-sided freestanding monument sign shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34. Two (2) two-sided freestanding monument signs shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of at least three hundred (300) feet based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34. Three (3) two-sided freestanding monument signs shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of four hundred (400) feet or greater based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34.

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Maximum Height

Maximum Sign Area for a Monument Sign

Broadway

12 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total area

California Drive

12 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total area

Rollins Road

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total area

All Other Streets (local)

5 feet

30 square feet per side

60 square feet total area

 

     (2)   Monument Sign Incentive. In order to promote monument signs in this district, two-sided monument signs are considered to be a single sign and in measuring total sign area, only one side of the sign is included in the calculation.

     (3)   Freestanding monument signs are prohibited on a parcel frontage of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length.

     (b)   Pole Signs.

     (1)   One freestanding pole sign shall be permitted on each parcel frontage of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet on the following streets and subject to the following criteria. Two (2) freestanding pole signs shall be permitted on each parcel frontage of at least three hundred (300) feet on the streets and subject to the following criteria:

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Maximum Height

Maximum Sign Area of Each Pole Sign

Broadway

25 feet

150 square feet per side

300 square feet total sign area

California Drive

25 feet

150 square feet per side

300 square feet total sign area

Rollins Road

25 feet

150 square feet per side

300 square feet total sign area

 

     (2)   There shall be no incentive for pole signs; a pole sign shall be counted as two (2) signs, and each side shall be counted in the total sign area.

     (3)   Pole signs are prohibited on parcel frontages less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1827 § 3, (2008); Ord. 1874 § 4, (2012))

 

22.16.060 Illumination requirements.
     (a)   A permanent sign may be non-illuminated, illuminated by internal, internal indirect or external indirect illumination. Consistency with Section 22.08.110 is required. Signs that are externally lit shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, down-directed, and shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign.

     (b)   A sign may not be animated or have flashing illumination.

     (c)   Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 4, (2012))

 

22.16.070 Changeable copy signs.
     A portion of a monument or freestanding pole sign may include changeable copy, subject to Chapter 22.28. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 4, (2012))

 

22.16.080 Additional criterion.
     In addition, up to a total of six (6) signs per parcel, not to exceed three (3) feet in height and no larger than three (3) square feet located at driveway entrances and within parking areas shall be exempt from the total square footage calculation. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 4, (2012))

Chapter 22.18 ECN, TW, HUU, BMU AND MMU DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22.18.010 Permitted signs.
     Awning signs, freestanding monument signs, projecting signs and wall signs are permitted in the ECN, TW, HMU, BMU and MMU districts, as specified in this chapter and as described in Chapters 22.26, 22.34, 22.42 and 22.48, subject also to the size, number and height regulations specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 5, (2012))

 

22.18.020 Prohibited signs.
     In addition to the signs specified in Chapter 22.40, Prohibited Signs, pole signs are prohibited. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 5, (2012))

 

22.18.030 Sign area and placement for wall signs, awning signs, and projecting signs.
     (a)   The maximum total sign area for wall signs, projecting signs and awnings signs allowed on each building frontage shall be determined based on the length of the building frontage calculated in accordance with the following table:

 

Building Frontage Length

Maximum Total Sign Area per Building Frontage

50 feet or less

60 square feet

51 feet to 100 feet

120 square feet

101 feet to 150 feet

180 square feet

Over 150 feet

200 square feet

 

     (b)   Wall signs shall be permitted on any building frontage subject to the sign area limitations listed above and the placement requirements listed in Chapter 22.48.

     (c)   The maximum height of wall signs shall be limited to the height of the signable area of the first two (2) stories or twenty-four (24) feet of wall face, whichever is less, as defined in Section 22.04.500

     (d)   Awning signs and projecting signs, in accordance with the regulations stated in Chapters 22.26 and 22.42 shall be permitted instead of wall signs and shall be limited to the first two (2) stories or twenty-four (24) feet in height, whichever is less.

     (e)   Any single sign on any frontage shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 5, (2012))

 

22.18.040 Number.
     There shall be no more than five (5) signs for each building frontage. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 5, (2012))

 

22.18.050 Freestanding monument signs.
     (a)   In addition to the wall, awning and projecting signs allowed in Section 22.18.030, one two-sided freestanding monument sign shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34.

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Maximum Height

Maximum Sign Area of Monument Sign

California Drive

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

El Camino Real

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

Howard Avenue

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

Magnolia Avenue

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

Murchison Drive

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

Trousdale Drive

8 feet

50 square feet per side

100 square feet total sign area

All Other Streets (local)

5 feet

30 square feet per side

60 square feet total sign area

 

     (b)   Monument Sign Incentive. In order to promote monument signs in this district, two-sided monument signs are considered to be a single sign and in measuring total sign area, only one side of the sign is included in the calculation.

     (c)   Freestanding monument signs are prohibited on parcels with a parcel frontage of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length, with the following exception: notwithstanding other regulations contained in this section; on properties with a parcel frontage of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet situated within only the ECN zoning district, one two (2) sided monument sign with a maximum height of no greater than five (5) feet and a maximum sign area per side of no greater than thirty (30) square feet shall be permitted. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 5, (2012); Ord. 1885 § 3, (2013))

 

22.18.060 Illumination requirements.
     (a)   A permanent sign may be non-illuminated, illuminated by internal, internal indirect or external indirect illumination. Consistency with Section 22.08.110 is required. Signs that are externally lit shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, down-directed, and shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign.

     (b)   A sign may not be animated, have changeable copy or have flashing illumination.

     (c)   Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 5, (2012))

 

22.18.070 Additional criterion.
     In addition, up to a total of six (6) signs per parcel, not to exceed three (3) feet in height and no larger than three (3) square feet located at driveway entrances and within parking areas shall be exempt from the total square footage calculation. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 5, (2012))

Chapter 22.20 SL, AA AND APN SIGN DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22.20.010 Permitted signs.
     Awning signs, freestanding monument signs, projecting signs and wall signs are permitted in the SL, AA and APN districts, as specified in this chapter and as described in Chapters 22.26, 22.34, 22.42 and 22.48, subject also to the size and height regulations specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.20.020 Prohibited signs, including pole signs.
     (a)   In addition to the signs specified in Chapter 22.40, Prohibited Signs, pole signs are prohibited.

     (b)   However, a pole sign lawfully existing on March 31, 2008, may continue to exist so long as it conforms to the provisions of Chapter 22.38. Further, notwithstanding Section 22.40.040, if the parcel on which a pole sign lawfully existing on March 31, 2008, is located is subdivided in accordance with Title 26 of this code, the advertising on the existing pole sign may advertise the businesses that are located on the resulting parcels but only under the following circumstances:

     (1)   No physical alterations of any kind may occur except for replacement of the actual face of the sign and maintenance as permitted under Section 22.38.020.

     (2)   Advertising is limited to the advertising of a person, product or service of an occupant of the parcels created by the subdivision of the original parcel and only during the period of actual occupancy by such an occupant.

     (3)   If the sign is removed, it cannot be replaced.

     (4)   No other freestanding signage may be placed on any of the parcels created by the subdivision of the original parcel so long as the pole sign remains.

 

     (5)   All off-premises advertising as prohibited in Section 22.40.040 on the pole sign shall be removed if any of the parcels created by the subdivision of the original parcel are redeveloped by the demolition or construction of any structure or any portion of any structure exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet or ten (10) percent of the floor area—gross square footage of the structures on the parcel, whichever is greater. Following removal of the off-premises advertising, the only advertising allowed on the pole sign shall be advertising of a person, product or service located on the one parcel on which the pole sign is then located.

     (6)   The provisions of this section are recorded in a form approved by the city attorney on the title of each of the parcels created by the subdivision of the original parcel. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1827 § 4, (2008))

 

22.20.030 Sign area.
     (a)   The maximum total sign area allowed at or below twenty-four (24) feet on each building frontage shall be determined based on the length of the building frontage on which the signs are placed and calculated in accordance with the following table:

 

Building Frontage Length

Maximum Total Area for All Signs Below 24 Feet in Height

Less than 100 feet

100 square feet

100 to 150 feet

150 square feet

151 to 250 feet

250 square feet

251 to 350 feet

350 square feet

Over 350 feet

500 square feet

 

     (b)   The maximum total sign area allowed above twenty-four (24) feet on each building frontage is three hundred fifty (350) square feet. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.20.040 Freestanding signs.
     (a)   In addition to the total sign area allowed under Section 22.22.030 above, one two-sided freestanding monument sign shall be permitted on each parcel frontage of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in length, or, for parcels which exceed three hundred (300) feet in frontage length, one two-sided free-standing monument sign for every one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage, based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34:

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Maximum Height

Maximum Sign Area for Monument Sign

Airport Boulevard

8 feet

75 square feet per side

150 square feet total area

Bayshore Highway

8 feet

75 square feet per side

150 square feet total area

All Other Streets (local)

8 feet

40 square feet per side

80 square feet total area

 

     (b)   Monument Sign Incentive. In order to promote monument signs in this district, two-sided monument signs are considered to be one sign and in measuring total sign area, only one side of the sign is included in the calculation.

     (c)   In addition to the total sign area allowed under Section 22.22.030, one freestanding monument sign at a height of not more than eight (8) feet and with a maximum sign area of twenty-five (25) square feet per side (a maximum of fifty (50) square feet total) shall be permitted on each parcel frontage of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1875 § 3, (2012))

 

22.20.050 Wall signs.
     (a)   Wall signs shall be permitted on any parcel frontage subject to the sign area limitations of Section 22.20.030 and the placement requirements listed in Chapter 22.48.

     (b)   There shall be no more than three (3) wall signs at a height below twenty-four (24) feet in height.

     (c)   No more than three (3) signs above a height of twenty-four (24) feet are allowed on any parcel frontage, and no single sign above twenty-four (24) feet in height shall be larger than two hundred fifty (250) square feet.

     (d)   For purposes of this section, no building shall be considered to have more than four (4) building frontages regardless of the building’s design or parcel. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.20.060 Awning signs.
     When located below twenty-four (24) feet in height, awning signs, in accordance with the regulations stated in Chapter 22.26, shall be permitted in addition to wall signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.20.070 Illumination requirements.
     (a)   A permanent sign may be non-illuminated, illuminated by internal, internal indirect or external indirect illumination. Consistency with Section 22.08.110 is required. Signs that are externally lit shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, down-directed, and shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign.

     (b)   A sign may not be animated, have changeable copy or have flashing illumination.

     (c)   Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.20.080 Additional criteria.
     (a)   In addition, up to a total of six (6) signs per parcel, not to exceed three (3) feet in height and no larger than three (3) square feet located at driveway entrances and within parking areas shall be exempt from the total square footage calculation.

     (b)   No single sign at a height of twenty-four (24) feet or less may be larger than two hundred (200) square feet.

     (c)   The only signs allowed at a height above twenty-four (24) feet are wall signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.22 RR DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22.22.010 Permitted signs.
     Awning signs, changeable copy signs, freestanding monument signs, projecting signs and wall signs are permitted in the RR district, as specified in this chapter and as described in Chapters 22.26, 22.28, 22.34, 22.42 and 22.48, subject also to the size and height regulations specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.22.020 Prohibited signs.
     All signs specified in Chapter 22.40, Prohibited Signs, are prohibited. Pole signs are allowed only as specified in Section 22.22.040 below. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.22.030 Sign area.
     The total sign area allowed on each frontage shall be determined based on the length of the building frontage and calculated in accordance with the following table:

 

Parcel Frontage Length

Maximum Total Sign Area for Parcel Frontage

50 feet or less

150 square feet

51 feet to 100 feet

200 square feet

101 feet to 150 feet

250 square feet

151 to 200 feet

300 square feet

Over 200 feet

350 square feet

 

(Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.22.040 Freestanding signs.
     (a)   In addition to the total sign area allowed under Section 22.22.030, one two-sided freestanding monument sign shall be permitted on each parcel frontage of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in length based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34. Two (2) two-sided freestanding monument signs shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of at least three hundred (300) feet based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34. Three (3) two-sided freestanding monument signs shall be permitted on a parcel frontage of four hundred (400) feet or greater based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34.

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Height

Maximum Sign Area of Monument Sign

Adrian Road

12 feet

75 square feet per side

150 square feet of total sign area

Broadway

12 feet

75 square feet per side

150 square feet of total sign area

Rollins Road

12 feet

75 square feet per side

150 square feet of total sign area

All Other Streets (local)

12 feet

40 square feet per side

80 square feet of total sign area

 

     (b)   In addition to the total sign area allowed under Section 22.22.030, one freestanding monument sign at a height of not more than twelve (12) feet and a maximum sign area of twenty-five (25) square feet per side (fifty (50) square feet total) shall be permitted on sites with a parcel frontage of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length.

     (c)   Monument Sign Incentive. In order to promote monument signs in this district, two-sided monument signs are considered to be one sign and in measuring total sign area, only one side of the sign is included in the calculation.

     (d)   Parcels with a parcel frontage of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in length on Adrian Road or Broadway may have one pole sign in place of a monument sign, subject to the criteria in Chapter 22.34 and the following:

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Maximum Height

Maximum Sign Area of Pole Sign

Adrian Road

40 feet

120 square feet per side

240 square feet of total sign area

Broadway

40 feet

120 square feet per side

240 square feet of total sign area

 

     There is no second side incentive for pole signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1827 § 5, (2008))

 

22.22.050 Wall signs.
     (a)   Wall signs shall be permitted on any designated frontage subject to the sign area limitations listed in Section 22.22.030 and the placement requirements listed in Chapter 22.48.

     (b)   No more than three (3) wall signs are allowed on any building frontage.

     (c)   The maximum height of wall signs shall be limited to the height of the signable area of the wall face as defined in Section 22.04.500. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1827 § 6, (2008))

 

22.22.060 Awning signs and projecting signs.
     When located below twenty-four (24) feet in height, awning signs and projecting signs, in accordance with the regulations stated in Section 22.24 and 22.42, shall be permitted as well as wall signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.22.070 Illumination requirements.
     (a)   A permanent sign may be non-illuminated, illuminated by internal, internal indirect or external indirect illumination. Consistency with Section 22.08.110 is required. Signs that are externally lit shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, down-directed, and shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign.

     (b)   A sign may not be animated or have flashing illumination.

     (c)   Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.22.080 Changeable copy signs.
     A portion of a monument or freestanding pole sign may include changeable copy subject to the criteria in Chapter 22.28. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.22.090 Additional criteria.
     (a)   In addition, up to a total of six (6) signs per parcel not to exceed three (3) feet in height and no larger than three (3) square feet located at driveway entrances and within parking areas shall be exempt from the total square footage calculation.

     (b)   No single sign or single face of a freestanding sign may be larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet.

     (c)   All forms of illumination are permitted; except that awning signs may not be internally illuminated. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.24 IB AND APS DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22.24.010 Permitted signs.
     Awning signs, changeable copy signs, freestanding monument signs, projecting signs and wall signs are permitted in the IB and APS districts, as specified in this chapter and as described in Chapters 22.26, 22.28, 22.34, 22.42 and 22.48, subject also to the size and height regulations specified below. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.24.020 Prohibited signs.
     All signs specified in chapter 22.40, Prohibited Signs, are prohibited. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.24.030 Sign area.
The maximum total sign area allowed on each parcel frontage shall be determined based on the length of the parcel frontage calculated in accordance with the following table:

 

Parcel Frontage Length

Maximum Total Sign Area for Parcel Frontage

50 feet or less

150 square feet

51 feet to 100 feet

200 square feet

101 feet to 150 feet

250 square feet

151 to 200 feet

300 square feet

Over 200 feet

350 square feet

(Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.24.040 Freestanding signs.
     (a)   In addition to the total sign area allowed under Section 22.24.040, one two-sided freestanding monument sign shall be permitted on each parcel frontage of at least one hundred-fifty (150) feet in length based on the following criteria and subject to the standards in Chapter 22.34.

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Maximum Height

Maximum Total Sign Area for Parcel Frontage

Airport Boulevard

12 feet

75 square feet per side

150 square feet of total area

Bayshore Highway

12 feet

75 square feet per side

150 square feet of total area

Gilbreth Road

12 feet

75 square feet per side

150 square feet of total area

All other streets and frontages

8 feet

40 square feet per side

80 square feet of total area

 

     (b)   In addition to the total sign area allowed under Section 22.24.030, one freestanding monument sign at a height of not more than eight (8) feet and a maximum sign area of twenty-five (25) square feet per side (fifty (50) square feet total) shall be permitted on each parcel frontage of less than one hundred-fifty (150) feet in length.

     (c)   Monument Sign Incentive. In order to promote monument signs in this district, two-sided monument signs are considered to be one sign and in measuring total sign area, only one side of the sign is included in the calculation.

     (d)   One pole sign may be placed on a parcel frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet or more on Gilbreth Road in place of an allowed monument sign for that parcel frontage, subject to the criteria in Chapter 22.34 and the following limitations:

 

Street on which Parcel Frontage is Located

Maximum Height

Maximum Sign Area for Pole Sign

Gilbreth Road

40 feet

120 square feet per side

240 square maximum total sign area

 

There is no second side incentive for pole signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.24.050 Wall signs.
     (a)   Wall signs shall be permitted on any defined frontage subject to the sign area limitations of Section 22.24.030 and the placement requirements of Chapter 22.48.

     (b)   No more than three (3) wall signs are allowed on any building frontage.

     (c)   The maximum height of wall signs shall be limited to the height of the signable area of the wall face as defined in Section 22.04.500. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1827 § 7, (2008))

 

22.24.060 Awning signs.
     When located below twenty-four (24) feet in height, awning signs, in accordance with the regulations stated in Section 22.26, shall be permitted as well as wall signs. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.24.070 Illumination requirements.
     (a)   A permanent sign may be non-illuminated, illuminated by internal, internal indirect or external indirect illumination. Consistency with Section 22.08.110 is required. Signs that are externally lit shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, down-directed, and shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign.

     (b)   A sign may not be animated or have flashing illumination.

     (c)   Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.24.080 Changeable copy signs.
     A portion of a monument or freestanding pole sign may include changeable copy, subject to Chapter 22.28. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.24.090 Additional criteria.
     (a)   In addition, up to a total of six (6) signs per parcel not to exceed three (3) feet in height and no larger than three (3) square feet located at driveway entrances and within parking areas shall be exempt from the total square footage calculation.

     (b)   No single sign or single side of a freestanding sign may be larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.26 AWNING, CANOPY AND MARQUEE SIGNS
22.26.010 Where permitted.
     An awning, canopy, or marquee as defined in Chapter 22.04 may be installed on a building in accordance with California Building Code Standards, subject to the zoning requirements for structures on each street or highway frontage and the limitations established in this title in the following zoning districts—C-l, CR, C-2, ECN, TW, SL, IB, AA, RR, APN and APS—and the signs on these structures shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.26.020 Signable area.
     On an awning, canopy and marquee, a sign may be displayed on or attached to only one signable area. The signable area shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the area of the principal face of the awning, canopy or marquee. The signage located on an awning, canopy and marquee shall be considered to be a part of the maximum total signage allowed below twenty-four (24) feet on a specified frontage. Signable area on an awning, canopy and marquee shall not project above, below or beyond the edges of the awning, canopy and marquee on which it is displayed. No advertising material shall be placed upon the roof of a marquee. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.26.030 Projection into public right-of-way.
     Awnings, canopies and marquees which are entirely supported on private property may extend up to four (4) feet into the public right-of way; provided that they shall not extend within three (3) feet of the portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular traffic (measured from the face of the curb). Portions of the awnings, canopies and marquees extending into the public right-of-way or over a private sidewalk shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet between the bottom of the structure and the surface of the ground or sidewalk. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.26.040 Illumination.
     Awnings, canopies and marquees may be unlit or may be externally illuminated only by down-directed and shielded lighting fixtures where the cone of light is contained on the parcel. Internally illuminated awnings and canopies and marquees are prohibited. An internally illuminated sign not to exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the face of a marquee may be placed in a frame on a marquee structure. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.28 CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS
22.28.010 Changeable copy signs.
     A changeable copy sign that does not contain any flashing lights or brilliant or reflected light is allowed in the C-2, RR, IB and APS districts only, so long as the total sign area of all changeable copy signs on the parcel is not more than the following:

     (a)   Fifteen (15) square feet or twenty (20) percent of the maximum total sign area allowed, whichever is less, if the lettering or graphics are movable only by hand; or

     (b)   Six (6) square feet or twenty (20) percent of the maximum sign area allowed, whichever is less, if some or all of the lettering or graphics are movable mechanically or electronically. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.30 COMBINATION SIGNS
22.30.010 General requirements.
     Combination signs are signs which have features or characteristics normally found in signs of more than one classification, and shall meet all the requirements for construction, height, location, supports, illumination or other specifications for each archetype. Where different standards are specified for the archetypes, the more restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.32 EXEMPT SIGNS
22.32.010 Exempt signs.
     Those classes of signs designated in the following sections of this chapter may be erected and maintained in the city without the obtaining of a building permit or sign permit and without the payment of fees; provided, however, all exempt signs are subject to the provisions of Chapter 22.08. In computing the total maximum sign area on any building or parcel for purposes of this title, the face area of exempted signs shall not be included. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.32.020 Signs required by law.
     Signs required by law, including but not limited to signs for essential public services including traffic, fire and police signs, signals, devices and markings of the state, the city, and any other component government authorities; signs of public utility or service companies, including signs showing the placement or location of public utility facilities; and trespass and warning signs, are exempt. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.32.030 Signs integrated into certain devices.
     Any sign integrated into or on a coin-operated machine, vending machine, gasoline pump, or telephone booth are exempt. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.32.040 Signs not visible from right-of-way.
     Any sign that cannot be viewed from a public right-of-way is exempt. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.32.050 Signs carried by persons.
     Any sign carried by a person is exempt, so long as it does not obstruct the use of any public right-of-way. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.32.060 “For Sale” or “For Rent” signs.
     Signs pertaining to the sale, exchange, lease or rental of the real property on which the sign is located, subject to such signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in single-face area in any R zoning district or not exceeding nine (9) square feet in single-face area in any other (commercial or manufacturing) zoning district, shall be exempt. Not more than one such sign may be placed on any lot or parcel of land except that two such signs may be placed on any corner lot or parcel, one such sign facing each of the abutting streets. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.32.070 Window signs.
     A premises, or an occupant of a shopping center or multiuse building, may display window signs not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window area of the façade of the building. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.32.080 Directional signs.
     A premises may display one directional sign at each entrance or exit not more than four (4) square feet. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.32.090 Flags.
     (a)   Flags shall be permitted within the following limitations:

     (1)   The flag shall be of flexible material, typically cloth, paper or plastic, and shall not include those painted on or otherwise erected or attached to any structure, and shall be flown from a flag pole pursuant to this section.

     (2)   No more than three (3) flags shall be permitted per parcel.

     (3)   No flag pole shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above grade.

     (4)   No flag shall exceed a vertical dimension of five (5) feet nor a horizontal dimension of eight (8) feet.

     (5)   No flag pole shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property line.

     (b)   Each flag flown shall be either a noncommercial sign or a sign directly related to a service or business offered on the property on which the flag is being flown.

     (c)   Bunting, pennants and streamers shall only be permitted in the C-2, Subarea D “Auto Row” area and the RR, Adrian Road Auto Row Overlay area. It is recognized that these areas have special historic and community significance and have and should maintain a special character different from other commercial areas. To support this objective, the area shall be allowed to display bunting, pennants and streamers typically associated with automobile sales.

     (d)   Decorative flags as defined in Chapter 25.08, whether temporary or permanent, may be displayed when attached to light poles in a parking area in the C-1, CR, and C-2 zoning districts, provided that the flags do not contain any commercial message, logo or symbol. Each decorative flag may not exceed eight (8) square feet in area, and there shall be no more than one decorative flag per one hundred (100) square feet of public parking area. The lowest portion of the decorative flag shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet above adjacent grade. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.34 FREESTANDING SIGNS
22.34.010 Where permitted.
     As defined in Chapter 22.04, freestanding signs include both monument signs and pole signs.

     (a)   Monument signs are allowed in the R-3, R-4, C-1, CR, C-2, ECN, TW, SL, AA, APN, RR, IB, and APS zoning districts as outlined in the chapter for each district.

     (b)   Pole signs are only allowed on certain street frontages in the C-2, IB, RR, and APS zoning districts. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.34.020 Size and height regulations.
     Freestanding signs shall comply with and not exceed the size and height regulations contained in the chapters for each of the above zoning districts. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.34.030 Materials.
     (a)   Monument signs shall be constructed on a solid foundation in accordance with Titles 17 and 18 of this code. A monument sign shall be designed so that the style and materials of the sign and its base are consistent with the architecture of the building(s) on the site.

     (b)   Pole signs shall be shall be constructed in accordance with Titles 17 and 18 of this code and attached to one or two (2) support poles or posts which shall each have a minimum diameter of twelve (12) inches. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.36 NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS AND MESSAGES
22.36.010 Noncommercial signs and messages.
     Any sign that can be displayed under the provisions of this title may contain a noncommercial message. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.36.020 Noncommercial signs in residential districts.
     In R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts and without a sign permit, noncommercial signs no larger individually than eight (8) square feet and totaling not more than sixty (60) square feet may be placed on a parcel in addition to the other signage that may be allowed pursuant to this code. This provision is intended to allow reasonable noncommercial expression in residential districts where signage has been restricted because of the need to protect the character and value of the residential districts. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.38 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
22.38.010 Change and modification.
     A nonconforming sign or sign structure shall be brought into conformity with this title if it is altered, reconstructed, replaced, or relocated. A change in copy is not an alteration or replacement for purposes of this section. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.38.020 Maintenance.
     Nonconforming signs must be maintained in good condition. Maintenance required by this section shall include replacing or repairing of worn or damaged parts of a sign or sign structure in order to return it to its original state, and is not considered to be a change or modification prohibited by Section 22.38.010. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.38.030 Removal.
     Removal of a nonconforming sign, or replacement of a nonconforming sign with a conforming sign is required when:

     (a)   A nonconforming sign, or a substantial part of a nonconforming sign, is blown down, destroyed, or for any reason or by any means taken down, altered, or removed. As used in this subsection, “substantial” means fifty (50) percent or more of the entire sign structure; or

     (b)   The condition of the nonconforming sign or nonconforming sign structure has deteriorated and the cost of restoration of the sign to its condition immediately prior to such deterioration exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the sign or sign structure prior to its deterioration; or

     (c)   The use of the nonconforming sign, or the property on which it is located, has ceased, become vacant, or been unoccupied for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or more. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.40 PROHIBITED SIGNS
22.40.010 Prohibited signs.
     Those classes of signs designated in the following sections of this chapter are expressly prohibited, and shall not be erected in any zoning district. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.40.020 Signs which conflict with traffic control.
     Signs which by color, location, or design resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or signals are prohibited (see also Section 22.08.040). (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.40.030 Signs on public right-of-way.
     (a)   Except as otherwise allowed under this section, signs, A-boards and advertising structures, placed upon or attached to the ground upon any portion of any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way, including signs attached to light poles or standards, are prohibited.

     (b)   Newspaper vending machines are allowed under Chapter 12.23.

     (c)   Signs required by law allowed under Section 22.32.020 and signs and banners of a civic nature allowed under Section 22.46.060 may be erected and maintained if they comply with the requirements of the code.

     (d)   Figures are allowed under the provisions of Section 22.46.050. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.40.040 Off-premises advertising.
     Signs carrying the advertising of a person, product or service other than that of the occupant of the parcel on which the sign is placed are prohibited; signs are permitted only to the actual occupant of the parcel upon which the sign is displayed during the period of occupancy. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.40.050 Portable signs.
     Portable signs are prohibited. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.40.060 Roof signs, above-roof signs and sky signs.
     Roof signs, above-roof signs and sky signs are prohibited. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.40.070 Signs on vehicles.
     (a)   No person shall park any vehicle on public property and place signs on the vehicle when the dominant purpose or use of the vehicle is to be a sign.

     (b)   If a person parks any vehicle on private property and places signs on the vehicle with the dominant purpose or use of the vehicle is to be a sign, the placement of the vehicle shall require a sign permit and the square footage of the signage on the vehicle shall be counted toward the allowance for the property on which the vehicle is parked. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.40.080 Moving signs.
     Any sign is prohibited if all or part of it moves or rotates. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.40.090 Signs with flashing lights.
     Any sign with animated, moving or flashing lights, or any sign which, because of flashing lights, brilliant lighting or reflected light, is a detriment to surrounding properties or prevents the peaceful enjoyment of residential uses, is prohibited. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.42 PROJECTING SIGNS
22.42.010 Where permitted.
     A premises, and each occupant of a shopping center or multiuse building, may display one projecting sign on each street frontage in the following zoning districts—C-1, CR, C-2, ECN, TW, SL, AA, APN, RR, IB and APS—and in accordance with the size and number regulations contained in the sign code chapter regulating that district. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.42.020 Size and height of projecting signs.
     (a)   Projecting signs shall comply with the size regulations established in the sign code chapter regulating that district.

     (b)   Projecting signs shall not project above twenty-four (24) feet in height or the roofline, whichever is lower. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.42.030 Projection into the public right-of-way.
     (a)   There shall be a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet from the bottom of the sign or its supporting structure to the surface of the ground or sidewalk below.

     (b)   A projecting sign may project no more than four (4) feet into the public right-of-way.

     (c)   A projecting sign may not extend within three (3) feet of any portion of a public right-of-way used principally for vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.44 PROPERTIES WITH NONCONFORMING USES
22.44.010 General requirements.
     Where a legal nonconforming use exists, any signs to be erected shall require application to and approval by the planning commission. The number of signs permitted on the building or parcel, the size and nature thereof and their location on the property shall be determined by the provisions of this code applicable to such property as if it were classified for the actual use then existing; however, the commission may modify such standards if it is determined that the use or condition of adjacent parcels makes such standards inappropriate because the illumination, location or size of the signage would unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment and use of one or more adjacent parcels. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.46 SPECIAL SIGNS
22.46.010 Temporary signs.
     The director of community development is authorized to grant permits for a premises, or an occupant of a shopping center or multiuse building to display one temporary sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height, for no more than thirty (30) days during any twelve (12) consecutive calendar months. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.46.020 Figures.
     Figures may be placed pursuant to a revocable encroachment permit on a public sidewalk in the area fronting to property on which the tenant’s owned or leased space is located in Subarea A of the Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area. Refer to Chapter 12.10, Encroachment Permits, for definition of figures and process for obtaining an encroachment permit. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.46.030 Signs and banners of a civic nature.
     The city manager or the manager’s designee may, upon written application to the manager, issue administrative sign permits for temporary signs and banners announcing a community event sponsored by a charitable or educational group in the city at no more than two (2) places in the city. The city manager shall, prior to issuance of a permit, require recommendations regarding matters of safety, construction and location from applicable city departments, and shall ensure that all the following conditions are fulfilled:

     (a)   Each sign is required for the convenience or safety of the public;

     (b)   Each sign is directly related to an event that is clearly of a noncommercial nature directly related to the city;

     (c)   Each sign is of a temporary nature, and not to remain up longer than fourteen (14) consecutive days in any twelve (12) month period; and

     (d)   Insurance in the amount set by the city attorney for such permits be provided. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Chapter 22.48 WALL SIGNS
22.48.010 Where permitted.
     In all zoning districts, a premises, and each occupant of a shopping center or multiuse building, may display wall signs on walls adjacent to each street, public right-of-way or private parking lot on which it has frontage in accordance with the height and area requirements of the zoning district or planning subarea. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.48.020 Signable area.
     (a)   Wall signs shall only be erected within areas that are signable area as defined in Chapter 22.04. The maximum area of the signage allowed is restricted by the total sign area designated for each frontage in each zoning district. The signable area(s) on each façade of the building that has frontage on a public street, right-of-way or parking lot shall be an area of the building façade which does not contain architectural features and windows.

     (b)   Sign area shall not exceed a maximum of eighty (80) percent of the signable area and no greater that fifty-five (55) percent of the vertical dimension of a designated sign band, and in no event shall the sign area be greater than the maximum sign area specified by this title for the zoning district in which the parcel is located. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1874 § 6, (2012))

 

22.48.030 Number and height.
     Wall signs may be displayed as one or divided among two (2) or more wall signs. Height is determined by the height of the signable area of the building façade. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

 

22.48.040 Additional limitations.
     Wall signs may be painted on or attached to the wall, but must not project from the wall by more than twelve (12) inches and must not interrupt architectural details. (Ord. 1807 § 2, (2007))

Title 23 SWIMMING POOLS, HOT TUBS AND SPAS
Chapter 23.01 REGULATIONS

Chapter 23.01 REGULATIONS
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: 1941 Code §§ 2410—2419, Ords. 699 and 927.

 

23.01.010 Definitions.
     (a)   Swimming Pool. “Swimming pool” or “pool” means any artificially constructed pool, used for swimming or bathing, twenty-four (24) inches or more in depth at any point, and with a surface area exceeding one hundred (100) square feet.

     (b)   Hot Tub and Spa. “Hot tub” or “spa” means a similar facility of twenty-four (24) inches or more in depth at any point and with a surface area of less than one hundred (100) square feet. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980))

 

23.01.020 Permit to install, construct or alter.
     (a)   No person shall install, construct or alter any swimming pool, hot tub or spa without first obtaining a building permit and appropriate electrical, plumbing, mechanical or other permits from the building official. Application for such permits shall be accompanied by plans in sufficient detail to show:

     (1)   Plot plan, showing location on property and relationship to all existing or proposed structures;

     (2)   Dimensions of unit, including depth and volume in gallons;

     (3)   Type and size of filter system;

     (4)   Unit piping layout with all sizes of pipe and types of material;

     (5)   Waste disposal system;

     (6)   Construction details;

     (7)   Fencing;

     (8)   Deck drainage.

     (b)   If any wall of a pool exceeds four (4) feet six (6) inches in height, the plans must be prepared or approved by a registered civil engineer or licensed architect. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980))

 

23.01.030 Registration of pools, hot tubs and spas.
     The building official shall keep a register of all swimming pools, hot tubs and spas within the city. Matters to be recorded shall include the address or legal description of the property, size of the unit, a general description of the improvements and accessories thereof and spaces for dates upon which inspections by any authority of the city are made. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980))

 

23.01.040 Location on property.
     (a)   Pools, hot tubs and spas, as well as separate accessory equipment, shall not be constructed in that portion of the property which is the front setback. (See Section 25.62.010, et seq. of this code.) There shall be a distance of at least four (4) feet between any unit and any side or rear property line and at least five (5) feet between a pool and any other structure.

     (b)   Separated accessory equipment, if not enclosed, shall be ten (10) feet from the property line. If enclosed in a soundproof structure, such enclosure shall meet requirements of Municipal Code Section 25.60.010. No portion of a pool, hot tub or spa may be constructed in any public utility easement or drainage easement.

     (c)   Hot tubs and spas above ground may be placed immediately adjacent to another structure. If they are to be below ground, the distance shall be regulated so that all portions are above a line drawn at forty-five (45) degrees (1-to-1 slope) from the junction of the foundation of the adjacent structure and grade. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980))

 

23.01.050 Safety requirements.
     (a)   A fence entirely enclosing the pool, hot tub or spa or yard containing it shall be erected and maintained. Such fence shall not be less than four (4) feet six (6) inches, nor more than six (6) feet in height. All gates must be self-closing and self-latching, and the latch or lock shall be located at least four (4) feet six (6) inches above the surface of the underlying ground or floor. A space at least four (4) feet in width shall be provided between the line of the fence and the edge of the unit. Fencing is to be constructed and approved before filling the unit.

     (b)   Walks or decks surrounding the unit shall be finished so as to minimize slipping.

     (c)   Overhead electrical conductor clearance shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code, except that (1) no utility lines, service drops or any other overhead conductor shall be allowed above any portion of the surface of the pool, hot tub or spa; and (2) beyond such overhead area such lines will be allowed within an eighteen (18)-foot radius of a pool or a ten (10) -foot radius of a hot tub or spa. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1772 § 2, (2005))

 

23.01.060 Lighting.
     No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in or about a pool, hot tub or spa in such a manner as to be a nuisance. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980))

 

23.01.070 Water supply.
     (a)   There shall be no inlet connection between any domestic water supply line and any circulation pump, filter, water softener or other apparatus or device that comes in contact with the water in or from the pool, hot tub or spa. Backflow protection shall be provided between the domestic water supply and any direct connection with the unit water supply. If the water is added by a removable hose or similar device, an antisiphon device or backflow preventer shall be installed on the nearest hose bib.

     (b)   If the unit has a filter cleaned by a backwash process, it must terminate in a separation tank or into a sewer in an approved manner. For the purpose of this section, a separation tank, also called a reclamation tank, is a device which separates and removes sludge and waste filter material from waste water and returns the clarified water to the pool.

     (c)   If the unit has a filter element which is removed for cleaning purposes, the element shall be removed and cleaned in an approved plumbing receptacle connected to the sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980))

 

23.01.080 Enforcement officers.
     The director of public works and the building official shall enforce all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980))

 

23.01.090 Variances.
     Exceptions to the regulations of this chapter shall be applied for and granted pursuant to the variance provisions of Title 25 of this code. (Ord. 1185 § 1, (1980))

Title 24 RESERVED

Title 25 ZONING
Chapter 25.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 25.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 25.12 DISTRICTS
Chapter 25.16 PROCEDURE FOR CLASSIFICATION, RECLASSIFICATION, VARIANCE OR SPECIAL PERMIT
Chapter 25.20 PERMITS AND LICENSES
Chapter 25.24 FEES
Chapter 25.26 R-1 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.27 R-2 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.28 R-3 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.29 R-4 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.30 C-1 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.31 C-2 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.32 BAC (BURLINGAME AVENUE COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.33 HMU (HOWARD MIXED USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.34 MMU (MYRTLE ROAD MIXED USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.35 BMU (BAYSWATER MIXED USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.36 DAC (DONNELLY AVENUE COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.37 CAC (CHAPIN AVENUE COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.38 CAR (CALIFORNIA DRIVE AUTO ROW) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.39 RRMU (NORTH ROLLINS ROAD MIXED-USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.40 NBMU (NORTH BURLINGAME MIXED USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.42 C-R DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.43 INNER BAYSHORE DISTRICT (IB)
Chapter 25.44 ROLLINS ROAD (RR) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.45 SHORELINE DISTRICT (SL)
Chapter 25.46 T-P DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 25.47 ANZA AREA
Chapter 25.48 ANZA POINT NORTH (APN)
Chapter 25.49 ANZA POINT SOUTH (APS)
Chapter 25.50 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 25.51 SPECIAL PERMIT
Chapter 25.52 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Chapter 25.54 VARIANCES
Chapter 25.55 MINOR MODIFICATIONS
Chapter 25.56 RENTAL OR LEASE OF VACANT SCHOOL PROPERTIES
Chapter 25.57 DESIGN REVIEW
Chapter 25.58 GENERAL USE PROVISIONS
Chapter 25.59 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
Chapter 25.60 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS
Chapter 25.61 ADDITIONS TO OR MODIFICATIONS OF RESIDENCES IN HILLSIDE AREAS
Chapter 25.63 DENSITY BONUS
Chapter 25.66 REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR ACCESSIBILITY
Chapter 25.68 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Chapter 25.70 OFF-STREET PARKING
Chapter 25.74 AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOTS, SALES LOTS AND SERVICE STATIONS
Chapter 25.76 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Chapter 25.77 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Chapter 25.78 FENCES AND HEDGES
Chapter 25.80 PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPACT FEES
Chapter 25.81 COMMERCIAL LINKAGE FEES
Chapter 25.82 RESIDENTIAL IMPACT FEES

Chapter 25.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
25.04.010 Zoning plan established—Purpose.
     (a)   The zoning plan of this title is established for the following purposes:

     (1)   Promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the residents of the city;

     (2)   Preserving a wholesome, serviceable and attractive community by adopting regulations and restrictions that increase the safety and security of home life and its incidents;

     (3)   Prevention of congestion, disorder and danger which often occur in unregulated municipal development by preventing the overcrowding of land and providing reasonable means to effectively protect and promote the general welfare and common rights of all;

     (4)   Promotion of wholesome, sightly, harmonious and economic results in the use of property, building construction, civic service, activities and operations:

     (5)   Establishing regulations to limit the location, uses and occupancy of building structures and land to be used for trade, industry, residences and other purposes and also the location, height, bulk, occupancy and coverage, street setbacks, including percentage of lot occupancy and coverage, street setback lines, sizes or yards and other open spaces;

     (6)   Encourage remodeling of existing residential structures which conform to the general design of the existing structure;

     (7)   Preserving neighborhood character by designing new single family structures, accessory buildings and other structures to be consistent with the existing character ambience, mass and bulk of the other structures in the neighborhood where the new construction is located;

     (8)   Regulation of the size and use of signs and the height of fences.

     (b)   To accomplish the purpose aforesaid the city is divided into districts of such number, shape and area and of such common unity of purposes or uses that are deemed most suitable to provide for the best general civic use and to protect the common rights and interest of all. (Ord. 539 § 1, (1954); Ord. 1378 § 1, (1988))

 

25.04.020 Powers and duties of planning commission.
     The planning commission heretofore appointed shall constitute the planning commission of this city. It shall be so constituted, and have the powers and duties, as set forth in Chapter 3.40 of this code. (1941 Code § 1900, Ord. 539, (1954))

 

25.04.040 Incorporation of state planning act by reference.
     Except as otherwise herein provided, the printing and substance of the certain act of the Legislature of the State of California, entitled “Conservation & Planning,” as set forth in Title 7 of the Government Code, and as subsequently amended, is incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference thereto. (1941 Code § 1902, Ord. 539, (1954))

 

25.04.050 Interpretation of title as minimum requirements.
     In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other provisions of this code or other rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall control. (1941 Code § 1917, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.04.060 Application to municipal buildings and uses.
     The provisions of this title shall apply to all buildings, improvements, lots and premises, owned, leased, operated or controlled by the city or any department thereof, or by any other municipal or quasi-municipal or public corporation or governmental agency; provided, however, that uses of all buildings and property engaged in the performance of a public function may be permitted in any zone or district herein described, provided such use is, in the opinion of the council, after determination and recommendation by the commission, not obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community. (1941 Code § 1920, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.04.070 Uses limited to those permitted.
     Excepting as authorized in this title, no premises may be used, occupied or maintained, and no building or improvement or premises shall be, or shall be permitted to be, designed, arranged, intended, used, occupied, constructed, established, maintained, altered or enlarged for any purpose other than for the uses permitted by this title in the district in which it is located. Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited. Specification of prohibited uses in any district shall be for illustration, example or emphasis only, and shall not be interpreted or understood as allowing uses neither permitted or expressly prohibited. (1941 Code § 1920, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1403 § 6, (1990))

 

25.04.080 Consistency with general or specific plans and CEQA.
     Approval of a zoning, rezoning, variance or use permit pursuant to this title shall be based on a finding that the approval is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plan adopted by the city council. Applications for a zoning, rezoning, variance or use permit shall be denied if found to be inconsistent with the general plan or applicable specific plan. Prior to taking action on any application, the approving authority, i.e., planning commission or city council, shall review the environmental status of the project for which the application is being made. Unless the project is categorically exempt or received a negative declaration, the approving authority shall have certified the environmental impact report as complete and adequate before action on the application. (Ord. 1229 § 1, (1982))

Chapter 25.08 DEFINITIONS
25.08.010 Definitions generally.
     For the purpose of this title the plural includes the singular, the masculine includes the feminine and neuter, and vice versa, except as otherwise provided. Other terms used in this title shall be defined as set forth in this chapter. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.015 Accessory structure.
     “Accessory structure” means any building or structure over thirty (30) inches above grade the use of which is incidental to the main building on the same lot. (Ord. 1179 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.020 Accessory use.
     “Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental to the principal use of land and/or building located on the same lot with the main building or use. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.022 Accessory use, RR.
     “Accessory use, RR District” means a use which is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal permitted or conditional use of land and/or building, does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of each tenant’s floor area within the structure or equivalent of the site, except that when outdoor storage is the primary use of the site such outdoor storage areas may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross site area; parking must be provided on site as required in Chapter 25.70. (Ord. 1543 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1793 § 17, (2006))

 

25.08.030 Accessory living quarters.
     “Accessory living quarters” means living quarters within an accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for the sole use of persons employed on the premises or of members of the same family, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. (1941 § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.035 Addition.
     “Addition” means construction which extends or increases the building envelope. (Ord. 1620 § 4, (1999))

 

25.08.040 Agriculture.
     “Agriculture” means the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, livestock, farming, dairying or animal husbandry, including all uses customary and incidental thereto, but not including slaughter houses, fertilizer works, bone yards, or plants for the reduction of animal matter. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.050 Airport.
     “Airport” means any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and launching of aircraft. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.060 Alley.
     “Alley” means a public or private way providing a secondary means of access to public or private property. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.070 Alter, alterations.
     “Alter, alterations” means any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.077 Animal shelter or animal rescue center.
     “Animal shelter” or “animal rescue center” means a facility operated by a government agency, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, humane society, or rescue group providing services for stray, lost, injured, or unwanted animals, including treatment, regulated under Division 14 of the Food & Agriculture Code (Sections 30500 to 32030). Such a use may include facilities for public education and training of volunteers, as well as facilities for the keeping of animals for adoption on site for a limited time. (Ord. 1789 § 3, (2006))

 

25.08.080 Apartment.
     “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit and has kitchen facilities permanently installed. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.090 Apartment house.
     “Apartment house” means a building, or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units used as a residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other, and in which each unit contains a kitchen. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.091 Arbor
     “Arbor” means a free-standing structure that is substantially open to the passage of light and air on the roof and all sides, and serves to roof a gate, driveway, or walkway. “Substantially open” as used in this subsection means that the sides and roof of the arbor are at least sixty (60) percent open around any given point across each side and the roof. (Ord. 1728 § 2, (2004); Ord. 1793 § 16, (2006))

 

25.08.092 Automobile dealers and dealerships.
     “Automobile dealers and dealerships” means an authorized automobile or vehicles sales agency or any business that acquires, leases, divides, distributes, or delivers at retail or wholesale, new or used automobiles and vehicles, including light trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles, and including any vehicle preparation or repair work considered as an accessory use; “automobile dealership” applies to the use of any building, land area, or other premises for the display and sale of new or used vehicles. (Ord. 1760 § 4, (2005))

 

25.08.095 Automobile leasing.
     “Automobile leasing” means the business of renting, leasing or bailing of vehicles for a term exceeding four (4) months and for a fixed rate or price. (Ord. 1383 § 1,  (1988))

 

25.08.097 Automobile rental.
     “Automobile rental” means the business of renting, leasing or bailing of vehicles for a term not exceeding four (4) months and for a fixed rate or price. (Ord. 1383 § 2, (1988))

 

25.08.098 Automobile repair, minor.
     “Minor automobile repair” means minor repairs, including, sale and service of spark plugs, batteries and distributors and distributor parts, replacement of mufflers, tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulb fuses, windshield wipers and wiper blades, wheel bearings, radiator maintenance, adjusting and repairing brakes, and other incidental replacement of parts to passenger automobiles and trucks not to exceed one and one-half tons capacity. (Ord. 1760 § 5, (2005))

 

25.08.100 Automobile or trailer sales lot.
     “Automobile or trailer sales lot” means an open area upon which automobiles or trailers are, or may be, parked or displayed for the purpose of sales or demonstration, together with accessory buildings necessary for the use, and where no repair work except minor incidental repairs are done. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1959); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.110 Balcony.
     “Balcony” means a platform, enclosed by a parapet or railing, projecting from an exterior wall of a building and open to the sky. A balcony may be either cantilevered or supported from below. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1521 § 12, (1995))

 

25.08.120 Basement.
     “Basement” means the portion of a building between floor and ceiling that is wholly or partially underground. Where more than two (2) feet of any portion of the basement’s height is above the existing grade next to the basement, a basement shall be counted as a story. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1649 § 2, (2001))

 

25.08.123 Bay window.
     “Bay Window” is a window or group of windows that extends outward from a wall of a building forming a projection from a building. “Bow,” oriel and similar projecting windows shall be included in this definition (see also Section 25.08.323, Greenhouse window) (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.124 Beauty shop or barbershop.
     “Beauty shop” or “barbershop” means a personal service business conducted by barbers, cosmetologists, electrologists, estheticians, or manicurists licensed by the state. Services provided may include nail care; hair cutting, styling and treatment; and skin care and treatment, including facials, cosmetic application, waxing and body wraps. A beauty shop or barbershop may include massage when conducted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 6.40 of this code. (Ord. 1702 § 2, (2003))

 

25.08.125 Bedroom.
     “Bedroom” means an enclosed area that:

     (a)   Is within a structure; and

     (b)   Is seventy (70) square feet or more with no dimension less than seven (7) feet; and

     (c)   Contains one or more windows and a door; and

     (d)   Is not a kitchen, living room, or dining room.

A room having the potential of being a bedroom shall be considered a bedroom for parking calculation purposes, unless the doorway access to the room with potential for being a bedroom is only through another bedroom. (Ord. 1390 § 1, (1989);Ord. 1603 § 3, (1998))

 

25.08.130 Block.
     “Block” means that property so designated on an official map of the city or part of the city, or bounded by streets or street and railroad right-of-way or by streets or street and unsubdivided acreage. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.137 Boarding kennel.
     “Boarding kennel” means any kennel where more than the number of animals allowed for a single site under Title 9 of this code and owned by another person are temporarily boarded for pay or other compensation of any kind; provided, however, this definition shall not apply to zoos, animal shelters, animal rescue centers, or veterinary hospitals. (Ord. 1789 § 4, (2006))

 

25.08.140 Boardinghouse.
     “Boardinghouse” means a rooming house with a common dining room for paying guests. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.145 Broadway Commercial Area.
     “Broadway Commercial Area” means the area shown on the map attached to Ordinance 1272, and this area shall be subject to the specific provisions of this code concerning uses therein. (Ord. 1586 § 2, (1998))

 

25.08.150 Building.
     “Building” means any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter, housing or protection of persons, animals or chattels. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.155 Building materials and garden supply store.
     “Building materials and garden supply store” means a retail or wholesale establishment that predominantly sells building materials, paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures, lumber, nursery stock, lawn and garden supplies, electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies, and building and construction tools. (Ord. 1789 § 5, (2006))

 

25.08.180 Carport.
     “Carport” means a roofed automobile shelter open on one or more sides. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.182 Ceiling height.
     “Ceiling height” means the distance between the floor and the lowest ceiling joist, pipe, or similar construction above the floor. (Ord. 1649 § 3, (2001))

 

25.08.183 Church.
     “Church” means any building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body or organization to sustain public worship. (Ord. 1753 § 8, (2005))

 

25.08.185 Class.
     “Class” means a group of three (3) or more persons meeting regularly for study, instruction, discussion, counseling or similar activity. (Ord. 1403 § 1, (1990))

 

25.08.190 Club.
     “Club” means an association of persons for the promotion of some common object, members of which are admitted only upon invitation, and the chief activity of which is not conducted for profit. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.200 Commission.
     “Commission” means the planning commission of the city of Burlingame. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.205 Courtyard.
     “Courtyard” means an open space, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, that is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls of a building that is on the same lot. (Ord. 1627 § 5, (2000); Ord. 628 § 5, (2000))

 

25.08.210 Curb level.
     “Curb level” means the level of the established curb in front of a building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been established, the city engineer shall establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this section. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.212 Declining height envelope.
     “Declining height envelope” means an inclined plane beginning at a stated height above grade at a side property line, and extending toward the center of the site at a stated upward angle. (See Figure 25.08.212)

 

 

 

Figure 25.08.212

 



 

(Ord. 1378 § 2, (1988); Ord. 1603 § 4, (1998))

 

 

25.08.215 Delicatessen.
     “Delicatessen” means a business which sells prepared and pre-prepared cooked foods, meats, smoked fish, cheese and/or salads for consumption on or off premises. (Ord. 1328 § 1, (1986))

 

25.08.220 District.
     “District” means a portion of the city within which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted or prohibited and in which other buildings or land restrictions may be specified as set forth herein. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.225 Drive-in service.
     “Drive-in service” means a feature or characteristic of a use involving sales of products or provision of services to occupants in vehicles, including drive-in or drive-up windows and drive-through services such as mechanical automobile washing. (Ord. 1312 § 1, (1985))

 

25.08.227 Driveway.
     “Driveway” means a roadway providing the most direct access for vehicles from a right-of-way to a garage, dwelling, other structure or parking space. (Ord. 1341 § 1, (1987))

 

25.08.230 Duplex.
     “Duplex” means a detached building designed for, or altered to provide dwelling units for, occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other with separate kitchens in each unit. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

 

25.08.240 Dwelling, multifamily.
     “Multifamily dwelling” means a building, or portion thereof, used and designed as a residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other with each unit having its own kitchen, including apartment houses and flats, but not including automobile courts or motels. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, 1961))

 

25.08.250 Dwelling, single-family.
     “Single-family dwelling” means a residence building containing but one kitchen, designed and/or used to house not more than one family, and not more at any time than three (3) paying guests of such family. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.253 Emergency shelter.
     “Emergency shelter” means a facility or use, which provides temporary housing (six (6) months or less) for homeless individuals or families and may involve supplemental services. Supplemental services may include, but are not limited to, meal preparation, an activities center, day care for homeless person’s children, vocational rehabilitation and other similar activities. (Ord. 1865 § 3, (2011))

 

25.08.255 Façade.
     “Façade” means:

     (a)   The exterior walls of a building or structure exposed to public view; or

     (b)   The walls viewed by a person not inside the building; or

     (c)   For a tenant space within a larger building, the portion of the exterior walls that corresponds to the interior space occupied by the tenant or business establishment; or

     (d)   Any awnings on or attached to the exterior walls that meet the definition of façade. (Ord. 1652 § 2, (2001))

 

25.08.260 Family.
     “Family” means a person, or a group of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common household, but excluding sororities, fraternities, clubs or similar organizations. A family shall be deemed to include servants. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.263 Fence.
     “Fence” means a structure of wood, masonry, metal or other solid material built on or close to a property line for the purpose of physically separating properties. (Ord. 1394 § 1, (1989))

 

25.08.264 Financial institution.
     “Financial institution” means:

     (a)   A state-licensed bank, national bank, savings and loan association, savings bank, federal credit union, industrial loan company or finance company and money machines associated with them; and

     (b)   A financial institution installed in another business, whether financially independent or not, shall be considered a financial institution, and required to meet all requirements of Title 25 for financial institutions;

     (c)   Freestanding automatic teller machines (ATMs) or similar machines dispensing currency and other items for cash or debit shall not be considered financial institutions;

     (d)   Investment advisors or brokers, as defined in Section 25.08.388, shall not be considered financial institutions, and shall be considered general office uses. (Ord. 1403 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1552 § 1, (1996); Ord. 1588 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 4, (2011))

 

25.08.264-1 Floor area—Gross square footage.
     “Floor area, gross square footage” means the total area of all floors of a building or buildings as measured to the outside surfaces of the exterior walls of the structure or structures and including such areas as halls, stairways, covered porches and balconies, covered walkways and arcades, elevator shafts, service and mechanical equipment rooms and basements, cellars, and improved space in attic areas. (Ord. 1482 § 1, (1993); Ord. 1586 § 4, (1998))

 

25.08.265 Floor area ratio (FAR).
     (a)   “Floor area ratio” or “FAR” means the ratio of the gross square footage of the floor area of a building or buildings to the lot on which the building or buildings are located. FAR for any lot includes new structures to be built and those remaining.

     (b)   Single-Family Residential.

     (1)   In calculating FAR on a lot, the measurement shall include the gross floor areas of the primary dwelling, attached garages, and all accessory structures on foundations, and shall include all basements with a ceiling height of six (6) feet or greater. Open spaces within the structure that are higher than twelve (12) feet shall be counted as two (2) floors.

     (2)   Up to six hundred (600) square feet of basement with a ceiling height of six (6) feet or greater shall be deducted from the floor area measurement for FAR under subsection (b)(1) above if it meets both of the following standards:

     (A)  The top of the finished floor above the basement is less than two (2) feet above existing grade; and

     (B)   No part of the basement is intended or used for parking.

     (3)   Deducted from the floor area computation for single-family residences are:

     (A)  Covered porches or decks on the first floor totaling two hundred (200) square feet or less which face a street and are not located on the rear of the dwelling. An area under a balcony shall be considered a covered porch if the balcony is over an exterior exit from the building; and

     (B)   Uncovered balconies and decks on the second floor; and

     (C)   Existing attic areas that are retained or reduced, but not extended in new construction. In all other cases, habitable attic areas shall be counted as floor area in calculating FAR; and

     (D)  Accessible space between the surface of the ground and the bottom of the first floor joists that measures less than six (6) feet in height shall not be counted as floor area in calculating FAR; and

     (E)   Lower floor or basement of one hundred (100) square feet or less, even if the lower floor or basement extends more than two (2) feet above existing grade.

     (c)   Commercial Development.

     (1)   In calculating FAR for commercial development the measurement shall apply to the gross floor area of the building above the average elevation of the curb opposite the front wall and does not include basements or cellars.

     (A)  For parking structures and buildings having enclosed space without floors, each twelve (12) feet in height shall be considered as a story. In addition, each fraction of twelve (12) feet in height shall be calculated as a fraction of a story. The calculated gross floor area of parking structures, auditoriums and other buildings with large enclosed spaces shall be determined by multiplying the covered lot area by the equivalent number of stories plus any fraction thereof.

     (B)   The floor area for the parking structure or building having enclosed space without floors will then be added to the floor area of the other building space on-site and dividing by the total lot area of the project.

     (2)   Exempted from floor area ratio computation for commercial development are:

     (A)  Chimneys, cupolas, flag poles;

     (B)   Water tanks, elevator penthouses or other mechanical appurtenances; and

     (C)   Fire or hose towers.

     (3)   In some of the commercial districts in the city, a separate maximum floor area ratio is established for a particular use on a lot as well as a maximum overall floor area ratio for a lot. (Ord. 1025 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1482 § 2, (1993); Ord. 1521 § 13, (1995); Ord. 1552 § 2, (1996); Ord. 1586 § 5, (1998); Ord. 1649 § 4, (2001); Ord. 1773 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1928 § 2, (2016))

 

25.08.268 Food establishment.
     “Food establishment” means a business which sells any kind of food or drink at retail and which contains any interior or on-site customer seating (seating in the public right-of-way is not on-site); mini-marts or similar kiosk type sales areas at service stations or other similar free standing retail businesses and incidental food sales are not food establishments. (Ord. 1302 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1619 § 2, (1999))

 

25.08.268-1 Food establishment—Free standing.
     “Free standing food establishment” means a food establishment is the sole use of a structure. (Ord. 1495 § 3, (1994))

 

25.08.268-2 Food establishment—Bar.
     “Bar” means a business in which the primary business is serving alcoholic drinks at retail for consumption on the premises, has a liquor license, and does not serve minors. Operating criteria to define a bar include some or all of the following: a commercial glass washer or dish washer, a limited food menu and no service to the public between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 1495 § 3, (1994); Ord. 1619 § 3, (1999))

 

25.08.268-3 Food establishment—Full service.
     “Full service restaurant” or “full service food establishment” means a business which sells food prepared indoors on the premise with a full menu and provides an indoor seating area of at least two hundred fifty (250) square feet. Such businesses may provide for the sale of alcoholic beverages as an accessory and secondary use. Operating criteria to define a full service food establishment include most or all of the following: served by waiters to seated customers and where payment is made at the end of the meal; presence of a full commercial kitchen and commercial dishwasher; and food is served on ceramic plates with metal flatware and cloth napkins. (Ord. 1619 § 4, (1999))

 

25.08.268-4 Food establishment—Limited food service.
     “Limited food service” means a business which sells food which is ready to eat such as sandwiches, frozen deserts or beverages served in edible, plastic or disposable containers. Operating criteria to define a limited food service include some or all of the following: no commercial kitchen; no commercial dish washer; take out food service only; and an indoor seating area of less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet. (Ord. 1619 § 4, (1999))

 

 

25.08.268-5 Food establishment—Specialty shop.
     “Specialty shop” means a business which sells food and has a posted menu. Operating criteria to define a specialty shop generally include two (2) or more of all of the following: food is ordered and/or served at a counter and paid for before consumption; provides take-out counter space and space for customer queue; items are ordered from posted menus and prepared for immediate consumption; food is served in edible or disposable containers with disposable flatware; the facilities provided for consumption of food on the premise are insufficient for the volume of food sold in the place; and more than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of seating. (Ord. 1619 § 4, (1999))

 

25.08.268-6 Food sales—Incidental.
     “Incidental food sales” means a business in which the sale of foods prepared on the site is a minor portion of the non-food sales retail business on the site or is an infrequent occurrence as a part of some other on-site business activity, such as a special sale or seasonal promotion, and there is no interior or on-site seating for customers to use for food or drink consumption. Seating on the public right-of-way is not on-site. Snack shops (such as candy stores, nut and popcorn specialty shops), grocery stores, and produce markets are businesses included in this definition. (Ord. 1619 § 4, (1999))

 

25.08.269 Footprint.
     “Footprint” is the gross floor area to the outside of the exterior walls plus roof overhangs, eaves, balconies and decks and trellises over outdoor areas. Footprint applies to first floor area and floor areas of the floors above the first which extend beyond first floors. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.270 Frontage.
     “Frontage” means all property abutting on one side of a street, between two (2) intersecting streets, measured along the street line. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.280 Garage, private.
     “Private garage” means a detached accessory building or portion of a main building for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the premises. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.290 Garage, public.
     “Public garage” means a building, or portion thereof except a private garage, used or designed to be used for the storage or care of self-propelled vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.300 Gasoline service station.
     “Gasoline service station” means the buildings and premises and use thereof for the retail distribution of gasoline directly to motor vehicles except semi-trailer trucks, and minor automobile repairs, and including the sale of associated sundry items and pre-prepared foods for consumption off the premises in conjunction with the sales of gasoline provided that the gross floor area devoted to the sale of such sundry items and prepared foods does not exceed a maximum area of five hundred (500) gross square feet. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1760 § 6, (2005))

 

25.08.310 Grade.
     “Grade” means the average of the existing ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to, and within five (5) feet of, a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.312 Grade, adjacent.
     “Adjacent grade” means the level of the soil immediately next to a structure or proposed structure. (Ord. 1649 § 5, (2001))

 

25.08.320 Grade, established.
     “Established grade” means the curbline grade at the lot lines established by the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.321 Grade, existing.
     “Existing grade” means the grade on a site prior to any grading or movement of soil for additional construction. (Ord. 1649 § 6, (2001))

 

25.08.322 Grade, natural.
     “Natural grade” means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state or as determined by the city engineer who may refer to original subdivision and subdivision grading plans if available. (Ord. 1649 § 7, (2001); Ord. 1649 § 7, (2002))

 

25.08.322-1 Graphics arts and design retail business.
     “Graphics arts and design retail business” means a pedestrian-oriented retail business that must include all of the following: is pedestrian friendly, including from the sidewalk vantage a visible retail sales area, with at least twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the first floor devoted to retail sales oriented to walk-in retail business, and with more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross revenues from the business derived from taxable retail sales. (Ord. 1691 § 2, (2000))

 

25.08.323 Greenhouse window.
     “Greenhouse window” is a three (3) sided window with shelf or shelves. It is set into a wall and projects from the face of the structure. It is not meant to be used for sitting, enclosed storage or as a walking area. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.324 Grocery store.
     “Grocery store” means a business which sells staple food stuffs (as coffee, sugar, flour) and usually meats and other foods (such as fruits, vegetables, dairy products) and household supplies (such as soap, matches, paper napkins); a minor portion of the food sold may be processed on site (such as in deli or bakery services). A grocery store shall have no interior or on-site customer seating to be used for food or drink consumption. A grocery store is not a food establishment. Food stores specializing in a single type of these items (such as candy stores, produce only shops, coffee and tea shops) are not classified as grocery stores. (Ord. 1619 § 5, (1999))

 

25.08.325 Group residential facilities for the elderly.
     “Group residential facilities for the elderly” means a residence for elderly persons sixty (60) years of age or over, in good health and not bedfast, which residence provides centralized dining facilities and related living services. (Ord. 1050 § 1, (1975))

 

25.08.330 Guest, paying.
     “Paying guest” means any person renting one or more rooms or portions thereof. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.335 Habitable area.
     “Habitable area” means any area within a structure defined as habitable area by the Uniform Building Code. (Ord. 1378 § 3, (1998))

 

25.08.336 Health service.
     “Health service” means an office, clinic, laboratory or any other facility engaged in furnishing medical, surgical or other services including a physician, dentist, dental technician, chiropractor, acupressurist, acupuncturist, therapist, counselor or other similar occupation. (Ord. 1403 § 3, (1990))

 

25.08.337 Hedge.
     “Hedge” means a compact planting of any type of plant or shrub which acts or is intended to act as a fence. (See Section 25.08.263.) (Ord. 1394 § 2, (1989))

 

25.08.340 Height of building.
     “Height of building” means the vertical distance between average top of curb and to the highest edge of a gable, hip or shed roof or top of parapet. Building height shall apply to not less than ninety-five (95) percent of the total roof surface; the remaining five (5) percent may project not more than ten (10) feet above top of parapet and may only be used for enclosing elevators, mechanical penthouses, solar structures, antennas or other equipment. (Ord. 1320 § 2, (1986))

 

25.08.350 Home occupation.
     “Home occupation” is any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling unit in an R zone pursuant to Chapter 25.68. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 965 § 1, (1972); Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985))

 

25.08.360 Home for the ambulatory aged.
     “Home for the ambulatory aged” means an establishment where the proprietor furnishes lodging and varying degrees of custodial care to persons who are elderly, but otherwise in good health and not bedfast. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.380 Hotel or motel.
     “Hotel or motel” means an establishment consisting of a building or a group of attached or detached buildings containing lodging accommodations designed for use by transients, travelers or temporary guests for short term stays. Facilities provided may include maid service, desk service, meal and beverage service, meeting rooms, incidental merchandise sales, barber and beauty shops, in-room guest convenience areas without standard kitchen appliances such as cook tops, full-sized refrigerators and full-sized kitchen sink, and other incidental services and facilities. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1552 § 3, (1996))

 

25.08.383 Hotel, extended stay.
     “Extended stay hotel” means an establishment consisting of a building or group of attached or detached buildings containing lodging accommodations of one or more rooms typically let for periods of a week or more and that contain standard kitchens and appliances and other facilities to support such extended occupancy. “Extended stay hotels” includes residential hotels. (Ord. 1760 § 8, (2005))

 

25.08.385 Hotel, residential.
     “Residential hotel” means an establishment consisting of a building or group of attached or detached buildings containing lodging accommodations of one or more rooms typically let for periods of a week or more and which contain standard kitchens and appliances and other facilities to support such extended occupancy. (Ord. 1552 § 4, (1996))

 

25.08.386 Hotel room.
     “Hotel room” means a room rented or used by a transient guest or customer that has four (4) walls, a door, a bathroom, a closet with doors and a window, and that is a minimum of three hundred (300) gross square feet or the minimum square footage required by the California Building Code current edition as amended by the city of Burlingame, whichever is greater. (Ord. 1760 § 10, (2005))

 

25.08.387 Improved space.
     “Improved space” means any area within a structure for which a building permit was issued for the interior finish of the area. Improved space may or may not be habitable under current California Building Code requirements. (1586 § 6, (1998))

 

25.08.388 Investment advisor or broker.
     “Investment advisor or broker” means an investment or financial counselor or manager, broker or dealer in stocks, bonds, or commodities, or similar business offering the same or similar services. (Ord. 1588 § 3, (1998))

 

25.08.390 Kennel.
     “Kennel” means any lot or premises or portion thereof on which dogs, cats and other household domestic animals are maintained, boarded, bred or cared for in return for compensation or kept for sale. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.392 Limited corner store retail.
     “Limited corner store retail” means a retail establishment to serve a residential area, with no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area, which sells primarily food products, household items, hardware, newspapers and magazines. A corner store may offer freshly prepared foods for on-site consumption or take-out, but the food preparation and dining space shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the store’s gross floor area. Corner store retail need can be either located on a corner lot or mid-block. Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. (Ord. 1863 § 5, (2011))

 

25.08.395 Limousine and livery businesses.
     “Limousine and livery business” means a business that operates one or more automobiles, limousines, buses and/or shuttle buses for the commercial purpose of carrying passengers for a fee; the term limousine applies to the use of any building, land area or other premises for the storage, maintenance, and repair of vehicles used in the operation of the business or by the employees of the business. (Ord. 1760 § 11, (2005))

 

25.08.398 Live/work unit.
     “Live/work unit” means a single unit (e.g., studio, loft or one-bedroom) consisting of both a commercial/office and a residential component that is occupied by the same resident. The live/work unit shall be the primary dwelling of the occupant. (Ord. 1863 § 6, (2011))

 

25.08.400 Lot.
     “Lot” means a single parcel of land, usually fronting on a street, into which an urban block is usually divided for the construction of a building or for a use, as such lot is shown and delineated on the latest official map thereof on file with the county recorder; or, if subsequently resubdivided, as described in the deed of the owner. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.410 Lot area.
     “Lot area” means the total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.420 Lot, corner.
     “Corner lot” means a lot on a corner fronting on two (2) intersecting streets. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.425 Lot, coverage.
     “Lot coverage” means the portion of a lot that is covered by buildings or structures which exceed thirty (30) inches in height above adjacent existing grade. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.430 Lot, depth of.
     “Depth of lot” means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.435 Lot front.
     “Lot front” means the lot line abutting upon a street right of way. On through and corner lots of equal frontage, the lot front is the lot line of the primary entrance of the primary structure; on through and corner lots of unequal frontage, the lot front is the lot line on the shorter side. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.440 Lot, interior.
     “Interior lot” means a lot, other than a corner lot. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.450 Lot line.
     “Lot line” means the established division line between parcels of land, public or private. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.455 Lot, standard and substandard.
     “Standard lot” means any lot with at least fifty (50) feet of street frontage and lot area at least equal to the minimum lot size designated for the area of the city by the map attached to Ordinance 712 and any amendments thereto. “Substandard lot” means any other lot. (Ord. 1550 § 2, (1996))

 

25.08.460 Lot, through.
     “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.470 Lot, width of.
     “Width of lot” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at an approximate right angle to the lot depth midway between the front and rear lot lines. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.475 Massage, bathing or similar establishment.
     “Massage, bathing or similar establishment” means a business as defined by Section 6.40.030 of this code. (Ord. 1426 § 4, (1990))

 

25.08.476 Motor freight terminal.
     “Motor freight terminal” means terminals with the capability of handling, sorting and reloading a large variety of goods involving various forms of transportation and providing multimodal shipping capabilities, such as truck to air. (Ord. 1543 § 1, (1996))

 

25.08.479 Nonconforming structure.
     “Nonconforming structure” means a structure that does not conform to the yard coverage, height, setback or other physical dimensional requirements. (Ord. 1287 § 2, (1984))

 

25.08.480 Nonconforming use.
     “Nonconforming use” is a use that does not conform to the permitted or conditional use including parking that does not conform to the permitted or conditional use regulations in the district in which it is situated. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1287 § 1, (1984))

 

25.08.490 Nursing and convalescent home.
     “Nursing and convalescent home” means a building and premises for the care of sick, injured, aged or infirm persons to be housed; or a place of housing for those who are bedfast or needing considerable nursing care. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.495 Office.
     “Office” means a room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government; unless specifically excluded, it includes investment advisors or brokers, health services, and real estate offices. (Ord. 1403 § 4, (1990); Ord. 1588 § 4, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 7, (2011))

 

25.08.497 Optician.
     “Optician” means a business which makes and sells prescription eyewear and contact lenses. An optician shall be considered a retail use, and may include no more than two (2) optometrist examination rooms as an ancillary use. (Ord. 1863 § 8, (2011))

 

25.08.500 Parking area, public.
     “Public parking area” means an open area, other than a street, used for the temporary parking of automobiles and available for public use whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, 1961))

 

25.08.510 Parking lot.
     “Parking lot” means an open lot or parcel of land used for the storage of motor vehicles capable of being moved by their own power and exclusive of lots or parcels of land used for the purpose of dead storage, auto wrecking or exhibition for sale. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.511 Parking lot, commercial.
     “Commercial parking lot” means a parking lot where the commercial parking lot use is the predominant use for temporary parking of motor vehicles and is not associated with any other use on the site and for which a fee for parking is charged; “commercial parking lot” includes long term airport parking lots and free standing parking lots where parking is the predominant use on the lot. (Ord. 1761 § 12, (2005))

 

25.08.520 Parking space, automobile.
     “Automobile parking space” means space within a parking area of a building exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work areas, for the temporary parking or storage of one automobile. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.521 Parking space, unistall.
     “Unistall parking space” means a parking layout in which all the parking spaces shall have the same eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet by eighteen (18) feet dimension unless the unistall space is confined by a structure, wall or fence along one or both lateral sides, then the minimum width shall be nine (9) feet. (Ord. 1811 § 2, (2007))

 

25.08.522 Personal services.
     “Personal services” means establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his/her personal goods or apparel. (Ord. 1543 § 1, (1996))

 

25.08.523 Personal trainer and assessment business.
     “Personal trainer and assessment business” means a personal service business focused on fitness analysis and training for individuals. To qualify as a personal service under this definition, each professional shall be limited to serving no more than two (2) clients at any one time; no group instruction of three (3) or more clients shall take place on the premises. The business may include retail sales. (Ord. 1702 § 4, (2003))

 

25.08.524 Plate height.
     “Plate height” means the vertical measurement from the top of the finished floor to the top of the plates. (Ord. 1620 § 5, (1999))

 

25.08.525 Plate line.
     “Plate line” means a member on top of a stud wall such as a top plate on which joists or rafters rest to support an additional floor or roof or to form a ceiling. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.528 Porch.
     “Porch” means a structure attached to a building, usually roofed and open-sided, and often at the entrance. It may be supported from the roof, screened or glass-enclosed. (Ord. 1521 § 15, (1995))

 

25.08.530 Premises.
     “Premises” means land and/or buildings or other improvements thereon. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.540 Private school.
     “Private school” means an educational institution for which entrance or tuition fees are charged for attendance. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.545 Psychic services.
     “Psychic services” means a personal service that is provided by a business, individual, or group of individuals who provide psychic, medium, palmist, or fortune telling services. (Ord. 1586 § 1, (1998); Ord. 1753 § 9, (2005))

 

25.08.550 Public utility.
     “Public utility” means any company, or municipal department, duly authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, transportation or water. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.550-1 Ready-to-eat food shop.
     “Ready-to-eat food shop” means an establishment which sells food that is ready to eat at the time of sale to be consumed either on the premises or off the premises, with no more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of seating area and a gross floor area of no more than one thousand (1000) square feet. Full service kitchens are not allowed in “ready-to-eat food shops.” A ready-to-eat food shop shall be considered a general retail use. “Ready-to-eat food shops” shall include shops that sell food such as bakery items, ice cream, yogurt, beverages, and similar items. (Ord. 1839 § 3, (2009))

 

25.08.552 Real estate.
     “Real estate” means the occupation of real estate broker or agent, title insurance, mortgage broker or similar business. Real estate investment, real estate management, or real estate developer shall not be considered a real estate use, and shall be considered a general office use. (Ord. 1403 § 5, (1990); Ord. 1760 §  13, (2005); Ord. 1863 § 9, (2011))

 

25.08.554 Recreation facility, commercial.
     “Commercial recreation facility” means a recreation facility operated as a business and open to the public for a fee. Such uses may include theaters for live performances, movie theaters, bowling alley, gymnasiums and outdoor recreation uses such as golf driving ranges, water slides, soccer centers and enclosed sports facilities. (Ord. 1760 § 14, (2005))

 

25.08.556 Remodel.
     “Remodel” means construction within a structure or to its exterior, including any addition, that does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the structure based on the per square foot cost of the type of construction based on the most current valuation tables in the Building Standards Magazine published by the International Conference of Building Officials. (Ord. 1653 § 2, (2001))

 

25.08.557 Restaurant.
     “Restaurant” means a food establishment, see Section 25.08.268. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.557-1 Restaurant, destination.
     “Destination restaurant” means a full-service food establishment in a location where the majority of the customers arrive by automobile; such restaurants are required to have a site size sufficient to accommodate all parking for customers and employees on the same site as well as accommodating landscaping and such amenities as the location may require, e.g., the Bay Trail, as set out in any applicable design guidelines adopted by the city. (Ord. 1760 § 15, (2005))

 

25.08.558 Retail sales.
     “Retail sales” means establishments engaged in selling commodities or goods in small quantities to ultimate customers or consumers. (Ord. 1543 § 1, (1996))

 

25.08.560 Rooming house.
     “Rooming house” means a building containing three (3) or more guest rooms where lodging is provided for compensation or a dwelling where more than three (3) paying guests are accommodated, without the service of meals. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.570 Sanitarium.
     “Sanitarium” means a building and premises in and on which two (2) or more sick, infirm or injured persons are regularly housed or intended to be housed for compensation, not including hospitals. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.572 School.
     “School” is any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.573 Accessory dwelling unit.
     “Accessory dwelling unit” means an additional residential dwelling unit on a parcel occupied solely by a single-family residence that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation purposes on the same parcel as the primary single-family dwelling is situated in one of the following forms:

     (a)   Detached: the unit is separated from the primary structure.

     (b)   Attached: the unit is attached to the primary structure.

     (c)   Repurposed Existing Space: space (e.g., master bedroom) within the primary residence is converted into an independent living unit. (Ord. 1954 § 2, (2018))

 

25.08.574 Service business.
     “Service business” means a business or establishment primarily engaged in providing assistance, as opposed to products, to business, industry, government and the general public. (Ord. 1543 § 1, (1996))

 

25.08.575 Setback.
     “Setback” is the area between a lot line and the setback line. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.576 Setback, exterior side.
     “Exterior side setback” is the area between the side lot line and the structure on the street side of a corner lot. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.577 Setback, interior side.
     “Interior side setback” is the area between the side lot line and the structure when there is an adjacent parcel on the side of a lot. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.580 Setback line.
     “Setback line” is the line which is the required minimum distance from the lot front or any other lot line that establishes the area within which any structure may be erected or placed. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.590 Shelters, fallout and protective.
     “Fallout and protective shelters” means structures built to protect humans against the effect of deposited radioactive airborne debris resulting from the explosion of a nuclear weapon or from other uncontrolled release of radioactive materials into the atmosphere. A shelter which extends at any point above the natural grade, except for the provision of essential ventilators, shall be deemed an aboveground shelter. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.600 Story.
     “Story” means that portion of any building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, and if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1378 § 4, (1988))

 

25.08.610 Story, attic half.
     “Attic half story” means a story with at least two (2) of its opposite walls situated in a sloping roof, and the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the story immediately below it. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1649 § 8, (2001))

 

25.08.614 Story, lower level half.
     “Lower level half story” means a story in which the area enclosed by walls does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the story immediately above it. (Ord. 1649 § 9, (2001))

 

25.08.620 Street.
     “Street” means the land dedicated to, or condemned for, or established by, use as a public thoroughfare, or a public or private thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.630 Street line.
     “Street line” means the property line or boundary between a street right-of-way and abutting property. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.640 Structure.
     “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, except fences, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.643 Substantial construction.
     “Substantial construction” means construction of a wholly new building, or removal or reconstruction of fifty (50) percent or more of the exterior walls of a building; change to accessory structures is not included in this definition. (Ord. 1652 § 3, (2001); Ord. 1620 § 6, (1999))

 

25.08.644 Supportive housing.
     “Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by target populations, as defined by Section 53260(d) of the California Health and Safety Code, and that is linked to on- or off-site services that assist the supportive housing residents in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing shall be considered as a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. Supportive housing programs may use residential care homes wholly or as a part of their overall facilities. (Ord. 1865 § 5, (2011))

 

25.08.645 Take-out service.
     “Take-out service” means a feature or characteristic of eating and drinking services, including fast food restaurants, delicatessens and other similar food services where food is pre-prepared or rapidly prepared, primarily for consumption off the premises, and which encourages or allows consumption of food and beverages outside of a building, such as in outdoor seating areas where regular table service is not provided, in vehicles parked on the premises, or off the site. (Ord. 1312 § 2, (1985); Ord. 1328 § 2, (1986))

 

25.08.647 Tandem parking.
     “Tandem parking” is the parking of one vehicle behind another; except for parking for an accessory dwelling unit where tandem parking is defined as two (2) or more vehicles that are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another. (Ord. 1954 § 3, (2018))

 

25.08.649 Time-share property.
     “Time-share property” or “interval ownership” or “condominium hotel” means a “time-share property” as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11212 without regard to any minimum number of time-share interests or minimum of years of use. (Ord. 1780 § 4, (2006))

 

25.08.650 Trailer.
     “Trailer” means a vehicle designed for carrying property or persons on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.652 Transitional housing.
     “Transitional housing” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted units to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months. Support services may include meals, counseling, and other services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. Transitional housing shall be considered a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. Transitional housing programs may use residential care homes wholly or as part of their overall facilities. (Ord. 1865 § 6, (2011))

 

25.08.657 Trellis.
     “Trellis” means a structure with a roof made of repetitive members open to the sky and supported by posts, open on all sides. (Ord. 1603 § 5, (1998))

 

25.08.660 Use.
     “Use” means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.665 Vehicle.
     “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power. (Ord. 1341 § 2, (1987))

 

25.08.666 Veterinary hospital.
     “Veterinary hospital” means an establishment for the care and treatment of the diseases and injuries of animals and where animals may be boarded during their convalescence; however, overnight care of said animals is not a part of veterinary hospital except when necessary in the medical treatment of the animal. (Ord. 1789 § 6, (2006))

 

25.08.667 Window.
     A “window” is an opening in an exterior wall, normally glazed, to admit light and/or air. (Ord. 1460 § 2, 1992))

 

25.08.668 Window enclosure.
     “Window enclosure” is a dormer or similar architectural feature which contains one or more windows. The window area shall be at least twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the face of the dormer between the floor and plate line. (Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1603 § 6, (1998))

 

25.08.670 Yard.
     “Yard” is an open space that lies between any structure and the nearest lot line and is on the same property as the structure. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961); Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.08.680 Yard, front.
     “Front yard” means a yard extending across the front of the lot between the inner side lines and measured between the front line of the lot and the front line of the building. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.690 Yard, rear.
     “Rear yard” means a yard extending across the width of the lot, and measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

 

25.08.700 Yard, side.
     “Side yard” is a yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the street line of the lot to the rear yard. (1941 Code § 1903; Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 747, (1961))

Chapter 25.12 DISTRICTS
25.12.010 Establishment of districts.
     The city is divided into the following districts as shown on the zoning maps attached to Ordinance 539 and the amendments thereto, which maps, with all notations, references, and other information thereon, are incorporated herein by reference and are declared to be a part hereof.

     Whenever the term R district or R zone is used herein, it refers to R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts. Whenever the term C district of C zone is used, it refers to AA, APN, APS, C-1, C-2, C-R, IB, SL, TW and RR districts.  (1941 Code § 1904, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 804, (1964); Ord. 825, (1965); Ord. 915 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1404 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1495 § 4, (1994); Ord. 1793 § 19, (2006))

 

25.12.015 Establishment of Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area.
     The areas of the first and second commercial district, as shown on the map attached to Ordinance 1214, shall be known as the Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area, and said areas and subareas thereof shall be subject to the specific provisions of this code concerning uses therein. (Ord. 1214 § 1, (1982))

 

25.12.016 Establishment of Broadway Commercial Area.
     The area of the first commercial district, as so designated and set forth on the map attached to Ordinance 1272 and on file in the office of the city clerk, shall be known as the Broadway Commercial Area, and the area shall be subject to the specific provisions of this code concerning the uses therein. (Ord. 1272 § 1, (1984))

 

25.12.020 Boundaries of districts.
     (a)   When a zone or district boundary is indicated as approximately following a public street or alley, such boundary shall be construed to follow the centerline of such street or alley.

     (b)   Where a zone or district boundary is indicated as approximately following a line between two (2) or more recorded lots, such boundary shall be construed to follow the line dividing such lots as shown on the most recently approved record of survey parcel map or subdivision map.

     (c)   When a public street or alley is hereafter vacated or abandoned, and such street or alley is the division line or boundary between two (2) districts, the centerline of such vacated or abandoned street or alley shall remain the boundary between districts.

     (d)   Where existing real property improvements extend over one or more lot lines, and are located on an assessor’s parcel consisting of two (2) or more lots in more than one zoning district, the real property improvements are nonconforming and shall be subject to the limitations of Chapter 25.50.

     (e)   In case any uncertainty exists as to the location of a boundary or boundaries of any district, and there is a dispute in reference thereto, the person so disputing the boundary shall file an application before the planning commission as provided by Chapter 25.16. (1941 Code § 1905, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 1092 § 1, (1976))

 

 

25.12.030 Zoning classification of annexed area.
     All land or territory annexed to the city of Burlingame after the effective date of this title shall immediately become classified in the R-1 district without additional procedure. (1941 Code § 1950, Ord. 539, (1954))

 

25.12.040 Unclassified lands.
     Any lot, parcel of land or area within the city which has not been assigned a zone classification by adoption of a map or by legislative action is unclassified. The use of unclassified land for any purpose for which no permit, license or other evidence of approval has been granted by an appropriate action of the city is declared to be an unlawful use. (Ord. 910 § 1, (1970))

 

25.12.041 Continuation of existing use of unclassified lands.
     Any existing use of unclassified land which was heretofore legally permitted may continue but may not be changed to any other use, expanded, extended beyond present confines or otherwise modified without a conditional use permit from the planning commission and compliance with the city general plan and any adopted city specific plans, including their design guidelines. (Ord. 910 § 2, (1970); Ord. 1603 § 17, (1998); Ord. 1756 § 3, (2005))

 

25.12.042 Use of presently unused lands.
     Any land which is unclassified and unused may not be used for any purpose without a conditional use permit or until and following a completed proceeding to classify the land for the purpose intended. (Ord. 910 § 3, (1970); Ord. 1603 § 18, (1998)

Chapter 25.16 PROCEDURE FOR CLASSIFICATION, RECLASSIFICATION, VARIANCE OR SPECIAL PERMIT
25.16.010 Application for classification or reclassification.
     Upon application of any property owner, or on the initiative of the commission or the council, land within the city may be classified within a district, or reclassified from one district to another, in the manner provided in this chapter.

     Applications by property owners shall be in writing upon such forms, and accompanied by such data, as may be prescribed by the commission, so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the record, and shall be addressed to the commission and the council. The application shall contain a description of the land sufficient for identification, a designation of the existing classification, and the change in classification sought. The application shall be signed by the owner or owners of the land.

     The application shall be filed with the city clerk who shall endorse such application as filed, fix a time and place of hearing such application, and notify the commission of the filing of the application and of the date set for hearing. (1941 Code § 1906, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.16.020 Notice to property owners of application for reclassification.
     At least ten (10) days prior to the date set for such hearing, the city clerk shall cause a notice thereof to be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city of Burlingame setting forth the time and place of such hearing, a description of the land sufficient for identification, a description of the existing classification, and a designation of the classification for which application has been made.

     At least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, the city clerk shall also cause a notice thereof to be given by mail to the applicant and to each owner of property, as such ownership is shown upon the last equalized assessment roll for taxes in the city, which lies within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the property for which a change in classification is sought. The notice shall give the date, time and place of hearing, the name of applicant, the description of the land, the change sought, and such facts as may be prescribed from time to time by the commission.

     The failure of the city clerk to mail or the failure of such addressees to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of such proceedings, provided such failure shall have occurred in good faith. (1941 Code § 1907, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

 

25.16.030 Hearings by commission and council on application for classification.
     At the time set for hearing, or at any time to which the same may be continued, the commission shall hear all interested parties. Thereafter, the commission shall prepare a summary of the hearing and a report of its findings. The action of the commission shall be by resolution setting forth its recommendation to the council. The affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members shall be required to adopt such resolution.

     The recommendation of the planning commission, including a copy of any recommended amendment to the code, shall thereupon be filed with the city clerk who shall refer the matter to the city council which shall set a date for hearing. At least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, the city clerk shall cause notice thereof to be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city of Burlingame setting forth the time and place of such hearing.

     Classification or reclassifications of land shall be accomplished by ordinance. (1941 Code § 1908, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.16.040 Application for variance or special permit.
     Applications may be made for variances or special permits by the owner of land or by any person having an interest therein, in the manner provided in this title.

     Applications shall be in writing upon such forms, and accompanied by such data, as may be prescribed by the commission, so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the record. The application shall contain a description of the land sufficient for identification, a designation of the existing classification, and the relief sought. The application shall be signed by the applicant and property owner.

     The application shall be filed with the city clerk who shall endorse such application as filed, fix a time and place of hearing such application, and notify the commission of the filing of the application and of the date set for hearing. (1941 Code § 1909, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992))

 

25.16.050 Notice to property owners of an application for variance, conditional use permit, or special permit.
     At least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, notice shall be given by mail to the applicant and to each owner of property, as such ownership is shown upon the last equalized assessment roll for taxes in the city, which lies within a radius of three hundred (300) feet from the property for which the variance or special permit is sought. The notice shall give the date, time and place of hearing, the name of the applicant, a description of the property, the relief sought and such facts as may be prescribed from time to time by the commission.

     The failure to mail or the failure of such addressees to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of such proceedings, provided such failure has occurred in good faith. (1941 Code § 1910, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1078 § 1, (1976); Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1603 § 19, (1998))

 

25.16.060 Hearing by commission on application for variance or special permit.
     At the time set for hearing, or at any time to which the same may be continued, the commission shall hear all parties interested therein. The commission may grant or deny the application, or grant the application subject to such restrictions or conditions as it may deem advisable. (1941 Code § 1911, by Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 625, (1956); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1078 § 2, (1976))

 

25.16.070 Finality of decisions—Appeal—Suspension of order pending appeal.
     (a)   The determination and order of the commission shall become final and conclusive after ten (10) days from the date of the commission decision if no appeal is filed. During the period between the action of the commission and the expiration of the ten (10) day period, any person may appeal the commission decision to the city council. In order to be effective, the appeal must be in writing, and be filed with the city clerk together with any required appeal fee. During the same period, any councilmember may file a written request with the city clerk that the action be reviewed by the city council. No fees are required when a council member requests review of a commission action.

     (b)   If an application has been denied by the commission, only the applicant may appeal the denial. If an application or a portion thereof is approved, an appeal may be made by the applicant or any interested person. (1941 Code § 1912, Ord. 539 (1954); Ord. 625, (1956); Ord. 762 (1962); Ord. 1078 § 2.5, (1976); Ord. 1713 § 2, (2003))

 

25.16.080 Review by council.
     At its next regular meeting following the appeal or the suspension by the council, or at any meeting thereafter to which the matter may be continued, the council shall conduct a hearing thereon. After having held such hearing, the council shall make and file its order determining the matter and may approve, disapprove or modify the order of the commission. (1941 Code § 1913, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 625, (1956); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1078 § 3, (1976))

25.16.085 Effect of decision.
     The determination and order of the commission, or, if appeal or review is had under the foregoing provisions, the determination and order of the council, is final and conclusive upon the applicant. No same or similar application with reference to the same premises shall be filed for a period of one year from the date of the order. (Ord. 1078 § 4, (1976))

 

25.16.090 Similar methods for all applications and hearings.
     Whenever in this title, hearings on any matter before the commission, or council, or both, are required, and it is not specified that applications or notices of hearings be dispensed with, and no other procedure is specified, the applications shall be substantially in the form, and shall be set for hearing and noticed, in the manner prescribed in this chapter for applications for variances and special permits. Procedures for appeals regarding any such applications shall also conform to the provisions of this chapter. (1941 Code § 1914, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 625, (1962); Ord. 1713 § 3, (2003))

 

25.16.100 Clerk to keep record of recommendations and orders.
     The city clerk shall keep and maintain a record of all recommendations of the planning commission and of all orders made by the planning commission or city council. (1941 Code § 1915, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 625, (1956); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.16.110 Power of commission and council to issue subpoenas and administer oaths.
     The commission and council shall both have the power to issue subpoenas for, and to require, the attendance of witnesses and the production of records and documents, and to administer oaths. (1941 Code § 1916, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.16.120 Unlawful to use property until authorization granted.
     It is unlawful for any person to use any land or building for any purpose requiring the granting of a variance or the issuance of a conditional use permit or special permit unless such variance has been granted or such conditional use permit or special permit has been issued. (1941 Code § 19171/4, Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1603 § 20, (1998))

 

25.16.130 Time limit for exercise of variance, conditional use permit, special permit, or condominium permit.
     (a)   Where a use is conditional upon the granting of a variance or the issuance of a conditional use permit or special permit, such use shall be commenced within a period of three (3) years from the date of the granting of the variance or the issuance of the conditional use permit or special permit, and in the event that such use shall not have been so commenced within such period, such variance or permit shall become null and void. The commission is authorized to grant one extension for a period not exceeding two (2) years upon application.

     (b)   In those instances where an initial approval referenced in subsection (a) remains valid as of (effective date of this ordinance), the initial approval shall be automatically extended for a period of two (2) additional years from the initial expiration date. For those approvals granted a one-year extension that remains effective as of (effective date of this ordinance), the term of the extension shall be increased by one year from the date of expiration.

     (c)   However, where a variance, conditional use permit, special permit, or condominium permit has been granted or issued for conversion or development and construction of a condominium pursuant to Title 26, the variance or permit shall become null and void when the tentative map for the condominium expires because no final map has been filed pursuant to State law and this code, rather than the time limits specified in subsection (a) above.

     (d)   Notwithstanding the amount of applicable development impact fees and/or permitting fees in place at the time of the initial approvals; such fees collected shall be in the amount adopted by resolution of the Burlingame City Council as of the date of Building Permit issuance.

     (e)   The term for this amendment extending time limits applicable to permits granted by the Planning Commission and/or City Council as referenced herein, shall “sunset” (expire) two (2) years following the effective date of the amendment; after which time, the initial term for permits granted following the “sunset” date shall be one year, with the opportunity provided for one year extensions; as stated within Section 25.16.130 of Title 25 of the Burlingame Municipal Code prior to adoption of the amendments contained herein. (1941 Code § 1917/12, Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1603 § 21, (1998); Ord. 1641 § 8, (2000); Ord. 1842 § 1, (2009))

 

25.16.140 Revocation, suspension or modification of use permit or variance.
     (a)   Grounds. Any variance or conditional use permit previously granted or issued may be revoked, suspended or modified on any one or more of the following grounds:

     (1)   That the approval was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation;

     (2)   That the use for which such approval was granted is not being exercised;

     (3)   That the use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for one year or more;

     (4)   That the conditional use permit or variance is being, or has been, exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or other regulation;

     (5)   That the use for which approval was granted was so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or so as to constitute a nuisance.

     (b)   Notice. Written notice to revoke, suspend or modify a variance or use permit shall be served on the permittee and property owner, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, either personally or by certified mail, and shall state:

     (1)   The reasons for the proposed revocation, suspension or modification;

     (2)   That the proposed action will be taken by the director of community development unless a hearing before the planning commission is requested within fifteen (15) days after the date of said notice. If no response is received, the director of community development shall forthwith revoke, suspend or modify the variance or permit as set forth in said notice.

     (3)   Hearing. If a hearing is requested, at least ten (10) days notice thereof shall be given to the requested party. At any such hearing the permittee or property owner shall be given the opportunity to be heard, and he or she may call witnesses and present evidence in his or her behalf. Upon conclusion of such hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether or not the permit or variance shall be suspended, revoked or modified. Such determination may be appealed to the city council in the same manner as for appeals taken on applications for the granting of variances. (Ord. 923 § 1, (1970); Ord. 1078 § 5, (1976); Ord. 1346 § 1, (1987); Ord. 1806 § 10, (2007))

 

25.16.145 Ambiguity of use.
     If any ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title, any person may apply to the director of community development for a determination of the ambiguity, and the director’s determination shall be subject to appeal pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1780 § 3, (2006); Ord. 1806 § 11, (2007))

 

25.16.150 Request for determination of director of community development’s decision.
     Any applicant or citizen may request that a determination made by the director of community development regarding interpretation of the zoning ordinance and/or code enforcement be appealed to the planning commission within ten (10) working days of the director’s decision. Such determination shall not require a public notice, but shall have a public hearing. The planning commission’s decision on any determination shall be the final action on the determination. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed by any interested person to the city council within the same time and in the same manner as provided in Sections 25.16.070 through 25.16.090. (Ord. 1586 § 7, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 12, (2007))

Chapter 25.20 PERMITS AND LICENSES
25.20.010 Building permit required before work started—Information required on application.
     Before commencing any work pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion or alterations of any building, or any addition to a building, a permit shall be secured from the building official by the owner or his or her agent for the work, and it is unlawful to commence any work unless such permit has been obtained.

     Each application for such building permit shall be made on a form to be furnished by the building official and shall contain accurate information as to dimensions, size and location of the lot, the size and location of the building on the lot, the dimensions of all yards and open spaces, and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the building and zoning regulations. A lot or plot plan drawn to scale shall also accompany each such application, except on alterations to existing buildings where no change is made in external walls which increases lot coverage.

     Where complete and accurate information is not readily available from existing records, the building official may require the applicant to furnish a survey of the lot or parcel of land prepared by a licensed surveyor or civil engineer. A careful record of the original application shall be kept in the office of the building official. (1941 Code § 1918, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.20.020 Permit or license for use or occupancy of building—Requirement and issuance.
     No building shall be occupied or used unless a permit or license for such use, where required, has first been obtained from the department or person vested with the authority to issue such permit or license. No such license or permit for buildings, uses or purposes shall be issued where the same would be in conflict with the purposes of this code. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with these provisions, shall be null and void.

     All departments, officials and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue licenses, permits or certificates of occupancy, where required by law, shall observe the provisions of this code. (1941 Code § 1919, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.20.030 Permit for temporary accessory building used for storage.
     A temporary accessory building, used solely for the storage of tools, materials, equipment or implements or as a field quarters incidental to the doing of any public work or to the construction, alteration or repair of a building, structure or other work for which a building permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this code, may be erected and maintained. Such temporary accessory building shall be removed upon completion of the work. Acceptance of completion shall be withheld by the proper city official until such temporary accessory building is removed. No such temporary accessory building shall be placed by any person upon a public street or way, or any part thereof, unless such person first obtains a permit to do so from the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1921(a), Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 625, (1956); Ord. 762, (1962))

 

25.20.040 Permit for temporary tract sales office or other temporary buildings.
     The director of community development may issue a permit for the construction or maintenance of a temporary tract office for the sale of real estate or for temporary buildings, tents or structures other than construction storage facilities as described in Section 25.20.030 above. Application for such permit shall be made in writing, shall state the date of installation and removal, shall include a site plan showing the location, size, construction material and covering of the temporary structure, parking layout and parking displacement, if any, and floor plan layout noting exiting. All proposed structures must be approved by the building division and fire department. The permit may be granted or denied by the director of community development without notice or after such notice as he or she may determine. No permit shall be issued by the director of community development for more than maximum of thirty (30) days. The director of community development may grant one extension of thirty (30) days. The director of community development’s decision may be appealed to the planning commission. A fee determined by the city council shall be charged for the filing of an application for such permit. A permit for the construction or maintenance of such temporary building or structure shall state the date on or before which such building or structure shall be removed together with such other conditions as the director of community development shall fix and determine. (1941 Code § 1921(b), Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 625, (1956); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1460 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1521 § 16, (1995); Ord. 1806 § 13, (2007))

Chapter 25.24 FEES
25.24.010 Amount of disposition of fees.
     Fees shall be paid in such amounts as the city council may determine from time to time by resolution. All fees shall be paid to the city and credited to the general fund. (1941 Code § 1924, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 1025 § 2, (1974))

Chapter 25.26 R-1 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.26.010 Scope of regulations.
     The regulations of this chapter shall apply to all R-1 Districts. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-1 Districts:

     (a)   One building designed and used as a single-family dwelling;

     (b)   Public buildings, public parks and playgrounds;

     (c)   Accessory buildings, structures or uses including private garages, parking spaces, greenhouses, lath houses, playhouses, sheds, swimming pools and accessory buildings to serve such swimming pools, but not including group pools or swimming pool clubs;

     (d)   Home occupations as defined in this title;

     (e)   Letting of rooms, with or without meals, to not more than three (3) persons;

     (f)    Storage of any trailer provided that no trailer shall be stored or permitted to be stored on that part of any lot or parcel of land upon which the construction of buildings is prohibited; and provided further, that no person shall use or permit to be used any trailer for the purpose of sleeping or as living quarters. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   Churches, convents, parish houses;

     (b)   Schools, public and private, including religious or parochial schools;

     (c)   Plant nurseries and truck gardening; provided that the produce therefrom shall not be retailed and delivered on the premises but may be delivered therefrom;

     (d)   Public utility and public service structures or installations when found by the commission to be necessary for the public health, safety, convenience and welfare;

     (e)   Demolition of a residential structure or an accessory structure thereto, which structure is built over or across two (2) or more legally subdivided lots, and the construction of a structure upon one or more of said lots. See Section 25.26.090;

     (f)    Demolition of a residential structure or any accessory structure thereto, which structure is built on a site consisting of a legally subdivided lot and a portion of another lot which when combined with an adjacent lot will result in more building sites than existed before the demolition of said structures, and the construction of a structure on one or more of said lots. See Section 25.26.090. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.035 Uses allowed with a special permit.
     The following are uses allowed in the district with a special permit:

     (a)   Attached garages for single-family dwelling units;

     (b)   Reduction in the number of parking spaces existing on site; except where the on-site parking requirement is met per Chapter 25.70 for the existing units onsite and the reduction in the number of parking spaces is for the purpose of creating an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59;

     (c)   Construction exceeding the limits of the declining height envelope;

     (d)   An accessory structure exempt from setback restrictions located within the rear forty (40) percent of the lot, except for an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit;

     (e)   An accessory structure that is in the rear of the lot and that is more than twenty-eight (28) feet in width or depth, except for an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit. (Ord. 1954 § 6, (2018); Ord. 1978 § 16, (2020))

 

25.26.040 Design review and hillside area construction permit.
     Construction of or additions to second and taller stories of structures in the R-1 Districts shall be subject to design review as provided in Chapter 25.57. Certain new construction and additions to residences on lots in specified hillside districts are subject to the requirements of the hillside area construction permit as defined in Chapter 25.61. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.050 Lot dimensions and lot requirements.
     (a)   Lot Dimensions.

     (1)   Lots of six thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (6,999) square feet or less must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet, and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than fifty (50) feet on a public street;

     (2)   Lots of seven thousand (7,000) square feet to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (9,999) square feet must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet, and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than fifty-five (55) feet on a public street; and

     (3)   Lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet, and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than sixty (60) feet on a public street.

     (b)   Lots Facing on a Curved Street. Lots or parcels which face on the curve of a curved street, where the radius of such curvature is less than forty-five (45) feet, may have a lesser frontage than required above, but not less than:

     (1)   Thirty (30) feet for a six thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (6,999) square foot or less lot or parcel;

     (2)   Thirty-five (35) feet for a seven thousand (7,000) square foot to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (9,999) square foot lot or parcel; or

     (3)   Forty (40) feet for a ten thousand (10,000) square foot or larger lot or parcel.

     (c)   Lot Sizes Shown on Ordinance 712. On the map adopted by Ordinance 712 and as subsequently amended:

     (1)   All lots shown in white shall have an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet;

     (2)   All lots shown within a border of horizontal crosshatching shall have an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet; and

     (3)   All lots shown within a border of vertical crosshatching shall have an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

     (d)   Dedication of Easements to Public Streets. Where frontage on a public street is impossible or impractical, the planning commission may recommend to the city council an easement or easements providing ingress from and egress to a public street in lieu of such street frontage. In any case, the city of Burlingame shall be made an owner of such easement. Recommendations of acceptance may be conditional.

     (e)   Variances. Variances may be granted, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 25.54 of this code, only to the provisions of subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section.

     (f)    Effect on Lots or Parcels Recorded Before 1958. The average width, lot frontage and minimum areas provided for in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of smaller dimensions appearing of record in the office of the county recorder of the county of San Mateo, or of the city engineer of the city of Burlingame, prior to June 18, 1958. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building on any lot divided or subdivided after said date which does not comply with the minimum requirements set forth above, except as varied by subsections (d) and (e) of this section.

     (g)   Conformance to this Chapter. All the development requirements of Chapter 25.26 lot dimensions and requirements shall apply to lands hereafter subdivided in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California; provided, however, that the planning commission and the city council may, in the considerations and acceptance of any tentative or final map submitted pursuant to the provisions of said Subdivision Map Act, approve or accept any such tentative or final map wherein one or more lots or parcels of land do not conform to all of the provisions of Chapter 25.26, when the planning commission and the city council find that by reason of exceptional or extraordinary circumstances the approval or acceptance of such maps will not adversely affect the comprehensive zoning plan of the city.

     (h)   Minimum Lot Size for Lands Annexed After 1960. No lands annexed to the city of Burlingame after May 31, 1960, which are thereupon classified for residential uses shall be divided into lots having areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet each. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.060 Height limitations.
     (a)   No structure in an R-1 District shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height, whichever is less, as measured from average top of curb taken from the corners of the lot extended, except as follows:

     (1)   A structure between thirty (30) and thirty-six (36) feet upon approval of a special permit under Chapter 25.51;

 

     (2)   A structure of thirty-six (36) feet or taller upon approval of a variance under Chapter 25.54.

     (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), on a lot that slopes downward more than twenty-five (25) percent from the front property line toward the rear property line, no structure shall exceed twenty (20) feet in height above average top of curb taken from the corners of the lot extended.

     (c)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), on a lot that slopes upward more than twenty-five (25) percent from the front property line to the rear property line, no structure shall exceed thirty (30) feet above average elevation as measured fifteen (15) feet behind the front property line of the lot at the intersection of the front and side setback lines at each side of the lot. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.065 Lot coverage.
     The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall be forty (40) percent, including balconies, stairs, roof overhangs extending more than twenty-four (24) inches, trellises and improvements which exceed thirty (30) inches in height above adjacent existing grade. The following shall be excepted from lot coverage:

     (a)   Arbors where the maximum roof area as measured exterior edge to exterior edge cumulative on a property does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and the maximum height, as measured from adjacent grade does not exceed nine (9) feet. Trellises where the maximum roof area as measured exterior edge to exterior edge cumulative on a property does not exceed one hundred (100) square feet and the maximum height, as measured from adjacent grade does not exceed nine and one-half (9 1/2) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.070 Floor area ratio.
     The maximum allowable floor area ratio based on gross floor area of structures for all construction on lots zoned R-1 shall be:

     (a)   For interior lots with attached garages: thirty-two (32) percent plus one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet which shall include attached garage and attached covered parking and other accessory structures;

     (b)   For interior lots with detached garages: thirty-two (32) percent plus one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet plus up to four hundred (400) square feet in a detached single or two (2) car garage and other accessory structures;

     (c)   For corner lots with attached garages: thirty-two (32) percent plus nine hundred (900) square feet which shall include attached garage and attached covered parking and other accessory structures;

     (d)   For corner lots with detached garages: thirty-two (32) percent plus nine hundred (900) square feet plus up to three hundred fifty (350) square feet in a detached single or two (2) car garage and other accessory structures.

     (e)   Maximum Home Size. The maximum single-family residential house size shall be eight thousand (8,000) gross square feet, excluding accessory structures. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.072 Setback lines.
     (a)   Measurement. Measurement of all setbacks shall be from the lot line to the closest wall or any covered projection of any existing or proposed structure.

     (b)   Front Setbacks.

     (1)   The minimum front setback to the first floor shall be fifteen (15) feet as measured from the lot front or the average front setback of properties with front setbacks on the same side of the street of that block, whichever is greater. The measurement shall be taken from the front property line to any wall or any covered projection of any existing or proposed structure.

     (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), the minimum front setback of an attached garage or attached covered parking shall be as follows:

     (A)  Twenty-five (25) feet for a single car garage;

     (B)   Thirty-five (35) feet for a two (2) car garage. However, if the garage doors for the two (2) car garage are provided by two (2) single doors, the front setback may be staggered at twenty (20) feet for one door and twenty-five (25) feet for the second door or side-by-side at twenty-five (25) feet.

     (3)   The minimum front setback to a second floor shall be twenty (20) feet. However if the required front setback to all or a portion of the first floor under the second floor is greater than twenty (20) feet, then the minimum front setback to each portion of the second floor shall be the same as that for the portion of the first floor immediately underneath it.

     (4)   Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), the minimum front setback to all structures on lots fronting on El Camino Real shall be twenty (20) feet.

     (5)   Notwithstanding subsections (b)(1), (2), (3), and (4) above, the front setback delineated on any approved subdivision map shall supersede any provision of this chapter.

     (c)   Side Setbacks.

     (1)   If front and rear lot lines are equal, the minimum side setback shall be based on the front property line dimension; if front and rear lot lines are unequal, the setback shall be based on the width of the lot as measured between the midpoints of the two (2) side lot lines. In either case the setbacks based on lot width shall be as follows:

 

 

Side Setback Lines (in feet)

Lot Width

Feet

Lots 42′ wide or less

3

Lots wider than 42′, but less than 51′

4

Lots 51′ wide or more, but less than 54′

5

Lots 54′ wide or more, but less than 61′

6

Lots 61′ wide or more

7

 

     (2)   The minimum side setback to second stories shall be based on the declining height envelope.

     (d)   Rear Setbacks.

     (1)   The minimum rear setback to the first floor shall be fifteen (15) feet;

     (2)   The minimum rear setback to the second floor shall be twenty (20) feet from the rear property line.

     (e)   Corner Lots.

     (1)   Front and rear setbacks to first and second floors shall be the same as for interior lots;

     (2)   The minimum side setback to the first floor of any structure or accessory structure shall conform to the district minimum for the interior side lot line and shall be seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet on the exterior side lot line;

     (3)   The side setback to the second floor shall average at least twelve (12) feet from the exterior side property line with the following limitations:

     (A)  The second floor shall not be closer than seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet to the exterior side property line, and

     (B)   No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the length of the second floor wall shall be placed in the area between twelve (12) feet and seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet from the exterior side property line, and

     (C)   The second floor side setback along the interior side shall comply with the declining height envelope requirements. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.073 Exceptions.
     (a)   The following shall be exceptions to both lot coverage and setback lines:

     (1)   Front entrance stairs and stoops with no roof, a maximum height from existing adjacent grade of three (3) feet, extend up to a maximum of six (6) feet into the front setback and extend no closer than three (3) feet to a lot line.

     (2)   Bay windows on the first floor projecting into the front setback no more than one and one half (1 1/2) feet and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in footprint.

     (3)   Fireplace chimneys projecting into the front setback no more than two (2) feet and not exceeding six (6) feet in width.

     (b)   The following shall be exceptions only to side and rear setback lines:

     (1)   Fireplace chimneys projecting into a setback no more than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet from a lot line shall be counted in lot coverage but not in setbacks.

     (2)   Bay window(s) projecting into exterior side setback not more than one and one-half (1 1/2) feet and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in total footprint area, at least three (3) feet from any lot line, provided that bay window(s) may not project into the interior side setback.

     (3)   Cornices or eaves projecting into a side setback no more than fifty (50) percent of the required setback to a maximum of two (2) feet.

     (4)   A detached garage or other one-story accessory buildings located within the rear thirty (30) percent of the length of the lot line.

     (5)   Greenhouse window(s) projecting no more than one foot and a minimum of three (3) feet above finished floor, not exceeding seventeen (17) square feet inside the window casement area and at least three (3) feet from any lot line.

     (6)   Open balconies projecting not more than four (4) feet into a front setback. Multiple balconies projecting from the same floor shall have a minimum horizontal separation of ten (10) feet.

     (c)   The exceptions herein are subject to the following limitations:

     (1)   No portion of the primary residential structure shall extend closer than thirty (30) inches to the property line on the interior side setback.

     (2)   Chimneys:

     (A)  No portion of an existing chimney shall be allowed within one and one-half (1 1/2) feet of a side property line;

     (B)   A new chimney shall be set back a minimum of two (2) feet from property line. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.075 Declining height envelope.
     (a)   There shall be a declining height envelope in this district departing from a height of twelve (12) feet above original existing grade at each side property line as determined by the average of the elevations at the front and rear property line corners at each side; at twelve (12) feet above grade, an angle of forty-five (45) degrees shall be set until it intersects with a point seven and one-half
(7 1/2) feet above the second story finished floor, then the line shall extend vertically to a maximum of thirty (30) feet or two and one-half (2 1/2) stories.

     (b)   No structure shall extend above or beyond said envelope except:

     (1)   Chimneys or flues, eaves to a maximum of two (2) feet or one-half the distance to property line whichever is less, and architectural features including gables without windows which do not create improved space and do not extend within the first story side setback;

     (2)   Window enclosures which create no more than thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area within the structure and have a length no greater than ten (10) feet. At least twenty-five (25) percent of the face of such enclosure as measured between the finished floor and the plate line shall be window area.

     (3)   The side of a single-family or duplex structure which is located adjacent to an existing two (2) story residential structure so that the properties on which they are located share a side property line, provided:

     (A)  The second story is not closer to the property line than the required first floor setback; and

     (B)   If the second story wall is outside of the declining height envelope and adjacent to an existing two (2) story wall, the second story plate line is no higher and no longer than the second story plate line on the adjacent property; and

     (C)   If there is a two (2) story residential structure on each side of a lot, only one side wall may be exempt from the declining height envelope; and

     (D)  If any portion of the second story of an existing two (2) story house adjacent to either side of the lot complies with the declining height requirements, the adjacent wall of the new construction shall not be exempt.

     (4)   Where the slope on a lot between the front setback and rear setback lines on either side property line varies by two (2) feet or more, the measurement for the declining height envelope point of departure shall be the average elevation as taken at the intersection of the adjacent side property lines with the fifteen (15) foot front setback line and the fifteen (15) foot rear setback line.

     (5)   Where the finished first floor of a house is more than three (3) feet above average finished grade and the area below or basement is not improved area, the measurement for the declining height envelope shall be fourteen (14) feet above the side property line. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.080 Interior access.
     There shall be a stairway, elevator, ramp or similar access between all floors of improved area within a single-family residential structure. Such access shall be located within the exterior walls of the structure. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.26.090 Multiple lots developed with a single structure.
     (a)   This section shall apply to all lots which are required to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 25.26.030(e) or (f). Demolition of existing structures or construction of new structures upon any such lot shall not be commenced until and unless a conditional use permit and any variances and special permits required by this section and a building permit are first obtained.

     (b)   In considering the conditional use permit for either standard or substandard lots the commission shall evaluate in addition to the criteria for a conditional use permit:

     (1)   The blend of mass, scale and dominant structural characteristics of the new construction with the existing street and neighborhood;

     (2)   The variety of roof line, façade, exterior finish materials and elevations of the proposed new structures;

     (3)   The commission shall also consider the necessity or mitigation for the removal of any protected trees, as defined in Section 11.06.020 of this code, which are located within the footprint of any proposed structure.

     (c)   A variance shall be required, in addition to and as a part of the conditional use permit, if, on a substandard lot, the following maximum gross floor area ratio of all structures is not met:

     (1)   Thirty-two (32) percent plus seven hundred fifty (750) square feet with an attached garage;

     (2)   Thirty-two (32) percent plus seven hundred fifty (750) square feet plus up to three hundred fifty (350) square feet in a detached single or two (2) car garage and other accessory structures.

     Such maximum allowable house size shall become effective upon the issuance of a building permit for the construction and may not be exceeded without amendment of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.27 R-2 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.27.010 Scope of regulations.
     The regulations of this chapter shall apply to all R-2 Districts. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Districts:

     (a)   All uses permitted in R-1 Districts, and subject to the same restrictions, regulations and exceptions;

     (b)   Duplexes, flats or other buildings designed for and occupied by not more than two (2) families;

     (c)   Accessory uses as described for R-1 Districts. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.030 Conditional uses.
     The following uses are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   All uses allowed with a permit in the R-1 District and subject to the same restrictions and limitations;

     (b)   Community clubhouses. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.040 Building regulations.
     (a)   Only one building designed or used as a residence for one or two (2) families, or two (2) dwellings designed or used as residences, each for one family, may be erected, located or maintained on any one lot.

     (b)   Where two (2) single-family dwellings are constructed on one lot, all the following requirements must be met:

     (1)   Only one dwelling may have frontage on the street;

     (2)   No portion of the rear dwelling may be closer than twenty (20) feet to any portion of the front dwelling;

     (3)   There shall be a yard at the rear of the rear building of at least twenty (20) feet in depth;

     (4)   There shall be a driveway of a minimum width of ten (10) feet leading to the rear structure;

     (5)   The lot must be not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.050 Lot dimensions and lot requirements.
     (a)   Lots of six thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (6,999) square feet or less must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than fifty (50) feet on a public street; lots of seven thousand (7,000) square feet to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (9,999) square feet must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than fifty-five (55) feet on a public street; and lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than sixty (60) feet on a public street; provided, however, that lots or parcels which face on the curve of a curved street, where the radius of such curvature is less than forty-five (45) feet may have a lesser frontage but not less than thirty (30) feet for a six thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (6,999) square foot or less lot or parcel, thirty-five (35) feet for a seven thousand (7,000) square foot to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (9,999) square foot lot or parcel, or forty (40) feet for a ten thousand (10,000) square foot or larger lot or parcel.

     (b)   On the map adopted by Ordinance 712 and as subsequently amended, all lots shown in white shall have an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet; all lots shown within a border of horizontal crosshatching shall have an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet; and all lots shown within a border of vertical crosshatching shall have an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

     (c)   Where frontage on a public street is impossible or impractical, the planning commission may recommend to the city council an easement or easements providing ingress from and egress to a public street in lieu of such street frontage. In any case, the city of Burlingame shall be made an owner of such easement. Recommendations of acceptance may be conditional.

     (d)   Variances may be granted, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 25.54 of this code, only to the provisions of subsections a and b.

     (e)   The average width, lot frontage and minimum areas provided for in subsections a and b shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of smaller dimensions appearing of record in the office of the county recorder of the County of San Mateo, or of the city engineer of the city of Burlingame, prior to June 18, 1958. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building on any lot divided or subdivided after said date which does not comply with the minimum requirements set forth above, except as varied by subsections e and f of this section.

     (f)    All the development requirements of Chapter 25.27 lot dimensions and requirements shall apply to lands hereafter subdivided in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California; provided, however, that the planning commission and the city council may, in the considerations and acceptance of any tentative or final map submitted pursuant to the provisions of said Subdivision Map Act, approve or accept any such tentative or final map wherein one or more lots or parcels of land do not conform to all of the provisions of Chapter 25.27, when the planning commission and the city council find that by reason of exceptional or extraordinary circumstances the approval or acceptance of such maps will not adversely affect the comprehensive zoning plan of the city.

     (g)   No lands annexed to the city of Burlingame after May 31, 1960, which are thereupon classified for residential uses shall be divided into lots having areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet each.

     (h)   Certain new construction and additions to residences on lots in specified hillside districts are subject to the requirements of the Hillside Area Construction Permit as defined in Chapter 25.61. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.060 Height limitations.
     No building in an R-2 district shall be constructed or altered which exceeds two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height, whichever is lesser, with the following exceptions:

     (a)   On lots that slope downward more than twenty-five (25) percent toward the rear of the lot, the maximum height of the building shall not exceed two (2) stories or twenty (20) feet above the curb level, irrespective of the number of stories at the rear of the building;

     (b)   On lots that slope upward more than twenty-five (25) percent toward the rear of the lot, the maximum height of the building shall not exceed two and one-half
(2 1/2) stories or thirty (30) feet above mean grade as measured fifteen (15) feet from the front property line. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.070 Lot coverage.
     The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall be forty (40) percent, including balconies, stairs, roof overhangs extending more than twenty-four (24) inches, trellises and improvements which exceed thirty (30) inches in height above adjacent existing grade. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.071 Setback lines.
     (a)   Measurement of all setback lines shall be from the lot line to the closest wall or any covered projection of the existing or proposed structure.

     (b)   Front. The minimum front setback line to the first floor shall be fifteen (15) feet as measured from the lot front or the average on the side of the street as measured from the lot front, whichever is greater, provided that the setback line delineated on any approved subdivision map shall supersede any provision of this chapter, except that there shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet to the face of any garage or covered parking area.

     (c)   Side and Rear.

     (1)   If front and rear lot lines are equal, the minimum side setback shall be based on the front property line dimension; if front and rear lot lines are unequal, the setback shall be based on the width of the lot as measured between the midpoints of the two (2) side lot lines. In either case the setbacks based on lot width shall be as follows:

 

Side Setback Lines (in feet)

Lots 42′ wide or less

3

Lots wider than 42′, but less than 51′

4

Lots 51′ wide or more, but less than 54′

5

Lots 54′ wide or more, but less than 61′

6

Lots 61′ wide or more

7

 

Rear Setback Lines (in feet)

1 and 2 story

15

 

     (2)   The minimum side setback for second stories shall be based on the declining height envelope.

     (d)   The minimum exterior side setback for any structure on a corner lot shall be seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet.

     (e)   A public building, church, library, museum or other similar use either governmental or private, shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all lot lines.

     (f)    There shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on all buildings on El Camino Real. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.072 Exceptions.
     (a)   The following shall be exceptions to both lot coverage and setback lines:

     (1)   Front entrance stairs and stoops with no roof which extend up to a maximum of six (6) feet into the front setback and no closer than three (3) feet to lot line;

     (2)   Bay windows on the first floor projecting into the front setback no more than one and one-half (1 1/2) feet and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in footprint;

     (3)   Fireplace chimneys projecting into the front setback no more than two (2) feet and not exceeding six (6) feet in width.

     (b)   The following shall be exceptions only to side and rear setback lines:

     (1)   Fireplace chimneys projecting into a setback no more than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet from a lot line shall be counted in lot coverage but not in setbacks;

     (2)   Bay window(s) projecting into exterior side setback not more than one and one-half (1 1/2) feet and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in total footprint area, at least three (3) feet from any lot line, provided that bay window(s) may not project into the interior side setback;

     (3)   Cornices or eaves projecting into a side setback no more than fifty (50) percent of the required setback to a maximum of two (2) feet;

     (4)   A detached garage or other one story accessory building located within the rear thirty (30) percent of the length of the lot line;

     (5)   Greenhouse window(s) projecting no more than one foot and a minimum of three (3) feet above finished floor, not exceeding seventeen (17) square feet inside the window casement area and at least three (3) feet from any lot line.

     (c)   The following shall be exceptions only to front setback lines:

     (1)   Open balconies projecting not more than four (4) feet into a front setback. Multiple balconies on the same story shall not exceed the maximum projection and shall each have a minimum horizontal separation of at least ten (10) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.27.075 Declining height envelope.
     There shall be a declining height envelope in this district departing from a height of twelve (12) feet above original existing grade at each side property line set at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees until it intersects with a point seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet above the second story finished floor, then it shall extend vertically to a maximum of thirty (30) feet or two and one-half (2 1/2) stories.

     No structure shall extend above or beyond said envelope except:

     (a)   Chimneys or flues, eaves to a maximum of two (2) feet or one-half the distance to property line whichever is less, gables without windows and architectural features which do not create habitable area and do not extend within the first story side setback;

     (b)   Window enclosures which create no more than thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area within the structure;

     (c)   The side of a single-family or duplex residential structure next to an existing two (2) story residential structure, provided:

     (1)   The second story is not closer to the property line than the required first floor setback,

     (2)   If the second story wall is outside of the declining height envelope and adjacent to an existing two (2) story wall, the second story plate line is no higher than the second story plate line on the adjacent property,

     (3)   If there is a two (2) story residential structure on each side of a lot, only one side wall may be exempt from the declining height envelope,

     (4)   If any portion of the second story of an existing two (2) story house adjacent to either side of the lot complies with the declining height requirements, the adjacent wall of the new construction shall not be exempt;

     (d)   Where the slope on a lot along the front property line varies one foot or more from corner to corner; in such cases the measurement of the declining height envelope point of departure shall be adjusted by the average elevation on the front property line;

     (e)   Where the slope on a lot between the front setback and rear setback lines on either side property line varies by two (2) feet or more; in such cases the measurement of the declining height envelope point of departure shall be adjusted by the average elevation at the two (2) setback lines;

     (f)    Where the finished first floor of a house is more than three (3) feet above average finished grade and the area below or basement is not habitable area; in such cases the measurement of declining height envelope shall be fourteen (14) feet above the side property line. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.28 R-3 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.28.010 Scope of regulations.
     The following regulations of this chapter shall apply to all R-3 Districts. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Districts:

     (a)   All uses permitted in R-1 and R-2 Districts, subject to the same restrictions, regulations and limitations that apply to those uses in their respective districts;

     (b)   Multifamily residential uses. Within the boundaries of the Downtown Specific Plan, there shall be an average maximum unit size for multifamily residential uses of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. Average maximum unit size is defined as the maximum value allowed when averaging the square footage of gross floor areas of all residential units in a project;

     (c)   Accessory uses as described for R-1 Districts;

     (d)   Churches, convents and parish houses. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   All uses allowed with a conditional use permit in the R-1 and R-2 Districts and subject to the same restrictions and exceptions;

     (b)   Parking areas;

     (c)   Roominghouses or boardinghouses; provided, however, that no roominghouse or boardinghouse permit may be granted unless the commission determines that all following conditions are met:

     (1)   No more than eight (8) paying guests shall be permitted in one building, and

     (2)   Separate and adequate sanitary facilities shall be provided for each sex, and

     (3)   State and local laws for access and egress must be observed, including the provision of necessary fire escapes, and

     (4)   One garage space shall be provided for each rented room for the first four (4) rooms and one additional space shall be provided for each additional two (2) rooms, and

     (5)   When common kitchen and eating facilities are provided as part of the house service, such services shall be limited to the residents of the boardinghouse;

     (d)   Group residential facilities for the elderly;

     (e)   Any structure that is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height (see Section 25.28.060);

     (f)    In association with a church or nonprofit institution, provisions of any use or activity which is not directly related to providing religious services by the church or religious organization including leasing of premises for instructional uses or non-religious based counseling services;

     (g)   In association with a church or nonprofit institution, provision of temporary shelter for homeless individuals or families, provided that the facility is located within a transportation corridor and the use does not occur continuously at any one location for more than six (6) months of any twelve (12) month period;

     (h)   Within the Anita Road residential subarea only, limited corner store retail as defined in Section 25.08.392, subject to the following standards:

     (1)   There shall be no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area devoted to the limited corner store retail use,

     (2)   Limited corner store retail may sell food products, household items, hardware, newspaper and magazines,

     (3)   Limited corner store retail may offer freshly prepared foods for on-site consumption or take-out, but the food preparation and dining space shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the store’s gross floor area,

     (4)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,

     (5)   No permanently installed security bars shall be allowed, only retractable or removable security features may be used. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.035 Uses allowed with special permit.
     The following are uses requiring a special permit in the R-3 District:

     All two (2) story structures constructed after May 3, 2000, in the Rollins Road multiple-family subzone between Toyon Drive and Bloomfield Road as generally shown on the map attached to Ordinance No. 1628. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.040 Building regulations.
     (a)   No detached building accessory to the main building shall occupy the portion of any lot in front of the main building, nor shall any accessory building be closer than four (4) feet distant from any other building on the same lot.

     (b)   All buildings shall be subject to the height, area, landscape, and garage limitations as provided in this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.050 Lot dimensions and lot requirements.
     (a)   Lots of six thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (6,999) square feet or less must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than fifty (50) feet on a public street; lots of seven thousand (7,000) square feet to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (9,999) square feet must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than fifty-five (55) feet on a public street; and lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than sixty (60) feet on a public street; provided, however, that lots or parcels which face on the curve of a curved street, where the radius of such curvature is less than forty-five (45) feet may have a lesser frontage but not less than thirty (30) feet for a six thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (6,999) square foot or less lot or parcel, thirty-five (35) feet for a seven thousand (7,000) square foot to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (9,999) square foot lot or parcel, or forty (40) feet for a ten thousand (10,000) square foot or larger lot or parcel.

     (b)   On the map adopted by Ordinance 712 and as subsequently amended, all lots shown in white shall have an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet; all lots shown within a border of horizontal crosshatching shall have an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet; and all lots shown within a border of vertical crosshatching shall have an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

     (c)   Where frontage on a public street is impossible or impractical, the planning commission may recommend an easement or easements providing ingress from and egress to a public street in lieu of such street frontage. In any case, the city of Burlingame shall be made an owner of such easement.

     An offer of grant or dedication of any such easement made to the city council shall be referred by it to the planning commission which shall recommend the acceptance or denial of such offer to the city council. Recommendations of acceptance may be conditional. The city council shall not accept or refuse to accept any such offer until it has received and considered the recommendations of the planning commission. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to public service easements as such easements are defined by Section 50432 of the California Government Code.

     (d)   Variances may be granted to the provisions of subsections a and b in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 25.54 of this code.

     (e)   The average width, lot frontage and minimum areas provided for in subsections a and b shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of smaller dimensions appearing of record in the office of the county recorder of the County of San Mateo, or of the city engineer of the city of Burlingame, prior to June 18, 1958. No building permit shall be issued after said date for the construction of any building on any lot divided or subdivided which does not comply with the minimum requirements set forth above, except as varied by subsections c and d of this section.

     (f)    All the development requirements of Chapter 25.28 lot dimensions and requirements shall apply to lands hereafter subdivided in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California; provided, however, that the planning commission and the city council may, in the considerations and acceptance of any tentative or final map submitted pursuant to the provisions of said Subdivision Map Act, approve or accept any such tentative or final map wherein one or more lots or parcels of land do not conform to all of the provisions of Chapter 25.28, when the planning commission and the city council find that by reason of exceptional or extraordinary circumstances the approval or acceptance of such maps will not adversely affect the comprehensive zoning plan of the city.

     (g)   No lands annexed to the city of Burlingame after May 31, 1960, which are thereupon classified for residential uses shall be divided into lots having areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet each. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.060 Height limitations.
     No building or structure shall be constructed in an R-3 District which exceeds four (4) stories or fifty-five (55) feet in height. No building shall be constructed in the Anita Road Subarea of the R-3 District which exceeds forty-five (45) feet in height (see Section 25.28.030(e)). A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.28.030(e)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.070 Lot coverage.
     The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures, including balconies, stairs, roof overhangs exceeding twenty-four (24) inches, trellises and improvements which exceed thirty (30) inches in height, shall be fifty (50) percent for interior lots and sixty (60) percent for corner lots. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.075 Setback lines.
     (a)   Front.

     (1)   The minimum front setback line shall be fifteen (15) feet as measured from the lot front, provided that the setback line delineated on any approved subdivision map shall supersede any provision of this chapter.

     (2)   If forty (40) percent or more of the frontage upon one side of a block is developed with structures the front setback line for any new structure shall be the average of the actual front setback of such existing structures, if such average exceeds fifteen (15) feet. Such measurement shall be to the front wall or to any projection of the existing structure.

     (b)   Side and Rear.

     (1)   Setbacks on Certain Streets. There shall be a minimum front setback of five (5) feet on all buildings constructed on lots which front on Park Road, between Howard and Peninsula Avenues.

     (2)   There shall be a minimum front setback of ten (10) feet on all buildings constructed on lots which front on Primrose Road, between Howard and Bayswater Avenues.

     (3)   There shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on all buildings constructed on El Camino Real.

     (c)   The minimum side and rear setback lines shall be as follows; if front and rear lot lines are unequal their average shall be the width at the midpoints of the two (2) side lot lines:

 

Side Setback Lines (in feet)

Lots 42′ wide or less

3

Lots wider than 42′, but less than 51′

4

Lots 51′ wide or more, but less than 54′

5

Lots 54′ wide or more, but less than 61′

6

Lots 61′ wide and over

7

 

Rear Setback Lines (in feet)

1 and 2 story

15

More than 2 stories

20

 

     (d)   Minimum side setback for condominium developments shall be five (5) feet.

     (e)   The side setback requirement shall be increased one foot for each floor above the first floor.

     (f)    The exterior side setback for any dwelling on a corner lot shall be seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet for a building of two (2) stories or less and shall increase one foot for each additional story.

     (g)   A public building, church, library, museum or other similar use, either governmental or private, shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all lot lines. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.080 Exceptions.
     (a)   The following shall be exceptions to both lot coverage and setback lines:

     (1)   Cornices or eaves projecting into a side setback no more than fifty (50) percent of the required setback to a maximum of four (4) feet;

     (2)   Front entrance stairs and stoops with no roof to a maximum projection of six (6) feet into the front and rear setback, such coverings shall be counted in lot coverage;

     (3)   Bay windows on the first floor projecting into the front setback no more than one foot six (6) inches and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in window casement area;

     (4)   Fireplace chimneys projecting into the front setback no more than two (2) feet and not exceeding six (6) feet in width.

     (b)   The following shall be exceptions only to side and rear setback lines:

     (1)   Bay windows projecting not more than one foot six (6) inches into exterior side setbacks on corner lots and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in window casement area, at least three (3) feet from any lot line, provided that bay window may not project into an interior side setback;

     (2)   A detached garage or other one story accessory building located within the rear thirty (30) percent of a lot;

     (3)   Greenhouse windows projecting no more than one foot, a minimum of three (3) feet above finished floor, not exceeding seventeen (17) square feet in window casement area and at least three (3) feet from any lot line.

     (c)   The following shall be exceptions to lot coverage and side and rear setback lines:

     (1)   Fireplace chimneys projecting into the side and rear setback no more than two (2) feet but not closer than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet from side property line and not exceeding six (6) feet in width.

     (d)   Open balconies projecting not more than four (4) feet into a front setback and not to exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. Multiple balconies so projecting from the same floor shall have a minimum horizontal separation of ten (10) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.090 Underground garages in setback areas.
     Garages may be constructed entirely below ground level and such underground garages may project into any required yard or building setback area, subject to the following limitations:

     (a)   Plans for such underground garages, together with methods of access and egress for the vehicles, must be prepared and submitted for approval by the planning commission prior to the issuance of a building permit;

     (b)   The surface of the structure lying within a required yard or setback area shall be suitably landscaped in keeping with the general character of the surrounding neighborhood;

     (c)   Plans for such landscaping and use of open space must be included in the submitted plans and must be approved by the planning commission;

     (d)   The uppermost portion of any structure or attachment thereto within any required yard or setback area shall not extend above natural grade;

     (e)   On lots abutting or fronting El Camino Real, underground garages may not be constructed in any portion of the property line and the building setback line on such frontage but may be constructed in accordance with the foregoing regulations in other portions of the property. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.092 Anita Road Residential Subarea.
     (a)   The Anita Road Residential Subarea is meant to serve as a buffer between the downtown commercial area and Myrtle Road mixed use area to the west and the single-family neighborhood to the east. All lots in this Sub-area, which consists of properties on both sides of Anita Road between Burlingame Avenue and Bayswater Avenue, shall be subject to the following additional requirements to provide the appropriate transition.

     (1)   Building Height. Buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height and not more than forty-five (45) feet in height shall require a conditional use permit (See Sections 25.28.030(e) and 25.28.060).

     (2)   Side Setbacks. There shall be a minimum side setback of five (5) feet. The side setback requirement shall be increased one foot for each floor above the first floor.

     (3)   Rear Setback. There shall be a minimum rear setback of twenty (20) feet.

 

 



(Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

 

25.28.095 Rollins Road multiple-family subzone—Bloomfield Road to Burlingame Avenue.
     All lots in this zone having a boundary on Rollins Road, between Burlingame Avenue and Bloomfield Road, and Lots 22 and 23, Block 19, Burlingables Subdivision No. 2, all as shown on the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section, shall be subject to the following additional requirements:

     (a)   Thirty (30) foot maximum height limit;

     (b)   Fifteen (15) foot minimum rear setback;

     (c)   No more than fifty (50) percent of the front setback shall be paving or other impermeable surface;

     (d)   One dwelling unit for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of land contained in the total area of the lot, plus one for any fraction over two thousand (2,000) feet or any multiple thereof. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.097 Rollins Road multiple-family subzone—Toyon Drive to Bloomfield Road.
     In order to create a more livable environment for reuse and new development and an appropriate transition between the existing freeway and intercommunity arterial for the established single-family residential area behind the properties within this overlay zone, all lots within this zone having a frontage on Rollins Road, between Toyon Drive and Bloomfield Road, as generally shown on the map attached to Ordinance No. 1627, shall be subject to the following additional requirements and limitations:

     (a)   Structures used for residential purposes; and

     (b)   The following height limits:

     (1)   A second-floor plate height of no more than twenty-one (21) feet, and

     (2)   No more than two (2) stories, and

     (3)   A height of building of no more than thirty (30) feet; and

     (c)   No more than one dwelling unit per one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of land contained in the total area of a lot, plus one additional dwelling unit for any remaining land more than one thousand (1,000) square feet and less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet; and

     (d)   Where two (2) or more recorded lots are combined to create a single lot that then has combined lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, one dwelling unit more than allowed under subsection (c) above may be built; and

     (e)   A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet per dwelling unit of at-grade landscaped area with improvements that make the landscaped area usable for passive or active recreational purposes in a courtyard; at least twenty-five (25) percent of this area shall be in soft landscape. The provision of this landscaped area shall be used in this district instead of the requirement for private open space under the adopted standards for a condominium permit pursuant to Chapter 26.30. If the parcel on which the landscaped area under this subsection is to be placed is larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, then the courtyard shall have a minimum dimension of at least twenty-five (25) feet in any direction. If the parcel on which the landscaped area under this subsection is to be placed is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less, then the courtyard shall have a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) feet in any direction; and

     (f)    At least sixty (60) percent of the required front setback area shall be developed in vegetative landscaping; and

     (g)   Approval of a special permit for any construction of a two (2) story structure or addition of a second story to an existing single-story structure. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.28.100 Landscape requirements.
     No more than forty (40) percent of the front setback of the building shall be paving or other impervious surface. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.29 R-4 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.29.010 Scope of regulations.
     The following regulations of this chapter shall apply to all R-4 Districts. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-4 Districts:

     (a)   All uses permitted in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, subject to the same restrictions, regulations and limitations that apply to those uses in their respective districts;

     (b)   Multifamily Residential Uses. Within the boundaries of the Downtown Specific Plan, there shall be an average maximum unit size for multifamily residential uses of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. Average maximum unit size is defined as the maximum value allowed when averaging the square footage of gross floor areas of all residential units in a project;

     (c)   Accessory uses as described for R-1 Districts. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   All uses permitted with a conditional use permit in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts and subject to the same restrictions and limitations;

     (b)   Bungalow courts, court apartments and similar uses;

     (c)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing or convalescent homes and similar uses, but excluding animal hospitals;

     (d)   Clubs, associations and similar uses;

     (e)   Apartments and residential hotels;

     (f)    Except within the R-4 Incentive District, any building or structure that is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height. Within the R-4 Incentive District, any building or structure which is more than fifty-five (55) feet in height;

     (g)   In association with a church or other religious or nonprofit institution, provision of temporary shelter for homeless individuals or families, provided that the facility is located within a transportation corridor and the use does not occur continuously at any one location for more than six (6) months of any twelve (12) month period;

     (h)   Within the R-4 Incentive District only, limited corner store retail as defined in Section 25.08.392, subject to the following standards:

     (1)   There shall be no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area devoted to the limited corner store retail use,

     (2)   Limited corner store retail may sell food products, household items, hardware, newspaper and magazines,

     (3)   Limited corner store retail may offer freshly prepared foods for on-site consumption or take-out, but the food preparation and dining space shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the store’s gross floor area,

     (4)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,

     (5)   No permanently installed security bars shall be allowed, only retractable or removable security features may be used. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.040 Building regulations.
     All building regulations required in R-3 Districts shall apply with the following exceptions which shall require a conditional use permit:

     Bungalow courts, court apartments and similar uses may be composed of two (2) or more detached dwellings on the same lot. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.050 Lot dimensions and lot requirements.
     (a)   Lots of six thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (6,999) square feet or less must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than fifty (50) feet on a public street; lots of seven thousand (7,000) square feet to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (9,999) square feet must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than fifty-five (55) feet on a public street; and lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more must have an average width of not less than fifty (50) feet and all such lots or parcels of land shall have a frontage of not less than sixty (60) feet on a public street; provided, however, that lots or parcels which face on the curve of a curved street, where the radius of such curvature is less than forty-five (45) feet may have a lesser frontage but not less than thirty (30) feet for a six thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (6,999) square foot or less lot or parcel, thirty-five (35) feet for a seven thousand (7,000) square foot to nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (9,999) square foot lot or parcel, or forty (40) feet for a ten thousand (10,000) square foot or larger lot or parcel.

     (b)   On the map adopted by Ordinance 712 and as subsequently amended, all lots shown in white shall have an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet; all lots shown within a border of horizontal crosshatching shall have an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet; and all lots shown within a border of vertical crosshatching shall have an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

     (c)   Where frontage on a public street is impossible or impractical, the planning commission may recommend an easement or easements providing ingress from and egress to a public street in lieu of such street frontage. In any case, the city of Burlingame shall be made an owner of such easement.

     An offer of grant or dedication of any such easement made to the city council shall be referred by it to the planning commission which shall recommend the acceptance or denial of such offer to the city council. Recommendations of acceptance may be conditional. The city council shall not accept or refuse to accept any such offer until it has received and considered the recommendations of the planning commission. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to public service easements as such easements are defined by Section 50432 of the California Government Code.

     (d)   Variances may be granted to the provisions of subsections a and b above in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 25.54 of this code.

     (e)   The average width, lot frontage and minimum areas provided for in subsections a and b above shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of smaller dimensions appearing of record in the office of the county recorder of the county of San Mateo, or of the city engineer of the city of Burlingame, prior to June 18, 1958. No building permit shall be issued after said date for the construction of any building on any lot divided or subdivided which does not comply with the minimum requirements set forth above, except as varied by subsections c and d of this section.

     (f)    All the development requirements of Chapter 25.34 lot dimensions and requirements shall apply to lands hereafter subdivided in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California; provided, however, that the planning commission and the city council may, in the considerations and acceptance of any tentative or final map submitted pursuant to the provisions of said Subdivision Map Act, approve or accept any such tentative or final map wherein one or more lots or parcels of land do not conform to all of the provisions of Chapter 25.34, when the planning commission and the city council find that by reason of exceptional or extraordinary circumstances the approval or acceptance of such maps will not adversely affect the comprehensive zoning plan of the city.

     (g)   No lands annexed to the city of Burlingame after May 31, 1960, which are thereupon classified for residential uses shall be divided into lots having areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet each. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.060 Height limitations.
     No building or structure shall be constructed in an R-4 District which exceeds six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet in height. Except within the R-4 Incentive District, a conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height. Within the R-4 Incentive District, a conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which is more than fifty-five (55) feet in height (refer to Section 25.29.030(f)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.070 Lot coverage.
     The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures, including balconies, stairs, roof overhangs exceeding twenty-four (24) inches, trellises and improvements which exceed thirty (30) inches in height, shall be fifty (50) percent for interior lots and sixty (60) percent for corner lots. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.075 Setback lines.
     (a)   The minimum front setback line shall be fifteen (15) feet as measured from the lot front, provided that the setback line delineated on any approved subdivision map shall supersede any provision of this chapter.

     (b)   If forty (40) percent or more of the frontage upon one side of a block is developed with structures the front setback line for any new structure shall be the average of the actual front setback of such existing structures, if such average exceeds fifteen (15) feet. Such measurement shall be to the front wall or to any projection of the existing structure.

     (c)   Setbacks on Certain Streets. There shall be a minimum front setback on all buildings constructed on lots which front on Park Road, between Howard and Peninsula Avenues, of five (5) feet.

     There shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on all buildings constructed on El Camino Real.

     (d)   The minimum side and rear setback lines shall be as follows; if front and rear lot lines are unequal their average shall be the width at the midpoints of the two (2) side lot lines:

 

Side Setback Lines (in feet)

Lots 42′ wide or less

3

Lots wider than 42′, but less than 51′

4

Lots 51′ wide or more, but less than 54′

5

Lots 54′ wide or more, but less than 61′

6

Lots 61′ wide or more

7

 

Rear Setback Lines (in feet)

1 and 2 story

15

More than 2 stories

20

 

     (e)   Minimum side setback for condominium developments shall be five (5) feet.

     (f)    Side setback requirement shall increase one foot for every floor above the first floor.

     (g)   The side setback for any dwelling on a corner lot shall be seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet for a building of two (2) stories or less and shall increase one foot for each additional story.

     (h)   A public building, church, library, museum or other similar use, either governmental or private, shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all lot lines. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.080 Exceptions.
     (a)   The following shall be exceptions to both lot coverage and setback lines:

     (1)   Cornices or eaves projecting into a side setback no more than fifty (50) percent of the required setback to a maximum of four (4) feet;

     (2)   Front entrance stairs and stoops with no roof to a maximum projection of six (6) feet into the front and rear setback, such coverings shall be counted in lot coverage;

     (3)   Bay windows on the first floor projecting into the front setback no more than one foot six (6) inches and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in window casement area;

     (4)   Fireplace chimneys projecting into the front setback no more than two (2) feet and not exceeding six (6) feet in width.

     (b)   The following shall be exceptions only to side and rear setback lines:

     (1)   Bay windows projecting not more than one foot six (6) inches into exterior side setbacks on corner lots and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in window casement area, at least three (3) feet from any lot line, provided that bay window may not project into an interior side setback;

     (2)   A detached garage or other one story accessory building located within the rear thirty (30) percent of a lot;

     (3)   Greenhouse windows projecting no more than one foot, a minimum of three (3) feet above finished floor, not exceeding seventeen (17) square feet in window casement area and at least three (3) feet from any lot line.

     (c)   The following shall be exceptions to lot coverage and side and rear setback lines:

     (1)   Fireplace chimneys projecting into the side and rear setback no more than two (2) feet but no closer than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet from side property line and not exceeding six (6) feet in width.

     (d)   Open balconies projecting not more than four (4) feet into a front setback and not to exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. Multiple balconies so projecting from the same floor shall have a minimum horizontal separation of ten (10) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.090 Underground garages in setback areas.
     Garages may be constructed entirely below ground level and such underground garages may project into any required yard or building setback area, subject to the following limitations:

     (a)   Plans for such underground garages, together with methods of access and egress for the vehicles, must be prepared and submitted for approval by the planning commission prior to issuance of a building permit;

     (b)   The surface of the structure lying within a required yard or setback area shall be suitably landscaped in keeping with the general character of the surrounding neighborhood;

     (c)   Plans for such landscaping and use of open space must be included in the submitted plans and must be approved by the planning commission;

     (d)   The uppermost portion of any structure or attachment thereto within any required yard or setback area shall not extend above natural grade;

 

 



 

 

     (e)   On lots abutting or fronting El Camino Real, underground garages may not be constructed in any portion of the property line and the building setback line on such frontage but may be constructed in accordance with the foregoing regulations in other portions of the property. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.095 R-4 Incentive District Subarea.
     (a)   The R-4 Incentive District is located within the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan Area (refer to Figure 3.2 of the Downtown Specific Plan) located south of Howard Avenue between Highland Avenue and Park Road. In order to provide an incentive to encourage high density residential uses, buildings or structures up to fifty-five (55) feet in height are allowed by right within this Subarea (refer to Section 25.29.030(f)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.29.100 Landscape requirements.
     No more than forty (40) percent of the front setback of the building shall be paving or other impervious surface. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.30 C-1 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.30.010 Scope of regulations.
     The following regulations of this chapter shall apply to all C-1 Districts. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.30.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the C-1 Districts:

     (a)   Retail uses, such as drug, liquor, variety stores, paint and hardware, apparel, accessory, stationery, florists, household furnishings, and furniture;

     (b)   Personal services, such as barber and beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe repair, and laundry and dry cleaning services which do not include on-site processing;

     (c)   Business services, such as printing services, mailing services and post office box services;

     (d)   Hotels;

     (e)   Pet shop and grooming, but excluding breeding pens, boarding or kennels;

     (f)    Offices except health services and real estate;

     (g)   Financial institutions;

     (h)   Food establishments;

     (i)    Laundromats. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.30.030 Conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the C-1 District:

     (a)   In the area designated by the North Burlingame/Rollins Road Specific Plan for mixed use, office/retail commercial/residential, multifamily residential uses, subject to the development standards prescribed in Section 25.30.060;

     (b)   Commercial recreation uses;

     (c)   Gasoline service stations, subject to regulations prescribed in Chapter 25.74;

     (d)   Pool halls, bowling alleys and other amusement uses;

     (e)   Dry cleaning processing plants;

     (f)    Any building or structure that is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height;

     (g)   Health services;

     (h)   Drive-in services or take-out services associated with permitted uses;

     (i)    Real estate;

     (j)    Classes;

     (k)   Other uses similar in character to those enumerated in this section or Section 25.36.020 which will not be obnoxious or detrimental to the neighborhood in which they are located;

     (l)    Grocery, drug and department stores which operate with the following characteristics:

     (1)   Operate outside the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., or

     (2)   Include sale of alcoholic beverages, or

     (3)   Abut a residential district and do not meet the following requirements:

     (A)  All structures have a maximum height of eighteen (18) feet,

     (B)   A solid wall or fence of six (6) feet in height is to be provided on or about the property line abutting the residential district,

     (C)   Structures cover no more than fifty (50) percent of the lot,

     (D)  At least one hundred twenty (120) percent of required off-street parking is provided,

     (E)   No curb-cut is closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the residential district,

     (F)   The business is wholly contained within the structures on the lot,

     (G)  All storage and loading areas and facilities are wholly contained on-site and at least fifteen (15) feet from the residential district,

     (H)  Areas between structures and adjacent residential districts are inaccessible to the public. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

25.30.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional in this district or any district subarea shall be prohibited, including:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to, junkyards and automobile wrecking establishments;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (d)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.30.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any C­1 District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. This limitation expressly applies to the Burlingame Avenue Commercial Subareas and Broadway Commercial Area if the use is otherwise allowed. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.30.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structure shall be included in the design review. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.30.050 Height and bulk of buildings.
     Every building hereafter constructed, reconstructed or relocated upon any lot or lots in a C-1 District shall not exceed a height determined by its relation to the area of the lot or lots upon which the building is located in the ratio of three (3) square feet of building to one square foot of land (FAR = 3.0). A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.30.030(i)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.30.055 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.30.060 Minimum setbacks on certain streets.
     There shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet on all buildings constructed on El Camino Real except where there is an existing frontage road. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.30.065 Broadway Commercial Area.
     (a)   Permitted Uses. Except as otherwise provided in this section, uses permitted in the C-1 District are permitted uses in the Broadway Commercial Area.

     (1)   Health services above the first floor only.

     (b)   Conditional Uses. In addition to the conditional uses allowed in the C-1 District, the following uses are only allowed in the Broadway Commercial Area pursuant to a conditional use permit:

     (1)   Food establishments;

     (2)   Real estate uses that comply with the following standards in addition to any conditions that may be imposed pursuant to Chapter 25.52:

     (A)  Occupy no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, and

     (B)   Have no more than ten (10) persons on-site at any one time, and

     (C)   Have a maximum of eight (8) desks or work stations and one conference room on-site, and

     (D)  Are located on the first or second floor.

     (c)   Prohibited Uses. Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited and in particular, but not limited to the uses prohibited in the C-1 District and the following:

     (1)   All offices on the first floor, other than real estate and financial institutions;

     (2)   Health services on the ground floor. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1910 § 2, (2015))

 

25.30.075 Development standards for properties designated for mixed use—Office/retail commercial/ residential use by the North Burlingame/Rollins Road Specific Plan.
     (a)   Multifamily dwellings, mixed uses, or commercial uses may be located and erected in one or more buildings on any one lot.

 

     (b)   Density. There shall be a maximum residential density of forty (40) dwelling units per acre; this density shall apply whether the project is a stand-alone residential project or combined with retail or office uses in a mixed use project.

     (c)   Minimum Building Height. Structures fronting on El Camino Real shall have a minimum building height of four (4) stories or forty-eight (48) feet in height, whichever is greater. Structures fronting on Trousdale or Murchison shall have a minimum building height of three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is greater.

     (d)   Maximum Building Height. Residential structures without any commercial uses shall have a maximum height of sixty-two (62) feet. Mixed use, commercial, including office, retail and residential structures shall have a maximum height of seventy-five (75) feet.

     (e)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, maximum heights are also subject to further limitation by the Federal Aviation Administration.

     (f)    Setbacks along El Camino Real and Trousdale.

     (1)   A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the first thirty-five (35) feet in height of a structure along El Camino Real shall be set back zero feet from the front property line;

     (2)   Any portion of the structure over thirty-five (35) feet in height and less than fifty (50) feet in height may be set back up to fifteen (15) feet from the El Camino Real property line.

     (g)   Setbacks along Murchison Drive. The first story or porch deck more than three (3) feet above adjacent grade of any structure containing a dwelling unit and the first story wall of any commercial or office use shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the front property line; and an average of at least sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the front setback line.

     (h)   Interior Side Setbacks.

     (1)   For lots fronting on El Camino Real, the minimum interior side setback for the first thirty-five (35) feet in height of any structure shall be zero feet. There shall be a minimum side setback of ten (10) feet above thirty-five (35) feet in height;

     (2)   For lots fronting on Murchison or Trousdale, the minimum interior side setback shall be ten (10) feet, and up to thirty-five (35) percent of the structure may encroach up to three (3) feet into this minimum side setback in order to achieve articulation along the sides of the structure.

     (i)    The exterior side setback for all corner lots shall be determined by the front setback required along that street frontage.

     (j)    Rear Setbacks. Except for through lots, the minimum rear setback shall be fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line. For through lots, the minimum rear setback shall be the same as the required build-to line for the street frontage the rear property line adjoins.

 
(Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.31 C-2 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.31.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the C-2 Districts:

     (a)   All uses permitted in the C-1 Districts and subject to the same regulations and restrictions applying to those uses in their respective districts;

     (b)   Automobile repair shop, specialty tire shop, battery rebuilding shop, tire building or recapping, auto paint shop;

     (c)   Automobile sales lot;

     (d)   Automobile washrack in which power-driven machinery or steam cleaning is used, all of which must be in an enclosed building;

     (e)   Building trades contracting, conducted within an enclosed building;

     (f)    Carpenter shop, cabinet making, furniture repairing, machine shop, plumbing and heating shop, or sheet metal shop, conducted within an enclosed building;

     (g)   Laundry and dry cleaning processing plant;

     (h)   Pool halls, bowling alleys and other commercial amusements, all of which must be conducted within an enclosed building;

     (i)    Electrical repair shop;

     (j)    Newspaper and job printing;

     (k)   Trade school;

     (l)    Sign shop;

     (m)  Accessory uses incidental to the uses in this section, and customary accessory buildings when located on the same lot. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.31.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   All uses permitted in C-1 Districts for which a permit is required in such districts, except public garages, and subject to the same restrictions and exceptions;

     (b)   Residential hotels;

     (c)   Any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height;

     (d)   Other uses similar in character to those enumerated in this section or Section 25.30.020 which will not be obnoxious or detrimental to the neighborhood in which they are located. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.31.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited including:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to junkyards and automobile wrecking establishment;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (d)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage, except automobile storage as allowed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.31.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any C­2 District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. This limitation expressly applies to the Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area if the use is otherwise allowed. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.31.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structure shall be included in the design review. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.31.050 Building regulations.
     Every building hereafter constructed, reconstructed or relocated upon any lot or lots in a C-2 District shall not exceed a height determined by its relation to the area of the lot or lots upon which the building is located in the ratio of three (3) square feet of building to one square foot of land (FAR = 3.0). A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.31.030(d)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.31.055 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.31.060 North California Drive Commercial District.
     The following provisions shall apply to the portions the Downtown Specific Plan that are within the North California Drive Commercial District:

 

 



 

 

     (a)   In addition to the permitted uses specified in Section 25.31.020, live/work units shall be permitted above the first floor only.

     (b)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to the North California Drive Commercial District:

     (1)   There shall be no minimum front setback.

     (2)   There shall be a minimum ten (10) foot rear setback.

 

     (3)   For properties with a side yard adjoining a residential district, there shall be a minimum five (5) foot side setback.

     (c)   Building Height. No building or structure shall be constructed in the North California Drive Commercial District which exceeds fifty-five (55) feet in height. A conditional use permit shall be required for building or structures which exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.31.030(d)).

     (e)   Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures in the North California Drive Commercial District shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the lot area.

     (f)    Exceptions Allowed with a Special Permit. The following exceptions shall be allowed in the North California Drive Commercial District with a special permit:

     (1)   Architectural features in excess of the maximum building height which do not extend more than ten (10) feet above the maximum height and do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. The architectural features shall enhance the design of the building and shall be reviewed as a part of the Design Review process as outlined in Chapter 25.57 of this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.31.065 Carolan/Rollins Commercial Area—R-4 overlay zone.
     In addition to the permitted uses specified in Section 25.31.020 and the conditional uses specified in Section 25.31.030, multiple-family residential uses are conditional uses within the Carolan/Rollins Road Commercial Area as shown on the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section, subject to the regulations and restrictions of the R-4 zone district, and subject to the following additional standards:

     (a)   Height of structures within one hundred (100) feet of southerly property line adjacent to R-1 and R-3 zoned properties shall not exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height, whichever is less, as measured from average top of curb taken from the corners of the lot extended, except as follows:

     (1)   A structure between thirty (30) and thirty-six (36) feet upon approval of a special permit under the provisions of Chapter 25.51. Findings for the granting of a special permit for height shall be based on the findings contained in Chapter 25.51, and shall particularly focus on providing articulation in the building design to mitigate the impact of the taller structure on neighboring properties;

     (2)   A structure of thirty-six (36) feet or taller upon approval of a variance under Chapter 25.54.

     (b)   The minimum setback from the southerly property line adjacent to R-1 and R-3 zoned properties shall be twenty (20) feet. This setback shall consist of a landscape screen containing large scale trees selected from the community development department Tree List for Private Property Planting.

     (1)   Vehicular circulation and/or parking may be considered within this setback upon approval of a special permit under the provisions of Chapter 25.54. Findings for the granting of a special permit for vehicular circulation and/or parking shall be based as defined in Chapter 25.54, and shall include a determination that a landscape buffer is provided and other measures are incorporated into the design to minimize the impact on the adjoining properties.

 

(Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.32 BAC (BURLINGAME AVENUE COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.32.010 Scope of regulations.
     The Burlingame Avenue Commercial District is the commercial and retail heart of Downtown Burlingame. It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage and maintain the current mixture of retail, personal service and restaurant uses which keep the heart of the downtown area lively. The following regulations shall apply to all properties within the BAC District. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the BAC District:

     (a)   Retail uses which achieve contiguous, pedestrian-oriented, retail frontage such as drug, liquor, variety stores, paint and hardware, apparel, accessory, stationery, florists, household furnishings, and furniture;

     (b)   Personal services, such as barber and beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe repair and laundry and dry cleaning services which do not include on-site processing;

     (c)   Business services, such as printing services, mailing services and post office box services;

     (d)   Hotels;

     (e)   Travel agencies;

     (f)    Government agencies;

     (g)   Above the first floor only:

     (1)   Offices, except health services and real estate;

     (h)   Above and below the first floor only:

     (1)   Personal trainer and assessment businesses. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.030 Conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the BAC District:

     (a)   Instructional classes incidental to retail or service use;

     (b)   Grocery stores and markets;

     (c)   Schools, above or below the first floor only, which operate outside of peak retail hours only;

     (d)   Above the first floor only:

     (1)   Real estate offices,

     (2)   Health services,

     (3)   Financial institutions;

     (e)   Public utility and public service buildings and facilities;

     (f)    Drive-in services or take-out services associated with permitted uses;

     (g)   Food establishments on certain sites, subject to the criteria established in Section 25.32.070;

     (h)   Any building or structure which is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height, up to a maximum building height of fifty-five (55) feet.

     (i)    Commercial recreation use, limited to tenant spaces with frontages on Burlingame Avenue between Primrose Road and El Camino Real, which meet all of the following criteria:

     (1) Active visible uses including retail, waiting/reception or lounge areas associated with the business, shall be provided along the business frontage abutting the sidewalk; and

     (2) Clear storefront glass is preferred, however obscured glass and/or window treatments are subject to review by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1966 § 2, (2019))

 

25.32.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited and in particular, but not limited to, the following:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to, junkyards and automobile wrecking establishments;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Laundry and dry cleaning agencies with on-site processing plants;

     (d)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (e)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any BAC District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.045 Building replacement and design review in the BAC, Burlingame Avenue Commercial District.
     The following provisions shall apply to the removal, remodel or construction of any building constructed within BAC, Burlingame Avenue Commercial District:

     (a)   Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structure shall be included in the design review; and

     (b)   In addition to the Design Review requirements contained in Chapter 25.57, all façade changes within the BAC District shall also be subject to the design review process unless the changes qualify for the administrative minor design review process outlined in Section 25.57.013; and

     (c)   No part of any building shall be removed or significantly altered on the exterior without compliance with all the requirements of California Environmental Quality Act, including an analysis of the contribution, both independently and cumulative, of the structure to be replaced or modified to the pedestrian-oriented retail fabric of and the city’s General and Specific Plan policies; and

     (d)   A demolition permit shall not be issued until the planning commission has approved the design review application for the project. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.050 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.055 Building height.
     (a)   No building or structure shall be constructed in the BAC District which exceeds fifty-five (55) feet in height. A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.32.030(h)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.060 Setbacks and build-to lines.
     (a)   El Camino Real. There shall be a ten (10) foot build-to line along El Camino Real. A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the build-to line.

     (b)   Except for properties fronting on El Camino Real, the front wall of the first story of any structure shall have no minimum front setback, and a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the front property line.

     (c)   There shall be no minimum side or rear setback, except properties with side or rear setbacks along El Camino Real. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.065 Exceptions allowed with a special permit.
     The following exceptions shall be allowed in the district with a special permit:

     (a)   Architectural features in excess of the maximum building height which do not extend more than ten (10) feet above the maximum height and do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. The architectural features shall enhance the design of the building and shall be reviewed as a part of the Design Review process as outlined in Chapter 25.57 of this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.32.070 Food establishments in the BAC, Burlingame Avenue Commercial District.
     (a)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall only apply to food establishments in the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District.

     (b)   In the BAC, Burlingame Avenue Commercial District, the number of food establishments shall be limited as follows:

     (1)   To those existing and in business on November 1, 1998, and/or at the locations as shown on the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Tables approved by the city council on November 21, 2011 (and as periodically updated by the Community Development Department — Planning Division staff). A food establishment is a business as defined in Section 25.08.268 and shall be deemed in business if it was legally open for business as a food establishment to the public on November 1, 1998 and is included on the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Tables.

     (2)   Effective December 5, 2012, full service food establishments shall be allowed within the BAC zone without limitation upon the number of such establishments subject to approval of a conditional use permit as required in Section 25.32.030(g). Full service food establishments legally open for business and/or for which a valid conditional use permit has been approved prior to December 5, 2012 shall retain the ability to change use classification and/or be replaced in the manner outlined in subsection (d) of this section.

     (c)   Seating Area. The seating area of the food establishments described in subsection (b) of this section as shown on the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Tables approved by the city council on November 21, 2011, may be enlarged only by amendment to the applicable conditional use permit for the establishment.

     (d)   Changes in Classification and Replacement.

     (l)    A food establishment use classified as a full service restaurant by the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Tables may change its food establishment classification only to a limited food service or bar upon approval of an amendment to the conditional use permit to the establishment.

     (2)   A food establishment use classified as a limited food service by the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Tables may change its food establishment classification only to a full service restaurant or bar with approval of an amendment to the conditional use permit for the establishment.

     (3)   A food establishment use classified as a bar by the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Tables may change its food establishment classification only to a full service restaurant or a limited food service with approval of an amendment to the conditional use permit for the establishment.

     (4)   A food establishment use classified as a specialty shop by the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Table shall be allowed to change to a different type of food establishment. A specialty shop may be replaced by another specialty shop at the same location within the same or less square footage. If a specialty shop is changed to any other classification the site shall not return to specialty shop use.

     (5)   A food establishment may be replaced by another food establishment of the same classification so long as the replacement business is of the same classification as that shown for the site on the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Tables subject to the conditions of the existing conditional use permit, and it complies with the same conditions as in the existing conditional use permit.

     (e)   Change in Location.

     (1)   No food establishment shall occupy a location not shown on the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishments by Type Tables as approved by the city council on November 21, 2011.

     (2)   Specialty shops shall not relocate to any other location on the Burlingame Avenue Commercial District Food Establishment by Type Tables list as approved by the city council on November 21, 2011.

     (f)    Expansion. An existing food establishment, including specialty shops, may be expanded at its existing location so long as the expansion does not increase the size of the seating area.

     (g)   Loss of Use. A food establishment shall be deemed out of business when the premises is occupied by another business which is not a food establishment.

     (h)   Performance Standards. All food establishments shall comply with the following:

     (1)   Provide trash receptacle(s) at location(s) and of a design selected by the city;

     (2)   Provide litter control along all frontages of the business and within fifty (50) feet of all frontages of the business;

     (3)   Apply for a conditional use permit for delivery of prepared food from the premises; and

     (4)   Food sales from a window or any opening within ten (10) feet of property line shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1878 § 3, (2012); Ord. 1881 § 5, (2012))

Chapter 25.33 HMU (HOWARD MIXED USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.33.010 Scope of regulations.
     The Howard Mixed Use District is the area to the south of Burlingame Avenue in Downtown Burlingame and consists of a mix of uses. The streets that connect Howard Avenue with Burlingame Avenue act as connectors with the commercial uses along those streets strengthening the relationship between Burlingame and Howard Avenues. The following regulations shall apply to all properties within the HMU District. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.33.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the HMU District:

     (a)   Retail uses which achieve contiguous, pedestrian-oriented, retail frontage, such as drug, liquor, variety stores, paint and hardware, apparel, accessory, stationery, florists, household furnishings, and furniture;

     (b)   Personal services, such as barber and beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe repair, and laundry and dry cleaning services which do not include on-site processing;

     (c)   Business services, such as printing services, mailing services, and post office box services;

     (d)   Hotels;

     (e)   Travel agencies;

     (f)    Government agencies;

     (g)   Grocery stores and markets;

     (h)   Financial institutions;

     (i)    Above the first floor only:

     (1)   Offices, including health services and real estate, with parking as required by Chapter 25.70,

     (2)   Multifamily residential uses, including live/work, with an average maximum unit size of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. Average maximum unit size is defined as the maximum value allowed when averaging the square footage of gross floor areas of all residential units in a project;

     (j)    Above and below the first floor only:

     (1)   Personal trainer and assessment businesses. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1874 § 7, (2012))

 

25.33.030 Conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the HMU District:

     (a)   Instructional classes incidental to retail or service use;

     (b)   Commercial recreation use;

     (c)   Food establishments;

     (d)   Pool halls, bowling alleys and other commercial amusements;

     (e)   Performing arts facilities;

     (f)    Laundry and dry cleaning agencies with on-site processing plants;

     (g)   Drive-in services or take-out services associated with permitted uses. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.33.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited and in particular, but not limited to, the following:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to, junkyards and automobile wrecking establishments;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (d)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.33.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any HMU District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.33.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial or mixed use structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the structure shall be included in the design review. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.33.050 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.33.055 Building height.
     No building or structure shall be constructed in the HMU District which exceeds fifty-five (55) feet in height. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.33.060 Setbacks and build-to lines.
     (a)   El Camino Real. There shall be a ten (10) foot build-to line along El Camino Real. A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the build-to line.

     (b)   Except for properties fronting on El Camino Real, the front wall of the first story of any structure shall have no minimum front setback, and a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the front property line.

     (c)   There shall be no minimum side or rear setback, except properties with side or rear setbacks along El Camino Real.

     (d)   R-3 side setback standards (see Section 25.28.075) shall apply to property line(s) with an existing residential use on the abutting property. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1927 § 2, (2016))

 

25.33.065 Minimum ground floor ceiling height.
     New building or structures or projects determined to be substantial construction shall have a minimum ground floor ceiling height of fifteen (15) feet, as measured from finished floor to the ceiling of the ground floor. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.33.070 Exceptions allowed with a special permit.
     The following exceptions shall be allowed in the district with a special permit:

     (a)   Architectural features in excess of the maximum building height which do not extend more than ten (10) feet above the maximum height and do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. The architectural features shall enhance the design of the building and shall be reviewed as a part of the Design Review process as outlined in Chapter 25.57 of this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.34 MMU (MYRTLE ROAD MIXED USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.34.010 Scope of regulations.
     The Myrtle Road Mixed Use District is centered on Myrtle Road and East Lane, east of the Caltrain railroad tracks. Development should be consistent with the existing neighborhood scale of small streets and varied commercial and residential buildings. New development shall maintain the existing pattern at a scale consistent with the adjacent residential areas, to serve as a buffer between the downtown commercial district and the residential neighborhoods to the east. The following regulations shall apply to all properties within the MMU District. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the MMU District:

     (a)   Retail uses with a gross floor area of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, which achieve contiguous, pedestrian-oriented, retail frontage such as drug, liquor, variety stores, paint and hardware, apparel, accessory, stationery, florists, household furnishings, and furniture;

     (b)   Personal services, such as barber and beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe repair and laundry and dry cleaning services which do not include on-site processing;

     (c)   Business services, such as printing services, mailing services and post office box services;

     (d)   Service commercial uses with a gross floor area of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, such as automobile repair and maintenance, and repair and maintenance of electronic, personal and household goods;

     (e)   Offices, except health services and real estate;

     (f)    Travel agencies;

     (g)   Government agencies. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.030 Conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the MMU District:

     (a)   Multifamily residential uses, including live/work, with an average maximum unit size of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. Average maximum unit size is defined as the maximum value allowed when averaging the square footage of gross floor areas of all residential units in a project;

     (b)   Health services and real estate offices;

     (c)   Financial institutions;

     (d)   Retail uses and service commercial uses greater than six thousand (6,000) square feet in floor area;

     (e)   Any building or structure which is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height, but not to exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited and in particular, but not limited to, the following:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to, junkyards and automobile wrecking establishments;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (d)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any MMU District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial or mixed use structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the structure shall be included in the design review. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.050 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.055 Building height.
     No building or structure shall be constructed in the MMU District which exceeds forty-five (45) feet in height. A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.34.030(e)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.060 Setbacks.
     (a)   Front. There shall be a minimum front setback of ten (10) feet.

     (b)   Side. There shall be no minimum side setback, except for properties with an existing residential use on the abutting property.

     (c)   Rear. There shall be a rear setback of twenty (20) feet.

     (d)   R-3 side setback standards (see Section 25.28.075) shall apply to property line(s) with an existing residential use on the abutting property. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1927 § 2, (2016))

 

25.34.065 Lot coverage.
     The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures, including balconies, stairs, roof overhangs exceeding twenty-four (24) inches, trellises and improvements exceeding thirty (30) inches in height, shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the lot area. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.070 Landscape requirements.
     A minimum of ten (10) percent of the front setback shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.34.075 Exceptions allowed with a special permit.
     The following exceptions shall be allowed in the district with a special permit:

     (a)   Architectural features in excess of the maximum building height which do not extend more than ten (10) feet above the maximum height and do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. The architectural features shall enhance the design of the building and shall be reviewed as a part of the Design Review process as outlined in Chapter 25.57 of this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.35 BMU (BAYSWATER MIXED USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.35.010 Scope of regulations.
     The Bayswater Mixed Use District is centered on Bayswater Avenue between El Camino Real and Park Road. Development should be consistent with the existing neighborhood scale of small streets and varied commercial and residential buildings. New development shall maintain the existing pattern at a scale consistent with the adjacent residential areas, to serve as a buffer between the downtown commercial district and the residential neighborhoods to the south and east. The following regulations shall apply to all properties within the BMU District. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the BMU District:

     (a)   Personal services, such as barber and beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe repair and laundry and dry cleaning services which do not include on-site processing;

     (b)   Business services, such as printing services, mailing services and post office box services;

     (c)   Travel agencies;

     (d)   Government agencies;

     (e)   Financial institutions;

     (f)    Multifamily residential uses, including live/work, with an average maximum unit size of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. Average maximum unit size is defined as the maximum value allowed when averaging the square footage of gross floor areas of all residential units in a project. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.030 Conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the BMU District:

     (a)   Offices, including health services and real estate offices;

     (b)   Religious facility;

     (c)   In association with a religious facility or nonprofit institution, provisions of any use or activity which is not directly related to providing religious services by the religious organization including leasing of premises for instructional uses or non-religious based counseling services;

     (d)   In association with a religious facility or nonprofit institution, provision of temporary shelter for homeless individuals or families, provided that the facility is located within a transportation corridor and the use does not occur continuously at any one location for more than six (6) months of any twelve (12) month period;

     (e)   Schools, public and private;

     (f)    Commercial recreation use;

     (g)   Any building or structure which is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height;

     (h)   Limited corner store retail, subject to the following standards:

     (1)   There shall be no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area devoted to the limited corner store retail use,

     (2)   Limited corner store retail may sell food products, household items, hardware, newspapers and magazines,

     (3)   The limited corner store retail may offer freshly prepared foods for on-site consumption or take-out, but the food preparation and dining space shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the store’s gross floor area,

     (4)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,

     (5)   No permanently installed security bars shall be allowed, only retractable or removable security features may be used. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited and in particular, but not limited to, the following:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to, junkyards and automobile wrecking establishments;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (d)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any BMU District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial or mixed use structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the structure shall be included in the design review. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.050 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.055 Building height.
     No building or structure shall be constructed in the BMU District which exceeds fifty-five (55) feet in height. A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.35.030(c)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.060 Setbacks.
     (a)   El Camino Real Setback. There shall be a minimum twenty (20) foot setback along El Camino Real.

     (b)   Front. With the exception of properties with El Camino Real frontage, there shall be a minimum front setback of ten (10) feet.

     (c)   Side. There shall be no minimum side setback, except properties with side setbacks along El Camino Real or for properties with an existing residential use on the abutting property.

     (d)   Rear. There shall be a rear setback of twenty (20) feet.

     (e)   R-3 side setback standards (see Section 25.28.075) shall apply to property line(s) with an existing residential use on the abutting property. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1927 § 2, (2016))

 

25.35.065 Lot coverage.
     The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures, including balconies, stairs, roof overhangs exceeding twenty-four (24) inches, trellises and improvements exceeding thirty (30) inches in height, shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the lot area. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.070 Landscape requirements.
     A minimum of ten (10) percent of the front setback shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.35.075 Exceptions allowed with a special permit.
     The following exception shall be allowed in the district with a special permit:

     (a)   Architectural features in excess of the maximum building height which do not extend more than ten (10) feet above the maximum height and do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. The architectural features shall enhance the design of the building and shall be reviewed as a part of the design review process as outlined in Chapter 25.57 of this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.36 DAC (DONNELLY AVENUE COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.36.010 Scope of regulations.
     The Donnelly Avenue Commercial District is the area immediately north of Burlingame Avenue and is an extension of the primary commercial area. It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage and maintain the current mixture of retail, personal service and office uses. The existing residential uses may remain, but new residential uses are not allowed. The following regulations shall apply to all properties within the DAC District. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.36.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the DAC District:

     (a)   Retail uses which achieve contiguous, pedestrian-oriented, retail frontage such as drug, liquor, variety stores, paint and hardware, apparel, accessory, stationery, florists, household furnishings, and furniture;

     (b)   Personal services, such as barber and beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe repair and laundry and dry cleaning services which do not include on-site processing;

     (c)   Business services, such as printing services, mailing services and post office box services;

     (d)   Grocery stores and markets;

     (e)   Travel agencies;

     (f)    Government agencies;

     (g)   Offices, including health services and real estate, with parking as required by Chapter 25.70;

     (h)   Financial institutions;

     (i)    Hotels;

     (j)    Above the first floor only:

     (1)   Multifamily residential uses, including live/work, on properties located north of Donnelly Avenue that have sole frontage on Donnelly Avenue, with an average maximum unit size of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. Average maximum unit size is defined as the maximum value allowed when averaging the square footage of gross floor areas of all residential units in a project. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1983 § 2, (2020))

 

25.36.030 Conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the DAC District:

     (a)   Instructional classes incidental to retail or service use;

     (b)   Commercial recreation use;

     (c)   Food establishments;

     (d)   Performing arts facilities;

     (e)   Public utility and public service buildings and facilities;

     (f)    Laundry and dry cleaning agencies with on-site processing plants;

     (g)   Drive-in services or take-out services associated with permitted uses;

     (h)   Any building or structure which is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height, up to a maximum building height of fifty-five (55) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.36.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited and in particular, but not limited to, the following:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to, junkyards and automobile wrecking establishments;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (d)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

25.36.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any DAC District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.36.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial or mixed use structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the structure shall be included in the design review. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.36.050 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.36.055 Building height.
     No building or structure shall be constructed in the DAC District which exceeds fifty-five (55) feet in height. A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.36.030(h)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.36.060 Setbacks and build-to lines.
     (a)   The front wall of the first story of any structure shall have no minimum front setback except that a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the front property line or no more than ten (10) feet from the front property line.

     (b)   There shall be no minimum side or rear setback. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.36.065 Minimum ground floor ceiling height.
     New building or structures or projects determined to be substantial construction shall have a minimum ground floor ceiling height of fifteen (15) feet, as measured from finished floor to the ceiling of the ground floor. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.36.070 Exceptions allowed with a special permit.
     The following exceptions shall be allowed in the district with a special permit:

     (a)   Architectural features in excess of the maximum building height which do not extend more than ten (10) feet above the maximum height and do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. The architectural features shall enhance the design of the building and shall be reviewed as a part of the design review process as outlined in Chapter 25.57 of this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.37 CAC (CHAPIN AVENUE COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.37.010 Scope of regulations.
     The Chapin Avenue Commercial District consists of properties on either side of Chapin Avenue between Primrose and El Camino Real. The area is characterized by a concentration of financial institutions, real estate and other office uses. The following regulations shall apply to all properties within the CAC District. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the CAC District:

     (a)   Retail uses which achieve contiguous, pedestrian-oriented, retail frontage such as drug, liquor, variety stores, paint and hardware, apparel, accessory, stationery, florists, household furnishings, and furniture;

     (b)   Personal services, such as barber and beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe repair and laundry and dry cleaning services which do not include on-site processing;

     (c)   Business services, such as printing services, mailing services and post office box services;

     (d)   Grocery stores and markets;

     (e)   Travel agencies;

     (f)    Government agencies;

     (g)   Offices, including health services and real estate, with parking as required by Chapter 25.70;

     (h)   Financial institutions;

     (i)    Hotels. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.030 Conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the CAC District:

     (a)   Instructional classes incidental to retail or service use;

     (b)   Commercial recreation use;

     (c)   Food establishments;

     (d)   Performing arts facilities;

     (e)   Public utility and public service buildings and facilities;

     (f)    Laundry and dry cleaning agencies with on-site processing plants;

     (g)   Drive-in services or take-out services associated with permitted uses;

     (h)   Any building or structure that is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height, up to a maximum building height of fifty-five (55) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited and in particular, but not limited to, the following:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to, junkyards and automobile wrecking establishments;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (d)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any CAC District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial or mixed use structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the structure shall be included in the design review. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.050 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.055 Building height.
     No building or structure shall be constructed in the CAC District which exceeds fifty-five (55) feet in height. A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.37.030(h)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.060 Setbacks and build-to lines.
     (a)   El Camino Real. There shall be a minimum ten (10) foot build-to line along El Camino Real, and a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the front wall of the structure shall be located at the build-to line.

     (b)   Except for properties fronting on El Camino Real, the front wall of the first story of any structure shall have no minimum front setback, and a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at or no more than ten (10) feet from the front property line.

     (c)   Except for properties with a side or rear setback along El Camino Real, there shall be no minimum side or rear setback. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.065 Minimum ground floor ceiling height.
     New building or structures or projects determined to be substantial construction shall have a minimum ground floor ceiling height of fifteen (15) feet, as measured from finished floor to the ceiling of the ground floor. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.37.070 Exceptions allowed with a special permit.
     The following exceptions shall be allowed in the district with a special permit:

     (a)   Architectural features in excess of the maximum building height which do not extend more than ten (10) feet above the maximum height and do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. The architectural features shall enhance the design of the building and shall be reviewed as a part of the Design Review process as outlined in Chapter 25.57 of this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.38 CAR (CALIFORNIA DRIVE AUTO ROW) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.38.010 Scope of regulations.
     The California Drive Auto Row District is the area along California Drive between Burlingame and Peninsula Avenues, which has long been known as Burlingame’s “Auto Row.” Automobile-related uses dominate in this area. Non-auto uses should be carefully considered to ensure compatibility with the area’s traditional focus on automobile businesses. The following regulations shall apply to all properties within the CAR District. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.38.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the CAR District:

     (a)   Retail sales of and service of automobiles;

     (b)   Automobile rental desks with no on-site rental car storage as an accessory use to retail sales or service of automobiles, and open only when the primary auto sales or service business is open;

     (c)   Automobile sales lots;

     (d)   Retail sales of automobile parts and accessories;

     (e)   Government agencies;

     (f)    Above the first floor only:

     (1)   Multiple-family residential uses, with an average maximum unit size of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. Average maximum unit size is defined as the maximum value allowed when averaging the square footage of gross floor areas of all residential units in a project,

     (2)   Office uses. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.38.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the CAR District:

     (a)   Office uses on the ground floor;

     (b)   Retail sales other than those related to automobile sales or service;

     (c)   Personal services other than those related to automobile sales or service;

     (d)   Business services other than those related to automobile sales or service, such as printing services, mailing services and post office box services;

     (e)   Hotels;

     (f)    Retail and other commercial uses with a gross floor area greater than six thousand (6,000) square feet;

     (g)   Automobile rental businesses that meet all of the following minimum standards:

     (1)   Parking is provided on-site for storage of at least ten (10) percent of the average number of vehicles rented monthly from the site; the average number shall be calculated over a calendar year; however, in no event, shall storage for more than fifty (50) rental vehicles be provided on-site, and

     (2)   Parking is provided on-site for all employees and customers;

     (h)   Any building or structure which is more than thirty-five (35) feet in height, up to a maximum building height of fifty-five (55) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.38.035 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited and in particular, but not limited to, the following:

     (a)   Uses of any industrial nature, including, but not limited to, junkyards and automobile wrecking establishments;

     (b)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments, unless licensed by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 4600 et seq.), which requires that CAMTC licensed massage establishments shall be considered a personal service;

     (c)   Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (d)   Psychic services;

     (e)   Warehouses for storage of furniture, household, personal, or other similar articles or outdoor commercial storage, except automobile storage as allowed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

 

25.38.040 Additional requirements for health services, beauty shops, barbershop, health studio, tanning facilities.
     A health service, beauty shop, barbershop, health studio, or tanning facility in any location in any CAR District shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.38.045 Design review.
     Construction and alterations as designated in Chapter 25.57 shall be subject to design review under that chapter. When any part of a commercial or mixed use structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the structure shall be included in the design review. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.38.050 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     Each lot in this district shall have an area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.38.055 Building height.
     No building or structure shall be constructed in the CAR District which exceeds fifty-five (55) feet in height. A conditional use permit is required for any building or structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height (refer to Section 25.38.030(g)). (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

 

25.38.060 Setbacks and build-to lines.
     (a)   The front wall of the first story of any structure shall have no minimum front setback, and a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the front property line.

     (b)   There shall be no minimum side or rear setback, except R-3 side setback standards (see Section 25.28.075) shall apply to property line(s) with an existing residential use on the abutting property. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011); Ord. 1927 § 2, (2016))

 

25.38.065 Minimum ground floor ceiling height.
     New building or structures or projects determined to be substantial construction shall have a minimum ground floor ceiling height of fifteen (15) feet, as measured from finished floor to the ceiling of the ground floor. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

25.38.070 Exceptions allowed with a special permit.
     The following exceptions shall be allowed in the district with a special permit:

     (a)   Architectural features in excess of the maximum building height which do not extend more than ten (10) feet above the maximum height and do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. The architectural features shall enhance the design of the building and shall be reviewed as a part of the Design Review process as outlined in Chapter 25.57 of this code. (Ord. 1863 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.39 RRMU (NORTH ROLLINS ROAD MIXED-USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.39.010 Purpose and applicability.
     (a)   The purpose of the North Rollins Road Mixed-Use Zone (RRMU) is to implement the General Plan Live/Work land use designation by creating and sustaining a new neighborhood of creative live/work units and developments, small-scale support commercial businesses, and other employment uses within easy walking distance to the Millbrae multimodal transit station. Long-established industrial uses are permitted to remain as conforming uses, provided they comply with all applicable standards and operational conditions.  

     (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the areas in the city with the “Live/Work” land use designation as shown on the Land Use Plan, Figure CC-1 of the Burlingame General Plan.

 



(Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

25.39.020 Land use regulations.
     (a)   Table 25.39-1 identifies the land use regulations for the RRMU zone.  Any use not listed below shall be prohibited, unless the Director finds that the proposed uses is similar in characteristics to allowed uses.

 

TABLE 25.39-1: RRMU LAND USE REGULATIONS

 

 

P

Permitted

 

 

CUP

Conditional Use Permit

 

 

MCUP

Minor Conditional Use Permit

 

 

TUP

Temporary Use Permit

 

 

A

Accessory Use

 

 

--

Not Permitted

 

Land Use

Permit Requirement

Specific Use Regulations

COMMERCIAL - RETAIL

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

 

 

• Bars, Taverns

MCUP

 

• Night Club

--

 

• Restaurant – Drive-through

P

 

Food and Beverage Sales

 

 

• General Market

P

 

• Convenience Store

MCUP

 

• Liquor Store

--

 

Nurseries and Garden Centers

--

 

Retail Sales

 

No outdoor storage or sales permitted in conjunction with any permitted use, except for permitted temporary sales.

• General

P

 

• Large Format

--

 

• Specialized

CUP

 

Vehicle Fuel Sales and Accessory Service

--

 

Vehicle Sales

------

 

• Auto and Light Truck – New

 

 

• Auto and Light Truck – Used

 

 

• Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental

 

 

COMMERCIAL – SERVICES AND RECREATION

 

Adult Entertainment Businesses

--

 

Animal Care Services

 

Grooming - No overnight animal stays permitted.

• Boarding/Kennels

--

 

• Grooming

P

 

• Veterinarian

MCUP

 

Banks and Financial Institutions

P

 

Check Cashing and Pay Day Loan Establishments

--

 

Commercial Recreation

CUP

 

Day Care Centers

CUP

 

Food Preparation (catering)

MCUP

 

Funeral Services and Cemeteries

--

 

Office – Medical or Dental

CUP

Limited to 5,000 square feet.

Office – Professional

P

Limited to 5,000 square feet.

Personal Services – General

P

 

Personal Services - Specialized

CUP

 

Theaters

 

 

• Live

CUP

 

• Movie or similar

CUP

 

• Vehicle Service, Repairs, and Rentals

 

 

• Car Wash

--

 

• Major Repair/Body Work

--

 

• Minor Repair/Body Work

--

 

• Rental Facilities

--

 

EDUCATIONAL SERVICES

 

Class or School Uses

CUP

 

Trade Schools

--

 

INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING, WAREHOUSING, AND WHOLESALING USES

 

Food Processing and Production

CUP

 

Laboratories/Research and Development

P

 

Light Industrial

MCUP

 

Personal Storage

CUP

 

Warehousing/Logistics

CUP

 

Wholesaling

A

Accessory to a permitted industrial or live/work use.

LODGING

 

Bed and Breakfast

--

 

Emergency Shelters

P

Limited in size to 24 beds. See also Section 25.44.045 (Additional Uses for Properties in the Northern Rollins Road Area).

Hostels

--

 

Hotels and Motels

--

 

PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC USES

 

Community Open Space

P

 

Hospitals

--

 

Medical Clinics

CUP

No 24-hour clinics.

Public Assembly Facilities

CUP

 

Public Parks

P

 

Places of Religious Assembly

CUP

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

 

Live/Work

P

See Section 25.39.030.B.1.

Multi-Family Residential

P

 

Residential Care Facilities

--

 

Supportive and Transitional Housing

P

 

MIXED USES

 

Mixed Use Developments

P

With individual specific uses subject to land use regulatory requirements set forth in this Table 25.39-1.

TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITIES

 

Air courier, delivery, or other transshipment services

--

 

Parking facilities, including parking garages

A

 

Transit Facilities

--

 

Utilities

MCUP

 

Vehicle Storage

--

 

DRAINAGE RIGHTS-OF-WAYS

 

Publicly Owned and Operated Drainage Facilities and Improvements

P

 

Privately Owned and Operated Electric Transmission Lines

P

 

Supplemental Parking for Permitted or Conditional Uses in the District

CUP

 

Storage of Operable Vehicles

CUP

a) Vehicles must be in operable condition and must be managed at all times by a single, responsible person with access to the keys for all vehicles.

b) Vehicles shall be moved by appointment only and shall not be moved during a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic periods as defined by the city engineer.

c) Site size must be a minimum of .7 acres.

d) Site must have approved access to a public street.

e) No customers shall visit the site.

Storage of Recreational Vehicles and Boats

 

Vehicles shall not be moved during a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic periods as defined by the city traffic engineer.

Outdoor Storage

CUP

Must be related to immediately abutting uses which are permitted or conditional in the district.

Fencing

CUP

 

Uses Similar in Nature to Those Allowed in This Section

CUP

Must have frontage on a public street and which proposed use and siting meets all the requirements established by the city engineer.

Long Term Airport Parking

--

 

SPECIFIC AND TEMPORARY USES

 

Outdoor Temporary and Seasonal Sales

TUP

 

Temporary Uses

TUP

 

Outdoor Dining

A

 

 

 

     (b)   Maximum Retail Sales Building Size.  No retail sales establishment shall exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of gross floor area. An applicant may request a retail sales building larger than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, but in no case larger than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, through the Conditional Use Permit process. 

     (c)   Stand-alone Residential, Commercial, and Light Industrial Uses. Stand-alone commercial, residential, and light industrial developments are permitted. 

     (d)   Limitations on Use. The following uses and activities shall be prohibited:

     (1)   New manufacturing and industrial uses except those specifically allowed in Table 25.39-1, except nonconforming uses as allowed in subsection 25.39.020(e).

     (2)   Vehicle/equipment repair (e.g., body or mechanical work, including boats and recreational vehicles, vehicle detailing and painting, upholstery, or any similar use).

     (3)   In any residential or live/work unit, storage of flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use.

     (4)   Any other activity or use, as determined by the Community Development Director, to be incompatible with residential activities and/or to have the possibility of affecting the health or safety of residents due to the potential for the use to create dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or would be hazardous because of materials, processes, products, or wastes.

     (e)   Nonconforming Industrial Uses.

     (1)   General. The purpose of this subsection is to recognize and allow for the continued use of industrial activities that become nonconforming with the adoption of this Chapter. Except as provided in this subsection, the nonconforming use regulations set forth in Chapter 25.50 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures) shall apply. 

     (2)   Discontinuance of nonconforming uses. If a nonconforming use of a lot, building, or structure is discontinued for a continuous period exceeding three years, the right to continue the nonconforming use shall expire. 

     (3)   Allowed expansion of nonconforming industrial uses. Expansion of a legally established nonconforming industrial use is permitted on the same site with the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 

     (4)   Change from a nonconforming industrial use to another nonconforming industrial use. The Community Development Director may authorize a change from a legally established nonconforming industrial use to another nonconforming industrial use upon making the finding that the new use is similar in character to the existing nonconforming use and does not have the potential to result in adverse impacts on surrounding uses. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

25.39.030 Development standards.
     (a)   Development Standards Generally; Calculation of FAR and Density.  

     (1)   Development projects shall comply with the development standards set forth in Table 25.39-2 (RRMU Development Standards). The floor area ratio (FAR) standards shall apply to the nonresidential component on a development on a site; the density standards shall apply to any residential component. The nonresidential (FAR) and residential (density) components may be additive.

     (2)   A developer may elect to develop consistent with either Tier 1, Tier 2, or Tier 3 development standards for live/work and any other non-industrial or non-institutional development.  Projects using Tiers 2 or 3 standards shall provide community benefits pursuant to subparagraph 25.39.030.C, below.

 

 

 

TABLE 25.39-2

RRMU DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Development Standards

Live/Work, Residential, Mixed Use and Commercial Development

Industrial and Institutional Development

Additional Regulations

Base Standard
(Tier 1)

Increased Intensity
(Tier 2)

Maximum Intensity
(Tier 3)

a. Density – Maximum

(applies to residential component)

30 du/ac

50 du/ac

70 du/ac

N/A

Tiers 2 and 3 must provide community benefits per subparagraph C below.

b. Floor Area Ratio – Maximum

(applies to nonresidential component) 1

0.50

0.75

1.0

1.02

Tiers 2 and 3 must provide community benefits per subparagraph C below.

c. Height

(Unless otherwise controlled by maximum heights established by the Federal Aviation Administration for parcels affected by airport safety zones)

3 stories/40 ft. maximum

5 stories/55 ft. maximum

7 stories/80 ft. maximum

50 ft.

Tiers 2 and 3 must provide community benefits per subparagraph C below.

d.  Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

•Front: Mixed-Use Arterial (Rollins Road)

0 - 15 ft.

0 - 15 ft.

0 – 15 ft.

20 ft.

Subject to streetscape frontage standards in Table 25.39-3

•Front: All other streets

12 ft. from edge of curb

12 ft. from edge of curb

15 ft. from edge of curb

15 ft. from edge of curb

Subject to streetscape frontage standards in Table 25.39-3

•Side – Interior

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

0 ft. adjacent to industrial use/20 ft. adjacent to all other uses

Setbacks for industrial uses apply only to new construction; established industrial uses shall be considered conforming with regard to required setbacks.

•Side – Street

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

Subject to streetscape frontage standards in Table 25.39-3

•Rear

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

0 ft. adjacent to industrial use/20 ft. adjacent to all other uses

Setbacks for industrial uses apply only to new construction; established industrial uses shall be considered conforming with regard to required setbacks.

•Alley

5 ft.

5 ft.

5 ft.

10 ft.

If alley is used for direct access to a garage, setback shall be 20 ft. to allow vehicle access.

e. Edge condition between industrial and residential use

 

 

See Section 25.39.030.B.4.

f. Lot Dimensions – Minimum

 

 

 

 

• Size

• Mixed use development: 10,000 sf

• Mixed use development: 10,000 sf

• Mixed use development: 10,000 sf

10,000 sf

 

 

• Residential subdivision: 3,500 sf

• Residential subdivision: 3,500 sf

• Residential subdivision: 3,500 sf

 

 

• Width at street frontage

• Mixed use development: 100 ft.

• Mixed use development: 100 ft.

• Mixed use development: 100 ft.

50 ft.

 

 

• Residential subdivision: 40 ft.

• Residential subdivision: 40 ft.

• Residential subdivision: 40 ft.

 

 

g.  Lot Coverage – Maximum2

60%

60%

60%

70%

 

h.  Open Space for residential units per unit  – Minimum

•Live/work units: 100 sf

•Live/work units: 100 sf

•Live/work units: 100 sf

 

Minimum dimensions of open space:

 

•Multifamily housing or mixed use: 125 sf

•Multifamily housing or mixed use: 125 sf

•Multifamily housing or mixed use: 125 sf

N/A

•Private: 5 ft. deep, 8 ft. wide

 

•Open space may be either private, common, or include both

•Open space may be either private, common, or include both

•Open space may be either private, common, or include both

 

•Common: 15 ft. in any direction

 

 

 

 

 

Any required pedestrian plaza/public space, as set forth in subsection B.3, below, may count toward up to 50% of the common open space.

i. Percent landscape coverage - Minimum

15%

20%

20%

15%

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Notes:
1 Above-ground parking structures shall be exempt from Floor Area Ratio (FAR) calculations.

2 FAR of Industrial, Manufacturing, Processing, Warehousing, and Wholesale uses may be increased to 1.5 with a Conditional Use Permit. 

3 Lot coverage may be increased if additional useable common open space equivalent to the additional lot coverage (in square feet) is provided on a podium-level landscaped courtyard or plaza. 

 

 

     (b)   Additional Regulations.

     (1)   Live/Work Standards.

     (A)  Purpose and Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to live/work units.

     (B)   Intent. The development standards of this section are intended to facilitate the creation of new, adaptable live/work units in a manner that preserves the surrounding industrial and artistic character, supports enhanced street level activity, maintains a consistent urban streetwall, and orients buildings and pedestrians toward public streets. Live/work units are intended to be designed with adequate workspace, higher ceilings, larger doors, sufficient natural light, open floor plans, and equipped with nonresidential finishes and features that support arts and production activities.

     (C)   Density/Floor Area Allocation. Live/work units consistent with the provisions of this section may be apportioned from either the residential (as specified by Density standards in Table 25.39-2) and/or nonresidential (as specified by Floor Area Ratio/FAR standards in Table 25.39-2) allocations for a property.

     (D)  Limitations on Use.  The nonresidential component of a live/work unit shall be limited in use to those uses set forth in Table 25.39-1 (RRMU Land Use Regulations). Nonresidential/work is not required; however, each unit shall be designed to be adaptable and facilitate work activities per the provisions in this section.  

     (E)   Floor Area Requirement.  A live/work unit shall have a minimum floor area of at least seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. At least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of a live/work unit shall be designated as suitable for workspace, and measure not less than fifteen (15) feet in at least one dimension and no less than ten (10) feet in any dimension. The area suitable for workspace for each unit shall be clearly demarcated on approved building plans.

     (F)   Separation of and Access to Individual Units. Access to each individual live/work unit shall be provided from shop fronts, directly from the sidewalk parallel to the primary or secondary street, or from common access areas, corridors, or halls. The access to each unit shall be clearly separate from other live/work units or other uses within the building.

     (G)  Location of Living Space – Ground Floor Units. Ground floor live/work units shall designate the front twenty (20) feet of the unit as area suitable for workspace, in order to maintain activity and commercial access along the frontage. Dedicated living space may be located in the rear portion of the ground level, provided the front twenty (20) feet of the unit is designated as suitable for work.

     (H)  Ceiling Height. Ground floor live/work units shall have floor to ceiling height of fifteen (15) feet or greater, measured from top of floor to bottom of ceiling. Upper floor live/work units shall have floor to ceiling height of ten (10) feet or greater. A mezzanine space shall not be included in the calculation of minimum height for any floor or level.

     (I)    Integration of Living and Working Space. Areas within a live/work unit that are designated as living space shall be an integral part of the live/work unit and not separated (or occupied and/or rented separately) from the area designated for workspace.

     (J)    Client and Customer Visits. Client and customer visits to live/work units are permitted. 

     (2)   Pedestrian Plaza/Public Space. Where total lot area or development site equals fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater, a pedestrian plaza or other public open space/gathering space shall be provided that meets the following design criteria:

     (A)  Is a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in size;

     (B)   Has a minimum dimension at least thirty (30) feet on any side;

     (C)   Is at least fifty (50) percent open to the sky;

     (D)  Is located at ground level with direct pedestrian and ADA access to the adjacent public street;

     (E)   Is unenclosed by any wall, fence, gate, or other obstruction across the subject property;

     (F)   Is open to the public, without charge, each day of the year, except for temporary closures for necessary maintenance or public safety; and

     (G)  Includes at least one gathering space with a fountain or other focal element.

     (3)   Mid-Block Plazas and Paseos. Where blocks (measured from curb face to curb face) are longer than four hundred (400) feet, and where a development has more than three hundred (300) feet of frontage, at least one plaza, pedestrian pathway or paseo shall be provided perpendicular to the block face. All such plazas shall meet the design criteria outlined in 25.39.030(b)(2). All such paseos shall meet the following design criteria:

     (A)  Be open to the public and remain so during daylight hours;

     (B)   Be at least fifteen (15) feet wide, and fifteen (15) feet deep if a plaza; 

     (C)   Have a clear line of sight to the back of the paseo, gathering place, or focal element; and

     (D)  Be at least fifty (50) percent open to the sky or covered with a transparent material.

     (4)   Industrial/Residential Interface.  Any live/work unit or other residential unit on a site abutting an industrial use on an adjoining site shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the lot line shared by the property with the industrial use.  A minimum six (6)-foot-high masonry wall or other buffering feature suitable to the review authority shall be provided along the shared property line.

     (5)   Residential Notice. Residents of new live/work, mixed-use, and stand-alone residential development projects, whether owners or tenants, shall be notified in writing before taking up residence that they will be living in an urban-type environment, that the noise levels may be higher than in a strictly residential area, and that there may be odors associated with commercial and industrial uses. The covenants, conditions, and restrictions of any development with a residential use shall require that prospective residents acknowledge the receipt of the written noise notification.  Such written noise notification shall be provided in residential leases. Signatures shall confirm receipt and understanding of this information.

     (c)   Community Benefit Bonuses – Tiers for Increased FAR, Density, and Height.

     (1)   Purpose and Applicability.  To provide an incentive for development, and in partnership with the City to provide community benefits that would not otherwise be created, the Planning Commission may grant increased FAR, density, and/or height in return for provision of specific community benefits, as listed below or subsequently identified by the City Council, if doing so is in the City’s interest and will help implement the General Plan and further, if these benefits cannot be realized without granting increased FAR, height, and/or density.  A variety of objectives are listed to ensure that proposed project features are appropriate for the site and surroundings, and to allow for a wide range of possible project types.

     (2)   Tier 2 – Number of Community Benefits.   The Planning Commission may approve Tier 2 projects if it determines that the project includes at least two (2) community benefits from subsection (c)(4) of this Section (Community Benefits Objectives).  At least one affordable and workforce housing objective from subsection (4)(A) shall be chosen.

     (3)   Tier 3 – Number of Community Benefits.   The Planning Commission may approve Tier 3 projects if it determines that the project includes at least three (3) community benefits from subsection (c)(4) of this Section (Community Benefits Objectives).  At least one affordable and workforce housing objective from subsection (4)(A) shall be chosen.

     (4)   Community Benefit Objectives.  

     (A)  Affordable and Workforce Housing.

     (i)    The project provides affordable housing at the rate of five percent for low-income households, or ten (10) percent for moderate-income households, as a percentage of the total number of housing units built, for a period of fifty-five (55) years or greater.

     (ii)   The project qualifies for, and utilizes, a density bonus in compliance with the City’s affordable housing incentives (Chapter 25.63).

     (B)   Pedestrian Amenities.   The project includes major pedestrian connections in excess of minimum paseo requirements.  

     (C)   Public Plazas Beyond Minimum. Public plazas or other publicly accessible open spaces at least 50 percent larger than the minimum required.  Where provided, such public plazas and open spaces shall be subject to the following:

     (i)    The public plaza shall be owned, operated, and maintained by the developer or property manager in accordance with an approved maintenance plan to be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director;

     (ii)   Each part of the public plaza shall be accessible from other parts of the open space without leaving the open space area;

     (iii)  The public plaza shall be on the ground level and directly accessible from the sidewalk, and be accessible to persons with disabilities;

     (iv)  The public plaza shall be open to the public, without charge, each day of the year, except for temporary closures for necessary maintenance or public safety; and

     (v)   At a minimum, the following elements shall be included: trees and landscaping, seating, bicycle racks, trash and recycling receptacles, and signage that include hours of operation.

     (D)  Off-Site Streetscape Improvements. Does not include improvements along the frontage of a development site that would normally be required. Examples include:

     (i)    Enhanced pedestrian and bicycle-oriented streetscapes;

     (ii)   Protected bicycle lanes and pedestrian pathways, improved bicycle and pedestrian crossings/signals, bicycle racks/shelters;

     (iii)  New pedestrian and bicycle connections to transit facilities, neighborhoods, trails, commercial areas, etc.;

     (iv)  Removal of existing pedestrian and bicycle barriers (e.g. dead-ends and cul-de-sacs);

     (v)   Upgrading traffic signals to enhance pedestrian and bicycle safety.

     (E)   Cultural Arts Space.  Includes space for visual arts, performing arts, artist housing, and other activities that support arts and culture.

     (F)   Pedestrian and Similar Paths and Connections between Adjacent Properties. To effectuate the goal of creating walkable and bikeable environments, improved pedestrian ways and other paths open to the public that accommodate easy movement across and between properties under separate ownership.

     (G)  Historic Preservation (Off-Site).   Where there are no historic resources on the project site, the project provides for the permanent preservation of a building off site that is listed in the City’s inventory of historical resources through the recordation of a historic preservation agreement.

     (H)  Mode Split.   The project provides for a permanent mobility mode shift towards alternative transportation of up to twenty-five (25) percent for building occupants through a Transportation Demand Management Program. Prior to the issuance of building permits, a covenant agreement shall be recorded that discloses the required Transportation Demand Management provisions. This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder to provide constructive notice to all future owners of the property of any ongoing programmatic requirements. 

     (I)    Zero Net Energy. The project provides one hundred (100) percent of total building energy load measured as kilowatt per square foot through solar panels, wind turbines, or other renewable sources.

     (J)    Publicly Accessible Park Space.   Contribution towards the provision of public parks in the North Rollins Road area.   Contribution can be in the form of dedication of land, provisions of improvements, or payment of fee in excess of that normally required for parks.

     (K)  Public Parking Facilities. The project provides publicly accessible parking to serve area-wide parking needs. To qualify, the parking spaces should be permanently available for public use and subject to easements or restrictions acceptable to the City.

     (L)   Flexible (Miscellaneous) Benefit. The applicant agrees to provide a currently undefined community benefit approved by the City Council that is significant and substantially beyond normal requirements. Examples are inclusion of a child care center or community event space in a new development project, off-site utility infrastructure improvements above and beyond those required to serve the development, additional funding for City programs such as contribution to a local façade improvement program, or subsidy for existing commercial tenants or other local small businesses. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

25.39.040 Design standards and objective design criteria.
     (a)   Design Standards.  All new development shall be designed to achieve the following objectives: 

     (1)   The overall design intent of the RRMU zone is to provide for an eclectic mix of residential, live/work, commercial, and light industrial development that has an industrial and contemporary look in terms of materials used, architectural styles, and building forms.  

     (2)   Site and building design shall provide for internal compatibility among the different uses in terms of noise, hours of operation, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, access, use of open space, and similar operating characteristics.

     (3)   Potential noise, odors, glare, pedestrian traffic, and other potentially significant impacts on residents shall be minimized to allow a compatible mix of residential and nonresidential uses on the same site.

     (4)   The design of any live/work or mixed-use project shall take into consideration potential impacts on adjacent properties and shall include specific design features to minimize potential impacts.

     (5)   The design of the mixed-use project shall ensure that the residential units are of a residential character and that privacy between residential units and between other uses on the site is maximized.

     (6)   The design of the structures and site planning shall encourage integration of the street pedestrian environment with the nonresidential uses through the use of plazas, courtyards, walkways, and street furniture.

     (7)   Site planning and building design shall be compatible with and enhance the adjacent and surrounding built environment in terms of scale, building design, color, exterior materials, roof styles, lighting, landscaping, and signage.

     (b)   Building Orientation, Entrances, and Articulation.

     (1)   Building Design. Recognizing the varied commercial and industrial character of the area, new development and redevelopment projects should be encouraged to feature a blend of both commercial and residential design features, including modern, industrial type building design.

     (2)   Orientation. The main building of a development shall be oriented to face a public street. Building frontages shall be generally parallel to streets. For all residential, retail, and office uses, at least one primary entrance to a ground-floor use shall face the adjacent street right-of-way. Ground-related entrances include entrances to ground-floor uses.

     (3)   Ground Floor Transparency.  At least forty-five (45) percent of the exterior walls on the ground floor facing the street shall include windows, doors, or other openings. 

     (4)   Nonresidential Entrances. Entries shall be clearly defined features of front façades and of a scale that is in proportion to the size of the building and number of units being accessed. Larger buildings shall have a more prominent building entrance while maintaining a pedestrian scale.

     (5)   Transitional Space at Residential Entries. New residential buildings shall provide transitional spaces in the form of stoops, overhangs, and porches between public areas fronting the primary street and entrances. This type of element or equivalent shall be required for each unit or group of units, but no less than one of this type of element shall be provided.

     (6)   Building Articulation. Except for buildings housing industrial uses, no street frontage wall may run in a continuous plane for more than twenty-five (25) feet without an opening (door or window) or offsets, or as approved by the review authority if the project is constrained by unusual parcel size, shape, use, or other features that the responsible review authority accepts as rendering this requirement infeasible. Openings fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces. Offsets shall vary in depth and/or direction of at least eighteen (18) inches, or a repeated pattern of offsets, recesses, or projections of similar depth.

     (7)   Structured Parking. Structured parking facing public streets should be fronted or wrapped with actively occupied spaces such as storefronts, live/work units, residential community amenities, and lobbies. Access to parking shall be designed so that it is not prominent and ties into the adjacent architectural style.

     (c)   Site Layout

     (1)   Streetscape.  Street frontages shall meet the standards set forth in Table 25.39-3 (RRMU Street Frontage Standards).

 

TABLE 25.39-3: RRMU STREET FRONTAGE STANDARDS

Street Type

Frontage – Measured from Back of Curb to Building Face

Mixed-Use Arterial (Rollins Road)

Building Frontage Setback

15 ft. minimum

Walk Zone (Public)

10 ft. minimum

Amenity/Planter Zone

5 ft. minimum

Tree Wells

5 ft. by 5 ft. minimum

Mixed-Use Collector (Adrian Road)

Building Frontage Setback

12 feet

Walk Zone (Public)

6 ft. minimum

Amenity/Planter Zone

5 ft. minimum

Tree Wells

5 ft. by 5 ft. minimum

Mixed-Use Access (Adrian Court, Broderick Road, Guittard Road, Ingold Road)

Building Frontage Setback

10 feet

Walk Zone (Public)

6 ft. minimum

Amenity/Planter Zone

4 ft. minimum

Tree Wells

4 ft. by 4 ft. minimum

Build-To Lines

At least sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the Building Frontage Setback.

Exceptions

Exceptions to Building Frontage Standards may be granted to accommodate conflicts with recorded easements, rights-of-ways, etc.

 

 

     (2)   Pedestrian Access.  On-site pedestrian circulation and access shall be provided per the following standards: 

     (A)  Internal Connections. A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and bicycle parking areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.

     (B)   To Circulation Network. Regular and convenient connections between on-site walkways and the public sidewalk and other existing or planned pedestrian routes, such as safe routes to school, shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage.

     (C)   To Adjacent Areas. Direct and convenient access shall be provided among adjoining residential and commercial areas and along creeks to the maximum extent feasible while still providing for safety and security. Public access easements minimum ten (10) feet in width shall be provided to allow for future connections.  

     (D)  To Transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be provided from adjacent transit stops to building entrances.

     (3)   Location of Parking.   Any surface parking facilities shall be located to the side or rear of any proposed project.  No more than thirty-three (33) percent of the site area at the ground level may be used for surface parking facilities.   

     (4)   Service and Delivery Areas.   Unenclosed service and loading areas shall be screened from residential areas and integrated with the design of the building. Special attention shall be given when designing loading facilities in a location that is proximate to residential uses. Techniques such as block walls, enhanced setbacks, or enclosed loading shall be used to minimize adverse impacts to residents. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

25.39.050 Parking.
     (a)   Off-Street Vehicle Parking. Parking shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 25.70 (Off-Street Parking), with the following exceptions for live/work units, stand-alone residential development, and the residential component of a mixed-use development:

 

TABLE 25.39-4: RRMU OFF-STREET VEHICLE PARKING

Number of Bedrooms in a Unit

Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required

0 (Studio or Loft)

1 space/unit

1

1 space/unit

2

1.5 spaces/unit for multifamily housing

 2 spaces/unit for live/work

3 or more

2 spaces/unit

Guest parking

None required

 

     (b)   Vehicle Parking Stall Dimensions. All parking stalls may be provided in a single dimension, eight and one-half (8½) feet in width by seventeen (17) feet in length, except for required accessible parking spaces which shall meet the dimensions required in the California Building Code in effect at the time a project is submitted for City review. No compact parking stalls shall be allowed if only a single dimension stall is used.

     (c)   Aisle Dimensions. All aisles within a parking area shall be as follows:

 

TABLE 25.39-5: RRMU PARKING AISLE DIMENSIONS

Parking Space Angle

Required Backup Aisle

90 degree

24 feet

60 degree

18 feet

30 degree

13 feet

 

     (d)   Stacked/Mechanical Parking. Parking utilizing stackers or mechanical systems may be approved with a Conditional Use Permit.

     (e)   Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided as follows:

 

TABLE 25.39-6: RRMU BICYCLE PARKING

Class

Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required

Class I – Resident bicycles

0.5 spaces/unit

Class II – Guest bicycles

0.05 spaces/unit

 

     (f)    Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Stalls. Five (5) percent of all spaces shall be prepared for EV charging equipment.

     (g)   Parking Reductions for Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan. Projects utilizing a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan per Section 25.39.030(c)(4)(H) shall be allowed up to twenty (20) percent reduction in required off-street vehicle parking (not including bicycle parking and EV stalls) provided the project provides for a permanent mobility mode shift towards alternative transportation of twenty-five (25) percent or greater for building occupants through the TDM program. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

25.39.060 Review procedures.
     (a)   Design Review Required.   Design review is required pursuant to Chapter 25.57 (Design Review). 

     (b)   Planning Commission Approval of Community Benefits Bonuses.   The Planning Commission shall be the final review authority for an application for Tier 2 and Tier 3 projects. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

Chapter 25.40 NBMU (NORTH BURLINGAME MIXED USE) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.40.010 Purpose and applicability.
     (a)   The purpose of the North Burlingame Mixed-Use (NBMU) zone is to implement the General Plan North Burlingame Mixed Use designation by providing a distinct, defining area at the City’s north gateway on El Camino Real, with housing and complementary commercial and office uses at urban-level intensities, and that takes advantage of the adjacent multimodal transit center. This transit-oriented development district accommodates housing at progressively higher densities based on the level of community benefits provided, with the goal of ensuring that new development adds value for all in the City. 

     (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the areas in the city with the “North Burlingame Mixed Use” land use designation as shown on the Land Use Plan, Figure CC-1 of the Burlingame General Plan.

 



 

(Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

25.40.020 Land use regulations.
     (a)   Table 25.40-1 identifies the land use regulations for the NBMU zone.  Any use not listed below shall be prohibited, unless the Director finds that the proposed uses is similar in characteristics to allowed uses.

     (b)   Stand-alone commercial and residential developments are permitted.

 

 

 

TABLE 25.40-1: NBMU LAND USE REGULATIONS

 

 

P

Permitted

 

 

CUP

Conditional Use Permit

 

 

MCUP

Minor Conditional Use Permit

 

 

TUP

Temporary Use Permit

 

 

A

Accessory Use

 

 

--

Not Permitted

 

Land Use

Permit Requirement

Specific Use Regulations

COMMERCIAL - RETAIL

Eating and Drinking Establishments

 

 

•Bars, Taverns

MCUP

 

•Night Club

CUP

 

•Restaurant – Drive-through

P

 

Food and Beverage Sales

 

 

•General Market

P

 

•Convenience Store

CUP

 

•Liquor Store

--

 

Nurseries and Garden Centers

--

 

•Retail Sales

 

 

•General

P

 

•Large Format

--

 

•Specialized

CUP

 

Vehicle Fuel Sales and Service

CUP

 

Vehicle Sales

--

 

•Auto and Light Truck – New

----

 

•Auto and Light Truck – Used

--

 

•Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental

--

 

COMMERCIAL – SERVICES AND RECREATION

Adult Entertainment Businesses

--

 

Animal Care Services

 

Grooming - No overnight animal stays permitted.

•Boarding/Kennels

--

 

•Grooming

P

 

•Veterinarian•

MCUP

 

Banks and Financial Institutions

P

 

Check Cashing and Pay Day Loan Establishments

--

 

Commercial Recreation

CUP

 

Day Care Centers

CUP

 

Food Preparation (catering)

MCUP

 

Funeral Services and Cemeteries

--

 

Office – Medical or Dental

P

 

Office – Professional

P

 

Personal Services – General

P

 

Personal Services - Specialized

CUP

 

Light Research/Development and Laboratories

P

 

Theaters

 

 

•Live

CUP

 

•Movie or similar

CUP

 

Vehicle Service, Repairs, and Rentals

 

 

•Car Wash

--

 

•Major Repair/Body Work

--

 

•Minor Repair/Body Work

--

 

•Rental Facilities

A

 

EDUCATIONAL SERVICES

Class or School Uses

CUP

 

Trade Schools

--

 

LODGING

Bed and Breakfast

--

 

Emergency Shelters

--

 

Hostels

--

 

Hotels and Motels

CUP

 

PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC USES

Community Open Space

P

 

Hospitals and Clinics

CUP

 

Public Assembly Facilities

--

 

Public Parks

P

 

Places of Religious Assembly

CUP

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

Multi-Family Residential

P

 

Residential Care Facilities

CUP

 

Supportive and Transitional Housing

P

 

MIXED USES

Mixed Use Developments

P

With individual specific uses subject to land use regulatory requirements set forth in this table.

TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITIES

Parking facilities, including parking garages

--

 

Transit Facilities

CUP

 

Utilities

MCUP

 

SPECIFIC AND TEMPORARY USES

Outdoor Temporary and Seasonal Sales

TUP

 

Temporary Uses

TUP

 

Vending machines

A

 

Outdoor dining

A

 

 

(Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

 

25.40.030 Development standards.
     (a)   Development Standards Generally; Calculation of FAR and Density.

     (1)   Development projects shall comply with the development standards set forth in Table 25.40-2 (NBMU Development Standards). The floor area ratio (FAR) standards shall apply to the nonresidential component on a development on a site; the density standards shall apply to any residential component. The nonresidential (FAR) and residential (density) components are additive.

     (2)   A developer may elect to develop consistent with either Tier 1, Tier 2, or Tier 3 development standards.  Projects using Tier 2 or Tier 3 standards shall provide community benefits pursuant to subparagraph 25.40.030.D, below.

   

 

 

TABLE 25.40-2

NBMU DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Development Standards

Base Standard
(Tier 1)

Increased Intensity
(Tier 2)

Maximum Intensity
(Tier 3)

Additional Regulations

a.  Density – Maximum

(applies to residential component)

40 du/ac

80 du/ac

140 du/ac

Tier 2 and 3 must provide community benefits per subparagraph B, below.

b.  Floor Area Ratio (FAR) – Maximum
(applies to nonresidential component)1

0.50 Office 0.25 Commercial 

1.25 Office 0.50 Commercial 

2.0 Office
1.0 Commercial 

Tier 2 and 3 must provide community benefits per subparagraph B, below.

c.  Height
(Unless otherwise controlled by maximum heights established by the Federal Aviation Administration for parcels affected by airport safety zones)

4 stories/45 ft. maximum

5 stories/55 ft. maximum

7 stories/
75 ft. maximum
For properties on the east side of El Camino Real,
9 stories/
100 ft.  subject to additional setback standards, below

Tier 2 and 3 must provide community benefits per subparagraph B, below.
Special Requirements and Exceptions:
1.  Building frontages facing Trousdale Drive (west of El Camino Real), Murchison Drive (west of El Camino Real), Magnolia Drive, Ogden Drive, and Marco Polo Way:
a.  35% of the linear frontage above 35 feet must step back a minimum 5 feet, in the form of insets, balconies, or stepbacks, or
b.  80% of a building’s linear frontage above 55 feet stories must step back a minimum of ten (10) feet, in the form of insets, balconies, or stepbacks

d.  Setbacks

 

 

 

 

•For any building adjacent to properties zoned R-1 or R-2

Any building façade that faces the adjacent R-1 or R-2 property line and that is above 15 feet in height shall have additional setback distance added to the required setback.  That additional setback shall apply to any portion of the building above 15 feet in height and shall be a minimum horizontal distance of one foot for every one foot of building height above 30 feet.  

 

•Front: El Camino Real

0 to 10 ft. for first 35 ft.

Subject to streetscape frontage standards in Table 25.40-3

•Front: Mixed-Use Arterial (Trousdale Drive, Murchison Drive, California Drive)

0 to 10 ft., with at least 60 percent of the structure located at the streetscape frontage line per Table 25.40-3

Subject to streetscape frontage standards in Table 25.40-3

•Front: Mixed-Use Collector (Magnolia Drive) and Neighborhood Access (Ogden Drive, Marco Polo Way)

0 to 10 ft., with at least 40 percent of the structure located at the streetscape frontage line per Table 25.40-3

Subject to streetscape frontage standards in Table 25.40-3

•Side – Interior: El Camino Real

10 ft.

 

•Side – Interior: Trousdale Drive, Murchison Drive, California Drive, Ogden Drive, and Marco Polo Way

10 ft.

 

•Side – Street

0 to 10 ft., with at least 40 percent of the structure located at the streetscape frontage line per Table 25.40-3

Subject to streetscape frontage standards in Table 25.40-3

•Rear

15 ft. minimum

20 ft. minimum if abutting a lot zoned R-1 or R-2

 

 

e.  Lot Dimensions – Minimum

•Size

•Width at street frontage

20,000 sf

150 ft.

Minimum applies to new subdivisions of land; legally established lots of smaller size may be developed consistent with the requirements of this Chapter 25.40.

f.  Lot Coverage – Maximum2

80%

Lot coverage may be increased if additional, usable common open space generally equivalent to the additional lot coverage (in square feet) is provided on a rooftop garden and hardscape.

g.  Open Space and Landscaping

•Open space for residential units – Minimum

•Percent landscape coverage - Minimum

100 sf per unit of open space per unit. Open space may be either private, common, or include both.

10% of entire site; see also 25.40.040.

Minimum dimensions of open space:

•Private: 5 ft. deep, 8 ft. wide

•Common: 15 ft. in any direction

h.  Parking

1. Parking shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 25.70. 

2.Garages may be constructed entirely below ground level, and such underground garages may project into any required yard or building setback area.

3. No at-grade parking shall be visible or accessed from El Camino Real.

Notes:

1 Above-ground parking structures shall be exempt from Floor Area Ratio (FAR) calculations.

2 Lot coverage may be increased if additional useable common open space equivalent to the additional lot coverage (in square feet) is provided on a podium-level landscaped courtyard or plaza. 

 

 

 

     (b)   Community Benefits – Required Enhancements for Tier 2 and 3 Increased FAR, Density, and Height. 

     (1)   Purpose and Applicability.  The community benefits program is established to provide incentives for higher intensity development not otherwise allowed by these zoning regulations, and to create new community benefits that may not otherwise result from development activity. The Planning Commission, through a discretionary review and public hearing process, may grant increased FAR, density, or building height in return for provision of specific community benefits, as listed below or subsequently identified by the City Council, if doing so is in the City’s interest and will help implement the General Plan, and in finding that these benefits cannot be realized without granting increased FAR, height, and/or density.  A variety of objectives are listed to ensure that proposed project features are appropriate for the site and surroundings, and to allow for a wide range of possible project types.

     (2)   Tier 2 - Number of Community Benefits. The Planning Commission may approve Tier 2 projects if it determines that the project includes at least two (2) community benefits from subsection 4 of this Section (Community Benefits Objectives).  At least one affordable and workforce housing objective from (4)(A) shall be chosen.

     (3)   Tier 3 - Number of Community Benefits. The Planning Commission may approve Tier 3 projects if it determines that the project includes at least three community benefits from subsection 4 of this Section (Community Benefits Objectives).   At least one affordable and workforce housing objective from (4)(A) shall be chosen.

     (4)   Community Benefit Options. 

     (A)  Affordable and Workforce Housing.

     (i)    The project provides affordable housing at the rate of five percent for low-income households, or ten (10) percent for moderate-income households, as a percentage of the total number of housing units built, for a period of fifty-five (55) years or greater.

     (ii)   The project qualifies for, and utilizes, a density bonus in compliance with the City’s affordable housing incentives (Chapter 25.63).

     (B)   Pedestrian Amenities.   The project includes major pedestrian connections in excess of minimum pedestrian requirements.

     (C)   Public Plazas.

     (i)    The minimum area of any public plaza shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet;

     (ii)   The public plaza is owned, operated, and maintained by the developer or property manager in accordance with an approved maintenance plan to be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director;

     (iii)  Each part of the public plaza shall be accessible from other parts of the open space without leaving the open space area;

     (iv)  The public plaza shall be on the ground level and directly accessible from the sidewalk, and be accessible to persons with disabilities;

     (v)   The public plaza shall be open to the public, without charge, each day of the year, except for temporary closures for necessary maintenance or public safety; and

     (vi)  At a minimum, the following elements shall be included within the open space: trees and landscaping, seating, bicycle racks, trash and recycling receptacles, and signage that include hours of operation.

     (D)  Off-Site Streetscape Improvements. These provisions do not include improvements along the frontage of a development site that would normally be required. Examples of amenities include:

     (i)    Enhanced pedestrian and bicycle-oriented streetscapes.

     (ii)   Protected bicycle lanes and pedestrian pathways, improved bicycle and pedestrian crossings/signals, bicycle racks/shelters.

     (iii)  New pedestrian and bicycle connections to transit facilities, neighborhoods, trails, commercial areas, etc.

     (iv)  Removal of existing pedestrian and bicycle barriers (e.g. dead-ends and cul-de-sacs).

     (v)   Upgrading traffic signals to enhance pedestrian and bicycle safety.

     (E)   Cultural Arts Space.  Includes space for visual arts, performing arts, artist housing, and other activities that support arts and culture.

     (F)   Pedestrian and Similar Paths and Connections between Adjacent Properties. To effectuate the goal of creating walkable and bikeable environments, improved pedestrian ways and other paths open to the public that accommodate easy movement across and between properties under separate ownership.

     (G)  Historic Preservation (Off-Site).   Where there are no historic resources on the project site, the project provides for the permanent preservation of a building off site that is listed in the City’s inventory of historical resources through the recordation of a historic preservation agreement.

     (H)  Mode Split.   The project provides for the permanent mode shift towards alternative transportation for building occupants through a Transportation Demand Management Program that achieves the objectives of General Plan Chapter VI: Mobility. Prior to the issuance of building permits, a covenant agreement shall be recorded that discloses the required Transportation Demand Management provisions. This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder to provide constructive notice to all future owners of the property of any ongoing programmatic requirements. 

     (I)    Zero Net Energy. The project provides one hundred (100) percent of total building energy load measured as kilowatt per square foot through solar panels, wind turbines, or other renewable sources.

     (J)    Public Parking Facilities. The project provides publicly accessible parking to serve area-wide parking needs. To qualify, the parking spaces should be permanently available for public use and subject to easements or restrictions acceptable to the City.

     (K)  Flexible (Miscellaneous) Benefit. The applicant agrees to provide a currently undefined community benefit approved by the City Council that is significant and substantially beyond normal requirements. Examples are inclusion of a child care center or community event space in a new development project, off-site utility infrastructure improvements above and beyond those required to serve the development, additional funding for City programs such as contribution to a local façade improvement program, or subsidy for existing commercial tenants or other local small businesses. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

25.40.040 Design standards and objective design criteria.
     In addition to the development standards in Section 25.40.030, the following design standards and criteria shall apply to all new development projects.  

     (a)   Design Standards.  All new development shall be designed to achieve the following objectives: 

     (1)   The design shall provide for internal compatibility between the different uses in terms of noise, hours of operation, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, access, use of open space, and other operating characteristics that affect quality of life.

     (2)   Potential noise, odors, glare, pedestrian traffic, and other impacts on residents shall be minimized to allow a compatible mix of residential and nonresidential uses on the same site.

     (3)   The design of the mixed-use project shall ensure that the residential units are of a residential character and that privacy between residential units and between other uses on the site is maximized.

     (4)   The design of the structures and site planning shall encourage integration of the street pedestrian environment with the nonresidential uses through the use of plazas, courtyards, walkways, and street furniture.

     (5)   Site planning and building design shall be compatible with and enhance the adjacent and surrounding built environment in terms of scale, building design, color, exterior materials, roof styles, lighting, landscaping, and signage.

     (b)   Building Orientation, Entrances, and Articulation.

     (1)   Orientation. The main building of a development shall be oriented to face a public street. Building frontages shall be generally parallel to streets. For all residential, retail, service, and office uses, at least one primary entrance to a ground-floor use shall face the adjacent street right-of-way. Ground-related entrances include entrances to ground-floor uses, residential units, clusters of residential units, lobbies, or private courtyards.

     (2)   Ground-Floor Transparency.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the exterior walls on the ground floor facing the street shall include windows, doors, or other openings. 

     (3)   Nonresidential Entrances. Entries shall be clearly defined features of front façades and of a scale that is in proportion to the size of the building and number of units being accessed. Larger buildings shall have a more prominent building entrance while maintaining a pedestrian scale.

     (4)   Transitional Space at Residential Entries. New residential buildings shall provide transitional spaces in the form of stoops, overhangs, and porches between public areas fronting the primary street and entrances. This type of element or equivalent shall be required for each unit or group of units, but no less than one of this type of element shall be provided.

     (5)   Building Articulation. No street frontage wall may run in a continuous plane for more than twenty (20) feet without an opening (door or window) or offsets, or as approved by the review authority if the project is constrained by unusual parcel size, shape, use, or other features that the responsible review authority accepts as rendering this requirement infeasible. Openings fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces. Offsets shall vary in depth and/or direction of at least eighteen (18) inches, or a repeated pattern of offsets, recesses, or projections of similar depth.

     (6)   Parking Lot and Structure Location.  Surface parking lots, to the greatest extent practicable, shall be located to the rear of a lot.  Parking structures shall be integrated into building design unless a separate structure is require for fire safety purposes or due to the shape or configuration of a lot.

     (c)   Site Layout

     (1)   Streetscape.  Street frontages shall meet the standards set forth in Table 25.40-3 (NBMU Street Frontage Standards). 

 

TABLE 25.40-3: NBMU STREET FRONTAGE STANDARDS

Street Type

Frontage – Measured from Back of Curb to Building Face

El Camino Real – with frontage road

Building Frontage Setback

15 ft. minimum from frontage road curb

Walk Zone (Public)

10 ft. minimum

Amenity/Planter Zone

5 ft. minimum

Tree Wells

5 ft. by 5 ft. min.

El Camino Real – without frontage road

Building Frontage Setback

20 ft. minimum from frontage road curb

Walk Zone (Public)

10 ft. minimum

Amenity/Planter Zone

5 ft. minimum

Tree Wells

5 ft. by 5 ft. minimum

Mixed-Use Arterial (Trousdale Drive, Murchison Drive, California Drive)

Building Frontage Setback

15 ft. minimum

Walk Zone (Public)

10 ft. minimum

Amenity/Planter Zone

5 ft. minimum

Tree Wells

5 ft. by 5 ft. minimum

Mixed-Use Collector (Magnolia Avenue)

Building Frontage Setback

12 feet

Walk Zone (Public)

6 ft. minimum

Amenity/Planter Zone

5 ft. minimum

Tree Wells

5 ft. by 5 ft. minimum

Neighborhood Access (Ogden Drive, Marco Polo Drive)

Building Frontage Setback

10 ft.

Walk Zone (Public)

6 ft. minimum

Amenity/Planter Zone

4 ft. minimum

Tree Wells

4 ft. by 4 ft. minimum

Build-To Lines

At least sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the Building Frontage Setback.

 

Exceptions

Exceptions to Building Frontage Standards may be granted to accommodate conflicts with recorded easements, rights-of-ways, etc.

 

 

 

     (2)   Pedestrian Access.  On-site pedestrian circulation and access shall be provided per the following standards: 

     (A)  Internal Connections. A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and bicycle parking areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.

     (B)   To Circulation Network. Regular and convenient connections between on-site walkways and the public sidewalk and other existing or planned pedestrian routes, such as safe routes to school, shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage.

     (C)   To Adjacent Areas. Direct and convenient access shall be provided from mixed-use projects to adjoining residential and commercial areas to the maximum extent feasible while still providing for safety and security.

     (D)  To Transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be provided from adjacent transit stops to building entrances.  

     (3)   Service and Delivery Areas.   Service and loading areas shall be screened from residential areas and integrated with the design of the building. Special attention shall be given when designing loading facilities in a location that is proximate to residential uses. Techniques such as block walls, enhanced setbacks, or enclosed loading shall be used to minimize adverse impacts to residents.

     (4)   Location of Residential Units.  In mixed-use developments, it is the intent that residential units not occupy the ground floor within the first fifty (50) feet of floor area measured from each building face adjacent to the street unless the review authority finds that the project is designed in a manner that a residential ground-floor component enhances the pedestrian environment.  

     (d)   Landscaping.

     (1)   Front and Street Side Setbacks.  Within any required front setback area or side yard setback adjacent to a public street, at least sixty (60) percent of the required setback area shall be landscaped to provide a transition to the sidewalk.

     (2)   Parking Lot Screening.  Where a surface parking lot abuts a public street, a minimum ten (10)-foot-deep landscape buffer shall be provided between the sidewalk and the first parking row.

     (3)   Parking Garage.  Where the wall of a parking garage directly faces a public street, a minimum ten (10)-foot-deep landscaped area shall be provided between the sidewalk and the parking structure wall. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

25.40.050 Parking.
     (a)   Off-Street Vehicle Parking. Parking shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 25.70 (Off-Street Parking), with the following exceptions for live/work units, stand-alone residential development, and the residential component of a mixed-use development:

 

 

TABLE 25.40-4: NBMU OFF-STREET VEHICLE PARKING

Number of Bedrooms in a Unit

Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required

0 (Studio)

1 space/unit

1

1 space/unit

2

1.5 spaces/unit for multifamily housing;

 

2 spaces/unit for live/work

3 or more

2 spaces/unit

Guest parking

None required

 

     (b)   Vehicle Parking Stall Dimensions. All parking stalls may be provided in a single dimension, eight and one-half feet in width by seventeen (17) feet in length, except for required accessible parking spaces which shall meet the dimensions required in the California Building Code in effect at the time a project is submitted for City review. No compact parking stalls shall be allowed if only a single dimension stall is used.

     (c)   Aisle Dimensions. All aisles within a parking area shall be as set forth in Table 25.40-5 (NBMU Parking Aisle Dimensions)

 

TABLE 25.40-5: NBMU PARKING AISLE DIMENSIONS

Parking Space Angle

Required Backup Aisle (minimum)

90 degree

24 feet

60 degree

18 feet

30 degree

13 feet

 

     (d)   Stacked/Mechanical Parking. Parking utilizing stackers or mechanical systems may be approved with a Conditional Use Permit.

     (e)   Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided as set forth in Table 25.40-6 (NBMU Bicycle Parking).

 

TABLE 25.40-6: NBMU BICYCLE PARKING

Class

Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required

Class I – Resident bicycles

0.5 spaces/unit

Class II – Guest bicycles

0.05 spaces/unit

 

     (f)    Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Stalls. Five percent of all spaces shall be prepared for EV charging equipment.

     (g)   Parking Reductions for Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan. Projects utilizing a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan per Section 25.40.030(b)(4)(H) shall be allowed up to twenty (20) percent reduction in required off-street vehicle parking (not including bicycle parking and EV stalls), provided the project provides for a permanent mobility mode shift towards alternative transportation of twenty-five (25) percent or greater for building occupants through the TDM program. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

 

25.40.060 Review procedures.
     (a)   Design Review Required.   Design review shall be required pursuant to Chapter 25.57. 

     (b)   Planning Commission Approval of Community Benefits Bonuses.  The Planning Commission shall be the final review authority for an application for Tier 2 or 3 projects. (Ord. 1960 § 1, (2019))

Chapter 25.42 C-R DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.42.010 Scope of regulations.
     The following regulations shall apply to all C-R districts. It is the purpose and policy of this chapter to encourage a mixed residential-commercial land use with pedestrian oriented retail uses compatible with residential uses in areas designated as C-R districts. (Ord. 1404 § 4, (1990))

 

25.42.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses shall be allowed in the mixed commercial-residential district:

     (a)   Retail uses which achieve contiguous retail frontage such as drug, liquor, variety, hardware, apparel, florists, furniture and draperies;

     (b)   Personal services such as barber and beauty shops, photographic studios, shoe repair;

     (c)   Residential. (Ord. 1404 § 4, (1990))

 

25.42.025 Conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit in the mixed commercial-residential district:

     (a)   Operation of a health service, beauty shop, barbershop, or health studio between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The hours limitation  imposed by this subsection does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1748 § 5, (2004))

 

25.42.030 Prohibited uses.
     The following uses shall be prohibited in the mixed commercial-residential district:

     (a)   Retail food establishments and bakeries;

     (b)   Takeout and drive-in services;

     (c)   Offices;

     (d)   Auto sales;

     (e)   Massage, bathing, tanning or similar establishments;

     (f)    Adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76. (Ord. 1404 § 4, (1990); Ord. 1426 § 16, (1990); Ord. 1514 § 6, (1994); Ord. 1727 § 9, (2004))

 

25.42.040 Building regulations.
     All commercial and residential development in the C-R zone shall conform to building regulations of Section 25.36.060. (Ord. 1404 § 4, (1990))

 

25.42.050 Development standards for Edgehill/California mixed use area.
     The following are additional development standards to be applied to the Edgehill/California mixed use areas. Said area is set forth in Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     (a)   Residential uses shall conform to the following requirements in addition to any others set forth in this code:

     (1)   The maximum number of residential units per lot shall be two (2) except where the only use on the lot is residential, then a maximum of three (3) dwelling units shall be allowed; if two (2) or more parcels are combined the maximum number of residential units shall be two (2) per original lot plus commercial or three (3) per original lot if the only use of the combined lots is residential;

     (2)   The front entrance and vehicular access for parking shall be from Edgehill Drive;

     (3)   The maximum height of residential uses shall be thirty (30) feet as measured from top of curb at Edgehill and on California Drives and thirty (30) feet from existing grade at the side setbacks at the midpoint between the front and rear property lines;

     (4)   Residential development built over commercial use shall be allowed to extend to the side and rear property lines so long as the residential use does not cover more than seventy (70) percent of the lot including that portion of the residential area over commercial use; this shall not include exterior decks open to the sky.

     (b)   Commercial uses shall conform to the following additional requirements:

     (1)   All commercial uses shall front only on California Drive with no vehicular access onto Edgehill Drive;

     (2)   Structures or portions of structures housing commercial uses shall have a maximum depth of thirty (30) feet from the property line parallel to California Drive, a maximum height of thirty (30) feet from top of curb on California Drive and shall cover no more than thirty-three (33) percent of the lot or combined lots;

     (c)   On-site parking shall not be required for single story commercial development fronting on California

Drive except that second story commercial uses shall require on-site parking accessible from California Drive to the requirements of Section 25.70.040. (Ord. 1404 § 4, (1990); Ord. 1793 § 28, (2006))

Chapter 25.43 INNER BAYSHORE DISTRICT (IB)
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ord. 1495, 1552, 1586, 1603, 1727, 1748.

 

25.43.010 Scope and purpose of regulations.
     It is the purpose and policy of this chapter to designate for the Inner Bayshore (IB) an office/light  industrial park area which will serve as a transition between the Shoreline Commercial District (SL) and the Rollins Road (RR) zones. In its uses, this district shall be consistent with the intent of the General Plan and the Bayfront Specific Plan, Inner Bayshore subarea, to provide professional and administrative offices, distribution, service, light industrial and other uses supported by access to San Francisco International Airport. An additional purpose of this district is to create a supportive interface between the adjacent hotel, restaurant and other Shoreline commercial activities and Bay Trail recreation area nearby which front on San Francisco Bay. These proposed uses shall further enhance the economic and aesthetic advantages of the adjacent Shoreline subarea and the economic base of the city. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1793 § 29, (2006))

 

25.43.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the IB district:

     (a)   Air courier, delivery or other transshipment services, including freight forwarding, which:

     (1)   Provide on-site parking for all fleet vehicles, and

     (2)   Provide on-site parking for all employees;

     (b)   Any light industrial or manufacturing use such as electronic, furniture, biotechnology, drug, pharmaceutical and printing conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, including associated laboratories, which:

     (1)   Has a floor area ratio of no more than 0.5, and

     (2)   Does not use impact presses of over twenty (20) tons rated capacity or machine-operated drop hammers, and

     (3)   Encloses compressors and generators so that there is no increase in the twenty-four(24) hour ambient noise level in excess of 3 dBA at any property line, and

     (4)   Does not create an obnoxious or offensive presence or emission of odor, dust, gas, noise, bright lights, smoke, vibration, harmful sewer waste or have a detrimental effect on permissible adjacent uses;

     (c)   Non-retail service businesses, including contractors, which:

     (1)   Provide on-site parking for all company vehicles, and

     (2)   On-site parking for all employees, and

     (3)   Adequate on-site, designated space for loading and unloading goods, equipment and materials;

     (d)   Class or school uses in office structures over twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet, where the total class or school use does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area on the lot, and with parking as set forth in Section 25.43.080 of this chapter;

     (e)   Incidental food establishments within a multi-use building which meet all of the following criteria:

     (1)   Is not the primary use of the building or structure, and

     (2)   Is open no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and no later than 5:00 p.m., and closed Saturdays and Sundays, and

     (3)   Has a maximum size of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, and

     (4)   Is at least fifteen (15) feet in length and fifteen (15) feet in width, and

     (5)   Has no sale of alcoholic beverages, and

     (6)   Provides parking as set forth in Section 25.43.080 of this chapter;

     (f)    Laboratory and clean room facilities for research, testing or creating products and goods;

     (g)   Office uses, with a maximum floor area ratio of 0.9, that may include health services and medical clinics not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet total in office structures over twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet, with parking as set forth in Section 25.43.080;

     (h)   Warehouse uses and warehouse storage and distribution of goods, materials, liquids and equipment conducted wholly within an enclosed building with a floor area ratio of not more than 0.5;

     (i)    Outdoor storage of materials incidental to permitted uses with a maximum storage area of ten (10) percent of the gross lot area; all contractor's storage or outdoor storage areas shall be:

     (1)   Limited to side and rear yards, and

     (2)   Shall be paved, and

     (3)   Shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or wall eight (8) feet in height; and

     (j)    Accessory uses which are necessary for the permitted uses under this section and Section 25.43.030; and all uses shall be required to provide trash enclosures adequate in size to accommodate storage for all trash generated on-site and an area adequate for recycling items as required by the city. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1766 § 8, (2005))

 

25.43.027 Hours for massage, bathing, tanning, or similar establishments and conditional use permit.
     A massage, bathing, tanning, or similar establishment use shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. (Ord. 1793 § 30, (2006))

 

25.43.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   Any use with a structure that:

     (1)   Exceeds the maximum floor area ratio set forth in Section 25.43.020, or

     (2)   Exceeds the development density standards for that use established in the Inner Bayshore subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, or

     (3)   Does not comply with a measurable standard of the design guidelines for that use established in the Inner Bayshore subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter;

     (b)   Any light industrial or manufacturing use such as electronic, furniture, biotechnology, drug, pharmaceutical and printing conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, including associated laboratories, which exceeds any of the performance criteria of Section 25.43.020(b).

     (c)   Automobile rental businesses which meet the following minimum standards:

     (1)   The use is the sole tenant and only occupant of the lot, and

     (2)   The lot is at least seven-tenths (0.7) of an acre, and

     (3)   Parking is provided on-site for storage of at least twenty-five (25) percent of the cars rented monthly, based on an annual average for the site, and

     (4)   Parking is provided on-site for all employees and customers, and

     (5)   The use meets all the other requirements of development in the district, including peak how trip generation at critical intersections as defined in the traffic analyzer and Specific Area Plan for the Bayfront Anza areas;

     (d)   Technical schools with training directly related to permitted or conditional uses in the Inner Bayshore area, with parking as required by chapter 25.70;

     (e)   Convention and exhibition facilities;

     (f)    Incidental food establishment uses that are not the primary use of a building and do not meet the other criteria of Section 25.43.020;

     (g)   Outdoor storage of materials incidental to permitted uses which storage exceeds ten (10) percent of the gross lot area and contractors storage yards; any such use shall be limited to side and rear yards, shall be paved, and shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or wall eight (8) feet in height;

     (h)   Structures over thirty-five (35) feet in height;

     (i)    Any use similar in nature to one which is permitted or for which a permit is required in this district at a density determined not to exceed the trip generation for the planned use of the lot using the adopted Bayfront traffic analyzer.

     (j)    Drive-in services or takeout services associated with permitted and conditional uses. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1766 § 9, (2005))

 

25.43.040 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional are prohibited in the IB district, specifically including the following:

     (a)   Automobile rental uses that do not comply with the criteria of Section 25.43.030;

     (b)   Automobile dealers and sales lots, wholesale and retail, and automobile leasing, whether freestanding, in office buildings, or in connection with other uses;

     (c)   Automobile wrecking, junkyards, storage or baling of scraps, paper, tags, sacks or metals;

     (d)   Freestanding food establishments on any properties without frontage on Bayshore Highway;

     (e)   Gasoline service stations on any properties without frontage on Bayshore Highway;

     (f)    Residential uses and buildings, except as part of a hotel as permitted under Section 25.43.045 of this chapter;

     (g)   Limousine and livery businesses and associated storage facilities;

     (h)   Adult oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (i)    Any use determined to be obnoxious or offensive;

     (j)    Hotels, motels, and extended stay hotels without lot frontage on Bayshore Highway;

 

     (k)   Long term airport parking facilities; and

     (l)    Massage, bathing, tanning or similar establishments. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005))

 

25.43.045 Properties with frontage on Bayshore Highway.
     (a)   In addition to the permitted uses in the Inner Bayshore district, the following uses are permitted uses on properties located in the Inner Bayshore Zone that have street frontage on Bayshore Highway:

     (1)   Free-standing food establishments with a floor area ratio of no more than 0.15 and with parking as set forth in Section 25.43.080,

 

 

     (2)   Motels and hotels with a maximum density of sixty-five (65) rooms to the acre and a floor area ratio of 1.0 or less; facilities provided on-site may include such retail sales and personal service uses as meal and beverage services, barber and beauty shops, smoke shops, and shuttle bus service to serve only hotel guests so long as the operations do not use parking required for primary hotel use, conventions and meeting facilities or services which are clearly incidental and accessory to provision of lodging accommodations; and no more than one dwelling unit within the motel or hotel structure that is used exclusively by the owner or manager of the motel or hotel,

     (3)   Offices, and

     (4)   Retail sales and personal service businesses with a maximum of five thousand (5,000) gross square feet or less and which singly or in combination shall not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area of any structure;

     (b)   In addition to the conditional uses allowed in the Inner Bayshore Zone, the following uses are allowed with a conditional use permit on properties with street frontage on Bayshore Highway located in the Inner Bayshore Subarea:

     (1)   Structures over thirty-five (35) feet in height,

     (2)   Convention and exhibition facilities,

     (3)   Commercial recreation,

     (4)   Hotels and motels that do not meet the criteria of subsection (a) of this section,

     (5)   Any light industrial or manufacturing use, such as electronic, furniture, biotechnology, drug, pharmaceutical, and printing, including associated laboratories,

     (6)   A car rental desk on a lot occupied by a hotel that does not affect the availability of on-site parking for hotel guests and the use and parking for any on-site meeting facilities,

     (7)   Provision by a hotel of a park and fly program that involves the long term parking of vehicles at a lot that is not approved as a commercial parking lot and does not affect the availability of on-site parking for hotel guests and the use and parking for any on-site meeting facilities,

     (8)   Gasoline service stations with a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet of retail sales area, excluding specialty food shops, and limited to minor automobile repair services,

     (9)   Incidental food sales and services in office buildings of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more, not to exceed a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet,

     (10) Drive-in and take-out services associated with permitted or conditional uses, and

     (11) Any use similar in nature to one which is permitted or for which a permit is required in this district at a density determined not to exceed the trip generation for the planted use of the lot using the adopted Bayfront traffic analyzer,

     (c)   In addition to the uses prohibited in Section 25.43.040 as expressly modified in subsections (a) and (b) above, the following additional uses are prohibited:

     (1)   Outdoor storage, including outdoor storage of materials or goods associated with a permitted or conditional use, and

     (2)   Extended stay hotels. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1766 §§ 10, 11 (2005))

 

25.43.052 Design review.
     Construction and alterations including substantial construction or change to more than fifty (50) percent of the front façade or change to more than fifty (50) percent of any façade facing a public or private street or parking lot shall be subject to design review based on the design guidelines for the Inner Bayshore subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan and shall be processed as provided in Section 25.57.030.

     (a)   A design review application in the IB district shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

     (1)   Support of the pattern of diverse architectural styles as defined in the design guidelines for the Inner Bayshore subarea,

     (2)   Respect and promotion of the streetscape by the placement of buildings to maximize the commercial use of the street frontage, off street public spaces, and by locating parking so that it does not dominate street frontages, and for properties fronting on Bayshore Highway, that the design contributes to the interface with the Shoreline subarea as directed in the Bayshore specific plan,

     (3)   On visually prominent and gateway sites, whether the design fits the site and is compatible with the surrounding development and consistent with the design guidelines for the Inner Bayshore subarea,

     (4)   Compatibility of the architecture and landscaping with the design guidelines for the Inner Bayshore subarea including materials used in existing development, location and use of plant materials, and compatibility with transitions where changes in land use occur nearby,

     (5)   Architectural design consistency by using a single architectural style on the lot that is consistent among primary elements of the structure(s) and with the directives of the design guidelines for the Inner Bayshore subarea,

     (6)   Provision of site features identified in the design guidelines such as landscaping and pedestrian circulation which enriches the existing opportunities of the commercial neighborhood;

     (b)   When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structures shall be included in the design review;

     (c)   Exemptions from design review:

     (1)   Applications for building permits or planning approvals for development in the B district filed before August 4, 2005, and certain amendments to those applications or permits as specifically provided in Ordinance No. 1760. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005))

 

25.43.055 Setbacks.
     The following minimum setbacks shall apply to all parcels located in the Inner Bayshore district:

     (a)   Front setbacks:

     (1)   All properties shall have a front setback of at least ten (10) feet except for front setbacks from Bayshore Highway,

     (2)   On lots with any street frontage on Bayshore Highway, there shall be an average front setback of fifteen (15) feet from Bayshore Highway; with at least forty (40) percent of the structure at the maximum setback of fifteen (15) feet;

     (b)   There shall be a minimum ten (10) foot side setback;

     (c)   Except for rear setbacks from Bayshore Highway, there is no minimum rear setback in the IB district;

     (d)   In addition to the setbacks set forth above, there shall be a fifteen (15) foot setback from Bayshore Highway for all below grade construction. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005))

 

25.43.060 Minimum lot size.
     There shall be a minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. No property in this district shall be divided or subdivided into a lot with less area or less street frontage. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005))

 

25.44.065 No variance for lot size and street frontage.
     Not withstanding any other provision of this code, no variance for lot size or street frontage shall be granted to any property within this district. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005))

 

25.43.070 Landscaping and design requirements.
     The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all parcels:

     (a)   The landscape requirements of the design guidelines for the Inner Bayshore subarea of the  Bayfront Specific Plan as adopted by the city council shall be met, including the requirement that sixty (60) percent of the front setback shall be landscaped.

     (b)   On properties with any lot front on Bayshore Highway, the following additional landscape requirements shall apply:

     (1)   A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total area of each lot shall be suitably landscaped and the landscaping shall be properly maintained. A landscape plan shall be submitted with any application for an approval under this title for any use on the lot.

     (2)   At least sixty (60) percent of the area between the front property line and the front of any building on a lot shall be landscaped. Where no building exists along a lot front, at least sixty (60) percent of the front setback area shall be landscaped; landscaping may include walkways and seating features.

     (3)   At least ten (10) percent of all parking areas shall be landscaped.

     (4)   A properly fenced and screened area for refuse, garbage, and recycling containers shall be provided for each building or group of buildings on a lot. Any such area shall be located at the side or rear of a building and shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of the rear property line.

     (5)   Loading docks and truck loading access shall be fully enclosed and shall be located at the side or rear of a building.

     (6)   No parking areas shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of any lot front on Bayshore Highway, or within the side setback of any lot with a property line on Bayshore Highway. Driveways are allowed in any such side setback, but the driveways shall not be considered as landscaped area. No parking areas shall be located between any structure and the lot front, except for loading zones. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005))

 

25.43.080 Parking requirements.
     (a)   Except as otherwise set forth in this section, all uses shall provide parking in accordance with Chapter 25.70.

     (b)   Free-standing Food Establishments. Free-standing food establishments shall provide customer parking on-site at the rate of one space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area; and employee parking on-site at the rate of one space for each one thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area.

     (c)   Incidental Food Establishments. Food establishments that are not the primary use of a building shall provide parking on-site at the rate of one parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area of food establishment use.

 

     (d)   Health Service and Medical Clinic uses. Health service and medical clinic uses in structures of more than twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet shall provide parking on-site at the rate of one parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area occupied by the uses; health service and medical clinic uses in structures smaller than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall provide parking on site at the rate of one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area. (Ord. 1760 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1766 § 12, (2005))

Chapter 25.44 ROLLINS ROAD (RR) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ch. 25.44, formerly M-1 District Regulations, derived from the 1941 Code § 1933 and Ordinances 561, 824, 830, 1025, 1037, 1078, 1234, 1251, 1255, 1264, 1383, 1403, 1404, 1426, 1446, 1495, 1543, 1586, 1603, 1727, and 1748 was amended in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1789.

 

25.44.010 Scope and purpose of regulations.
     The following regulations shall apply in all RR districts and shall be subject to all other provisions of this title relating to RR districts. It is the purpose and policy of this chapter to implement the North Burlingame/Rollins Road Specific Plan by establishing in the Rollins Road area a vital industrial center for the Burlingame community and the mid-peninsula. The Rollins Road area lies between US 101 and the CalTrain railroad tracks, the city boundary of Millbrae and Broadway. Future development in the area should build on good access to mass transit for workers and employers, incorporating daytime amenities for area workers and encouraging new development which enhances Burlingame’s industrial, heavy service and employment base. Fundamental to the planned character of the Rollins Road area is the development of distinct gateway entrances which are supported by safe and attractive pedestrian and bicycle access and roadway facilities throughout the area which balance the needs of employee access, service vehicles, and business operations. The zoning regulations establish and maintain all areas designated as RR district to provide space for warehouse, distribution, and manufacturing uses; to provide opportunity for a centralized area for automobile sales and service with reasonable access and optimum visibility from US 101; to provide areas for commercial and service uses; to encourage other similar uses which are supported by access to San Francisco International Airport; and to discourage uses, buildings and structures which are incompatible with the intended character of the district. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the RR district:

     (a)   Air courier, delivery, or other trans-shipment services, including freight forwarding, which:

     (1)   Provide on-site parking for all company vehicles dispatched from the site and for vehicles of employees working on the premises; and

     (2)   Provide adequate on-site space for loading and unloading goods, equipment and materials.

     (b)   Ambulance services, including dispatch, day rooms, and parking for all company vehicles dispatched or stored on the site and vehicles of employees working on the premises.

     (c)   Automobile and truck repair, service and body shops, wholesale or retail, which are:

     (1)   Located south of Easton Creek; and

     (2)   Provide on-site parking for all vehicles being serviced and for vehicles of all employees working on the premises.

     (d)   Any light industrial or manufacturing use, including associated laboratories, such as but not limited to electronic, biotechnology, furniture, pharmaceutical, and printing, which:

     (1)   Is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building with a floor area ratio of no more than 0.5; and

     (2)   Does not increase noise at property line by more than 5 dBA L10; and

     (3)   Does not generate vibrations which can be felt off the site and which will have no increased effect on permissible adjacent uses; and

     (4)   Is conducted in such a manner so as to preclude any nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive and obnoxious conditions or characteristics from odors detectable at the property line or off the site.

     (e)   Incidental food establishments within a multi-use building which meet all of the following requirements:

     (1)   Are not the primary use of the building or structure; and

     (2)   Are open no earlier than 5:00 a.m. and close no later than 7:00 p.m., and open Monday through Saturday only; and

     (3)   Have a maximum size of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet; and

     (4)   Are at least fifteen (15) feet in length and fifteen (15) feet in width; and

     (5)   Provide parking of at least one space per three hundred (300) gross square feet.

     (f)    Laboratory and clean room facilities for research, testing, or creating products and goods.

     (g)   Office uses, but only in conjunction with and for the sole support of a permitted, non-office use occurring on the same lot, where the office use does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of gross floor area of the buildings on the lot, and parking is provided on-site to code requirements.

     (h)   Outdoor storage of materials which is an accessory use to a permitted use and which meets the requirements of Section 25.44.065 of this chapter.

     (i)    Rental and leasing of goods and equipment conducted wholly within an enclosed building, with no associated outdoor display or storage areas in the front yard where goods, equipment, or stored supplies are visible from the street.

     (j)    Service businesses, including but not limited to janitorial and contractors, and other support services, but not including personal services, which:

     (1)   Provide on-site parking for all company vehicles dispatched from the site and vehicles of employees working on the premises; and

     (2)   Provide adequate on-site space for loading and unloading goods, equipment and materials.

     (k)   Warehousing, storage, and distribution of goods, materials, liquids, and equipment conducted wholly within an enclosed building with a floor area ratio not to exceed 0.5.

     (l)    Accessory uses which are necessary for the permitted uses under this section.

     (m)  Retail sales and display areas as an accessory use to a permitted use, interior to a building only, with the following additional requirements:

     (1)   The hours of operation are between 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. only; and

     (2)   Retail display area is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet; and

     (3)   No sale of alcoholic beverages; and

     (4)   Does not increase noise at property line by more than 5 dBA L10; and

     (5)   Does not generate vibrations which can be felt off the site and which will have no increased effect on permissible adjacent uses. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   Industrial uses with a floor area ratio not to exceed 1.0;

     (b)   Air courier, delivery, or other transshipment services, including trucking which do not meet the requirements for permitted uses.

     (c)   Automobile rental businesses, including rental of recreation vehicles and trucks, which meet the following minimum standards:

     (1)   The use is the sole tenant and only occupant of any building or area on the site;

     (2)   The site is a minimum size of seven-tenths (0.7) of an acre;

     (3)   Parking is provided on-site for storage of at least twenty-five (25) percent of the cars rented monthly, based on an annual average for the site;

     (4)   Parking is provided on-site for all employees and customers; and

     (5)   The use meets all the other requirements of development in the district, including peak hour trip generation at critical intersections as defined in the city’s traffic analyzer.

     (d)   Automobile dealerships that are wholly enclosed within a warehouse structure with no outdoor vehicle display areas;

     (e)   Automobile storage for car rental businesses provided the following requirements are met:

     (1)   Vehicles shall not be moved during a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic periods as defined by the city engineer; and

     (2)   Minimum site size of seven-tenths (0.7) of an acre; and

     (3)   The storage area is enclosed with an opaque fence or wall eight (8) feet in height at a location approved by the public works department.

     (f)    Building materials and garden supply stores, which:

     (1)   Have no more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of indoor floor area, outdoor storage display, and sales areas combined; and

     (2)   Have paved, on-site parking based on retail sales requirements of Chapter 25.70 of this code and for all indoor and outdoor retail sales areas, adequate area on-site for maneuvering, parking, and unloading of trucks, and employees who will be on-site at one time.

     (g)   Technical schools with training related to the permitted and conditional uses in the Rollins Road district with parking as required by Chapter 25.70.

     (h)   Commercial recreation, including health clubs and gymnasiums, with on-site parking.

     (i)    Health services and medical clinics whose primary function is to support businesses in the RR district.

     (j)    Food establishments in multiuse buildings which do not meet the requirements of Section 25.44.020(e) of this chapter.

     (k)   Motor freight terminals whose site development meets the following requirements:

     (1)   Provide on-site parking for all company vehicles dispatched from the site and for vehicles of employees working on the premises; and

     (2)   Provide adequate on-site space for loading and unloading goods, equipment and materials.

     (l)    Office uses limited to supporting only a permitted or conditional uses on the same site and that exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of buildings on a lot, but only where parking is available on-site to code requirements.

     (m)  Outdoor storage of rental or leased equipment which is a primary use of a lot located in the RR district between Easton Creek and Broadway, and which meets the requirements of Section 25.44.065 of this chapter.

     (n)   Outdoor storage or treatment of materials which is not an accessory use to a permitted use, but which meets the requirements of Section 25.44.065 of this chapter.

     (o)   Retail sales and display areas as an accessory use to a permitted or conditional use, interior to a building only, if the retail use will:

     (1)   Operate beyond the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; or

     (2)   Sell alcoholic beverages in containers.

     Any such conditional use shall be conditioned on the retail use conforming to all of the other requirements for retail sales and display areas of Section 25.44.020 of this chapter.

     (p)   Veterinary hospitals where:

     (1)   All animal care activity, including necessary exercise and educational programs, is contained within a structure; and

     (2)   The business is operated by a licensed veterinarian and all sanitary standards established by the state and all local requirements as approved by the city engineer are met on the site; and

     (3)   The noise level is not increased at property line by more than 5 dBA L10; and

     (4)   The business is conducted in such a manner so as to preclude any nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive and obnoxious conditions or characteristics from odors detectable at the property line or off the site.

     (q)   Animal shelter or animal rescue centers where:

     (1)   All animal care activity, including necessary exercise and educational programs, is contained within a structure, except for aviaries which may be exterior to the structure, but which shall be fully enclosed with mesh as commonly used in zoos; and

     (2)   Animal care is overseen by a licensed veterinarian and all sanitary standards established by the state and all local requirements as approved by the city engineer, are met on the site; and

     (3)   The noise level is not increased at property line by more than 5 dBA L10; and

     (4)   No animal is kept on the site longer than allowed in the conditions of approval, unless there is a specific medical need for longer term care, and the maximum density established by the conditions of approval is maintained; and

     (5)   An attendant is present on the site twenty-four (24) hours a day; and

     (6)   All activity on the site is conducted in such a manner so as to preclude any nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive and obnoxious conditions or characteristics from odors detectable at the property line or off the site.

     (r)    Living quarters in association with a permitted or conditional use, but only to be used by a night watchman or to provide security for the site.

     (s)    Structures over thirty-five (35) feet in height.

     (t)    Any structure or structures that cover more than sixty (60) percent of the lot.

     (u)   Accessory uses which are necessary for the conditional uses under this section.

     (v)   Retail sales as an accessory use to a warehouse use wholly enclosed within a structure for specialty providers with a single product line for the construction industry, such as but not limited to plumbing fixtures, tile outlets, paint stores.

     (w)  Accessory uses related to a permitted use which requires outdoor treatment or processing of materials shall meet the following additional requirements:

     (1)   Is adequately screened from view from the street with an opaque eight (8) foot fence; and

     (2)   Is not located in the front yard of the property.

     (x)   Any commercial or industrial use similar in nature to a permitted or conditional use in this or the Inner Bayshore (IB) district. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

 

25.44.035 Hours for health service uses and conditional use permit.
     A health service use shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter  25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1793 § 31, (2006))

 

25.44.040 Prohibited uses.
     All uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited, including:

     (a)   Adult oriented businesses;

     (b)   Massage, bathing, or similar establishments;

     (c)   Automobile sales lots;

     (d)   Automobile wrecking, junk yards, storage or baling of scraps, paper, rags, sacks or metals;

     (e)   Conference and exhibition facilities;

     (f)    Hotels and motels;

     (g)   Living quarters and residential structures, except as specifically provided in subsection 25.44.030(q) of this chapter;

     (h)   Outdoor storage or treatment of materials in required parking or in landscaping in the front setback;

     (i)    Gasoline service stations;

     (j)    Personal services; and

     (k)   Kennels. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.045 Additional uses for properties in the Northern Rollins Road area.
     In addition to the permitted uses in the RR, Rollins Road, District, emergency shelters for the homeless are permitted on properties located north of Mills Creek, subject to the following performance standards and subject to the parking requirements established in Section 25.70.035:

     Property Development Standards. The emergency shelter for the homeless shall conform to all property development standards of the RR zone district except as modified by these performance standards. In addition, the following design standards shall apply:

     (a)   Shelters shall have designated smoking areas that are not visible from the street and which are in compliance with all other laws and regulations.

     (b)   There shall be no space for outdoor congregating in front of the building and no outdoor public telephones.

     (c)   There shall be a refuse area screened from view.

     (d)   Maximum Number of Persons/Beds. The emergency shelter for the homeless shall contain a maximum of twenty-four (24) beds.

     (e)   Size and location of exterior and interior on-site waiting and client intake areas. Shelters shall provide ten (10) square feet of interior waiting and client intake space per bed. In addition, there shall be two (2) office areas provided for shelter staff. Waiting and intake areas may be used for other purposes as needed during operations of the shelter.

     (f)    On-Site Management. On-site management and on-site security shall be provided during hours when the emergency shelter is in operation.

     (g)   Distance to Other Facilities. The shelter must be more than three hundred (300) feet from any other shelters for the homeless.

     (h)   Length of Stay. Temporary shelter shall be available to residents for no more than sixty (60) days. Extensions up to a total stay of one hundred eighty (180) days may be provided if no alternative housing is available. (Ord. 1865 § 7, (2011))

 

25.44.050 Special requirements for the Automobile Sales and Service Overlay Area.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, within the Automobile Sales and Service Overlay Area designated in Ordinance No. 1790 as amended, the following use regulations apply:

     (a)   Permitted Uses. Only the following uses are permitted in the Automobile Sales and Service Overlay Area:

     (1)   Automobile dealerships and automobile sales lots, which include the following:

     (A)  A minimum site size of five (5) acres; and

     (B)   A floor area ratio of not more than 0.15.

     (2)   Automobile repair, both minor and major, which:

     (A)  Provide on-site storage for all cars being repaired on-site; and

     (B)   Provide on-site parking for all vehicles being serviced and for vehicles of all employees working on the premise; and

     (C)   Have a floor area ratio of not more than 0.5.

     (3)   Automobile rental, including rental of recreational vehicles and trucks, which meet the following minimum standards:

     (A)  The use is the sole tenant and only occupant of any building or area on the site; and

     (B)   The site is a minimum size of seven-tenths (0.7) of an acre; and

     (C)   Parking is provided on site for storage of at least twenty-five (25) percent of the cars rented monthly, based on an annual average for the site; and

     (D)  Parking is provided on site for all employees and customers; and

     (E)   The use meets all the other requirements of development in the district, including peak hour trip generation at critical intersections as defined in the city’s traffic analyzer.

     (b)   Conditional Uses. The following are uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (1)   Any exception to a performance standard listed in subsection (a) above for an automobile dealership, automobile sales lot, or automobile repair, both major and minor; and

     (2)   All other uses that are permitted or conditional in Sections 25.44.020 and 25.44.030 of this chapter shall be conditional uses in the Automobile Sales and Service Overlay Area except as provided in subsection (c) below.

     (c)   Prohibited Uses. All uses not listed as permitted or conditional in this section shall be prohibited in the Automobile Sales and Service Overlay Area, including but not limited to:

     (a)   Adult oriented businesses;

     (b)   Massage, bathing, or similar establishments;

     (c)   Automobile wrecking, junk yards, storage or baling of scraps, paper, rags, sacks or metals;

     (d)   Conference and exhibition facilities;

     (e)   Hotels and motels;

     (f)    Living quarters and residential structures, except as specifically provided in subsection 25.44.030(r) of this chapter;

     (g)   Outdoor storage or treatment of materials in required parking or in landscaping in the front setback;

     (h)   Gasoline service stations; and

     (i)    Personal services. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.055 Special requirements for the Southern Gateway Entrance Overlay Area.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, within the Southern Gateway Entrance Overlay Area designated in Ordinance No. 1790 as amended, the following use regulations apply:

     (a)   Permitted Uses. Only the following uses are permitted in the Southern Gateway Entrance Overlay Area:

     (1)   Office uses with a floor area ratio not to exceed 1.0;

     (2)   Automobile dealers and dealerships with a floor area ratio not to exceed 1.0; and

     (3)   Commercial recreation facilities, other than theaters, with a floor area ratio not to exceed 1.0 and with all activity conducted inside a building.

     (b)   Conditional Uses. Only the following uses are allowed with a conditional use permit in the Southern Gateway Entrance Overlay Area:

     (1)   Gasoline service stations;

     (2)   All other uses that are permitted or conditional in Sections 25.44.020 and 25.44.030 of this chapter except as specifically prohibited in subsection (c) below.

     (3)   All permitted and conditional uses that include an approved gateway feature as defined by the planning commission and located on a parcel of at least fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall be eligible for up to a maximum of 1.0 additional floor area ratio, provided the planning commission finds that the gateway feature included in the project complies with the adopted design guidelines. The amount of the 1.0 bonus floor area ratio approved shall be dependent upon the sufficiency of the proposed gateway feature in distinguishing the entrance to the Rollins Road industrial area which shall be determined by the planning commission during the design review process.

     (c)   Prohibited Uses. All uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses in this section shall be prohibited in the Southern Gateway Entrance Overlay Area, including but not limited to:

     (1)   Adult oriented businesses;

     (2)   Massage, bathing, or similar establishments;

     (3)   Automobile wrecking, junk yards, storage or baling of scraps, paper, rags, sacks or metals;

     (4)   Conference and exhibition facilities;

     (5)   Hotels and motels;

     (6)   Living quarters and residential structures, except as specifically provided in subsection 25.44.030(r) of this chapter; and

     (7)   Outdoor storage or treatment of materials in required parking or in landscaping in the front setback. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.060 Use of drainage rights-of-ways.
     Because of the importance of the Rollins Road drain as a detention basin to prevent flooding in the industrial area and its importance in providing habitat for rare and endangered species no use which will impact these functions of the drain will be considered and only the following uses, with a conditional use permit, environmental review, full compliance with National Pollution Discharge Elimination requirements, city encroachment permits approved by the city engineer, hold harmless agreement in favor of the city, permits from Pacific Gas & Electric Company or its successor, and all required state and federal permits, shall be allowed within the drainage right-of-ways from the southern boundary of Millsdale Industrial Park Number 5 Subdivision north to the city boundary:

     (a)   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the drainage right-of-way:

     (1)   Publicly owned and operated drainage facilities and improvements; and

 

     (2)   Privately owned and operated electric transmission lines.

     (b)   Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted in the drainage right-of-way with a conditional use permit:

     (1)   Supplemental parking for permitted or conditional uses in the district;

     (2)   Storage for operable vehicles including automobiles and trucks provided the following requirements are met:

     (A)  Vehicles must be in operable condition and must be managed at all times by a single, responsible person with access to the keys for all vehicles, and

     (B)   Vehicles shall be moved by appointment only and shall not be moved during a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic periods as defined by the city engineer, and

     (C)   Minimum site size of .7 acres, and

     (D)  Site has approved access to a public street, and

     (E)   No customers shall visit the site;

     (3)   Recreation vehicle and boat storage as long as vehicles are not moved during a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic periods as defined by the city traffic engineer;

     (4)   Outdoor storage related to immediately abutting uses which are permitted or conditional in the district;

     (5)   Fencing;

     (6)   Uses similar in nature to those allowed in this section on a site with frontage on a public street and which proposed use and siting meets all the requirements established by the city engineer.

     (c)   Prohibited Uses. All uses not listed as permitted or conditional in this section shall be prohibited in the drainage right-of-ways, including but not limited to long term airport parking. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.065 Outdoor storage.
     Outdoor storage in the RR district shall be subject to the following requirements:

     (a)   The storage area shall be paved and shall not be located in required parking, aisles, driveways, or landscaping.

     (b)   Lots Located North of Mills Creek or With Lot Fronts on Rollins Road. No outdoor storage shall be placed in the front yard of any lot located north of Mills Creek or with a lot front on Rollins Road.

     (c)   Fencing. All outdoor storage shall be fully enclosed by either an opaque or solid fence or wall eight (8) feet in height or by buildings, or a combination of fencing and buildings. However, if the outdoor storage area is located at the sides or rear of a building on a lot that is located south of Mills Creek, and the outdoor storage area is not visible from a public street, the eight (8) foot fence or wall may be of an open design. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.070 Design review.
     Construction and alterations including substantial construction or change to more than fifty (50) percent of the front façade or change to more than fifty (50) percent of any façade facing a public or private street or parking lot shall be subject to design review based on the design guidelines for the Rollins Road Design District in the

North Burlingame/Rollins Road Specific Plan and shall be processed as provided in Chapter 25.57.

     (a)   A design review application in the RR district shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

     (1)   Architectural design and siting of structures which supports the light industrial, manufacturing and job creating land uses of the Rollins Road subarea as adopted in the North Burlingame/Rollins Road Specific Plan with the focus on creating positive streets for safe vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian use interfacing with appropriately scaled development.

     (2)   Create an appropriate form, shape and scaled interface between the vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian uses of the street and the buildings and their uses along the public realm, including attention to the pattern of landscaping, physical identification of the site and building entrances; the design should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding development and consistent with the design guidelines and development of structures in the Rollins Road subarea.

     (3)   Throughout the Rollins Road subarea, except for the special considerations for the area designated for Auto Row, design of all structures should incorporate articulation on the building façade including elements which emphasize appropriate scale and relate to human form; entrances should be clearly announced and oriented toward the street; a variety of materials should be used; roof screening elements should be incorporated into the architectural design; signage should be a part of the site and consistent with the scale and design of the building; exterior lighting should be sufficient for safety but not used as an architectural feature or to illuminate adjacent properties.

     (4)   At the north and south gateway areas into the Rollins Road area special attention shall be paid to incorporation of gateway oriented architectural features, entry markers, street furniture, specially scaled landscaping to announce the entrance to the Rollins Road subarea; these features shall be in character with the purpose, scale and function of the Rollins Road area and should facilitate access by vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians from adjacent mass transit locations. Meaningful gateway features are required for design review approval in the Southern Gateway Entrance Overlay Area.

     (5)   On lots with any frontage on creeks, integrate the creek feature into the site and building design; incorporate the creek amenity including interconnected public access and views into site landscaping and planning; design access features, particularly pedestrian and bicycle trails, to be interconnected and consistent with those on adjacent properties in order to promote and protect natural features of the area to benefit those who work in and use the area while providing a safe environment for walking and bicycling; respect and protect natural habitat areas including seasonal wetland breeding locations for special species under power lines and in natural drains.

     (6)   To achieve a unified and successful Auto Row in the Rollins Road subarea, develop a unifying thematic design concept for the area built on a single approach to the transition space between the public sidewalk and the private outdoor sales area using such concepts as using consistent fencing material throughout the Auto Row area, unifying signage approaches which also reflect the architectural style and materials of the development on each site and take into consideration the character of the entire Auto Row area; focus on development at a scale which works at the pedestrian level as well as from US 101; develop a pattern of consistent landscaping, and encourage building facades which are articulated, structurally incorporate human scale elements and properly integrate large display window areas.

     (b)   When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structures shall be included in the design review.

     (c)   The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:

     (1)   Applications for building permits or planning approvals for development in the RR district filed before July 5, 2006;

     (2)   Any amendment to a project exempt from design review pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be subject to design review if the project involved would have otherwise been subject to design review under subsection (a) above, the project has not been completed, and the amendment would extend any structure involved in the application outside the envelope of the structure for which the approval was granted or sought in the underlying application or would change a façade. Changes to, additions of, or deletions of awnings as an amendment to a project shall not trigger design review under this subsection. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.075 Building regulations.
     The following maximum lot coverage shall apply to all parcels located in the RR district:

     (a)   Lot Coverage. All buildings and structures or portions thereof which are hereafter erected, constructed, established or enlarged shall be limited to seventy (70) percent of the total area of each property or parcel.

     (b)   Maximum Front Setback and Build-to-Line.

     (1)   David Road and Rollins Road. The front wall of the first story of any structure built on a lot with a lot front on Rollins Road or David Road shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front property line; and at least sixty (60) percent of the structure shall be located at the front setback line.

     (2)   Broderick Road, Edwards Court, Guittard Road, Ingold Road, Marsten Road, and North Carolan Avenue. There shall be a minimum front setback of fifteen (15) feet from Broderick Road, Edwards Court, Guittard Road, Ingold Road, Marsten Road, or North Carolan Avenue.

     (3)   Adrian Road and Adrian Court. The front wall of the first story of any structure built on a lot with a lot front on Adrian Road or Adrian Court shall have a zero foot setback; and at least twenty (20) percent of the structure shall be located at the zero setback line.

     (c)   Side Setback.

     (1)   There shall be no side setback requirement for any structures constructed on lots in the portion of the RR district between Easton Creek and Broadway, including properties with lot frontage on Broadway.

     (2)   There shall be a minimum ten (10) foot side yard setback on all buildings and structures constructed on all other lots in the RR district.

     (d)   Rear Setback. There shall be no rear setback requirements. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.080 Height limitations.
     (a)   The maximum height for structures in the RR district is sixty (60) feet.

     (b)   However, structures on lots in the RR district with lot fronts on either Nerli Lane or Broadway have a maximum height of seventy-five (75) feet.

     (c)   Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) above, maximum heights are also subject to further limitation by the Federal Aviation Administration. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.090 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     There shall be a minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. No property in this district shall be divided or subdivided into a lot with less area or less street frontage. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.095 No variance for lot size and street frontage.
     No variances for lot size and street frontage shall be granted to any property within this district. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

 

25.44.100 Landscaping, creek access, and fencing requirements.
     (a)   Landscaping Requirements. The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all parcels located in the RR district:

     (1)   A minimum of ten (10) percent of the total area of each lot shall be suitably landscaped, and the landscaped portions shall be properly irrigated and maintained.

     (2)   A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the front setback shall be covered with soft landscaping, provided:

     (A)  If the area equal to ten (10) percent of the site is less than sixty (60) percent of the front setback area, then all the required landscaping shall be placed within the front setback; or

     (B)   If the area equal to ten (10) percent of the site is more than sixty (60) percent of the front setback area, then the remaining area of required landscaping shall be placed so that it is visible from the public right-of-way.

     (3)   When fences are placed to enclose outdoor storage areas on any site, the required landscaping shall be outside of the fence and visible from the public right-of-way.

     (4)   A landscaping plan and specifications, including irrigation, shall be submitted for approval by the city arborist when construction plans are submitted to the building division for a building permit.

     (b)   Fences. Fences up to eight (8) feet in height, as measured from the highest adjacent grade, shall be allowed in this district, subject to the other requirements and limitations of this code, in particular, Chapters 11.12 and 25.78.

     (c)   Creek Access. Any lot in the RR district with any lot frontage on Easton, Mills, and El Portal Creeks shall be required to provide, as a part of the on-site landscaping plan, a paved, public access trail along the top of the bank for the portion of the creek bank on the site. The design of the trail shall be compliant with the Rollins Road Design District design guidelines and designed to the specifications of the public works department. Each such trail segment shall connect directly to the termination of the public access trail segment along the creek bank on each adjacent property. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1806 § 15, (2007))

 

25.44.105 Parking space requirements.
     All uses shall be subject to the provisions of this code and such additional parking conditions as may be required for permitted or conditional uses pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1789 § 2, (2006))

Chapter 25.45 SHORELINE DISTRICT (SL)
Note:
*      Prior history: Chapter was renumbered from Ch. 25.41 by Ord. 1766.

        Prior ordinance history: Ords. 903, 1025, 1037, 1078, 1129, 1153, 1172, 1312, 1383, 1403, 1405, 1426, 1431, 1446, 1460, 1514, 1521, 1552, 1577, 1586, 1603, 1727.

 

25.45.010 Scope and purpose of regulations.
     It is the purpose and policy of this chapter to establish and maintain land uses for the areas designated as Shoreline and Anza Extension subareas in the Bayfront Specific Plan, and to cause development of buildings and structures that will benefit from their proximity to the open water areas of San Francisco Bay and will support and be beneficial to the public access and use of this irreplaceable natural resource. Development of these areas should contribute positively to the economic future of the city. In creating this district, the city asserts that economic as well as aesthetic advantages accrue to the land, the occupants and the public from the required controls and regulations. In addition, these regulations ensure that new development can be supported by the local roadway system and other public infrastructure. (Ord. 1756 § 3, (2005))

 

25.45.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the Shoreline district:

     (a)   Commercial recreation facility that includes the sale of merchandise and items which are related to the principal use but does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of support retail sales area;

     (b)   Freestanding restaurants with a maximum floor area ratio of 0.15;

     (c)   Motels and hotels with a maximum density of sixty-five (65) rooms to the acre and a floor area ratio of 1.0 or less; facilities provided on site may include such retail sales and service uses as meal and beverage services, barber and beauty shops, smoke shops, shuttle bus service to serve only hotel guests so long as the operation does not use parking required for primary hotel use, convention and meeting facilities, and similar services which are clearly incidental and accessory to provision of lodging accommodations; a motel or hotel may also have no more than one dwelling unit within the motel or hotel structure that is used exclusively by the owner or manager of the motel or hotel;

     (d)   Publicly owned recreation facilities;

     (e)   Offices with a maximum floor area ration of 0.9; however, neither health services nor medical clinics are allowed;

     (f)    Adult oriented businesses that meet all of the requirements of Chapters 25.76 and 10.58 of this code. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005): Ord. 1766 §§ 5, 6, (2005))

 

25.45.025 Conditional uses.
     The following are uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   Motels and hotels with more than sixty-five (65) rooms to the acre or with a floor area ratio more than 1.0, or both; facilities provided on site may include such retail sales and service uses as meal and beverage services, barber and beauty shops, smoke shops, shuttle bus service to serve only hotel guests so long as the operation does not use parking required for primary hotel use, convention and meeting facilities, and similar services which are clearly incidental and accessory to provision of lodging accommodations;

     (b)   As part of a hotel or motel use, an automobile rental desk or a park and fly program associated with the renting of rooms and that does not affect the availability of on-site parking for hotel or motel guests and the use and parking for any on-site meeting facilities;

     (c)   Retail sales and personal service uses which are located in a designated retail node as shown on the Shoreline subarea plan, which depend on proximity to San Francisco Bay and have a maximum floor area ratio of 0.5;

     (d)   Commercial recreation facility including the retail sale of merchandise and items which are related to the principal greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet ;

     (e)   Incidental food sales and services in office buildings of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more, not to exceed a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and without exclusive access to the outside;

     (f)    Gasoline service stations with a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet of retail sales area, excluding specialty food shops, limited to minor automobile repair services, and limited to the areas identified as retail nodes in the Shoreline subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan.

     (g)   Buildings and structures that exceed forty (40) feet in height when located within one hundred (100) feet of the San Francisco Bay shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.

     (h)   All buildings, structures and site plans that do not comply with the adopted design guidelines in the Bayshore Specific Plan for the Shoreline subarea as established by resolution of the city council;

     (i)    Drive-in services or take-out services associated with permitted and conditional uses;

     (j)    Massage, bathing, tanning or similar establishments when in compliance with Chapter 6.40 or 6.41;

     (k)   Structures over sixty-five (65) feet in height or five (5) stories;

     (l)    Structures which are wider than fifty (50) percent of the lot front or exceed the side setback requirements;

     (m)  Any use similar in nature to one which is permitted or for which a permit is required in this district at a density determined not to exceed the trip generation for the planned use of the site using the adopted Bayfront traffic analyzer. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005): Ord. 1766 § 7, (2005))

 

25.45.030 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited, including:

     (a)   Automobile dealers and sales lots, wholesale and retail, including automobile leasing, freestanding and in office buildings;

     (b)   Automobile truck and other vehicle rental and associated rental storage, except a car rental desk only is permitted inside hotels;

     (c)   Automobile wrecking, junkyards, storage or baling of scraps, paper, rags, stacks or metals;

     (d)   Extended stay hotels;

     (e)   Limousine and livery businesses and associated storage facilities;

     (f)    Restaurants and food establishments greater than 0.25 FAR;

     (g)   Commercial parking lots;

     (h)   Manufacturing and warehousing except as designated and limited in the permitted uses;

     (i)    Medical clinics and health services;

     (j)    Outdoor storage of merchandise, inventory, and material, including automobile storage lots not related to a permitted or conditional use on the same lot or parcel; however, boats and boat trailers may be displayed in connection with permitted marinas; and

     (k)   Residential uses including mobile homes except for an owner/manager residence within a motel or hotel as expressly permitted above. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005))

 

25.45.040 Setbacks, minimum lot sizes, height, and development standards.
     (a)   The following minimum setbacks shall apply to all buildings and structures and shall apply to any enlargement thereof:

     (1)   Front Setback. Structures shall be set back at least ten (10) feet. At least fifty-five (55) percent of the buildings on the lot shall be set back between ten (10) and fifteen (15) feet from the lot front, and at least forty (40) percent of the buildings on the lot shall be set back at ten (10) feet from the lot front.

     (2)   Side Setback. Structures shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from side property lines, and no more than fifty (50) percent of the lot front shall be occupied by structures.

     (3)   Rear Setback. Structures shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from rear property lines.

     (4)   Setback from Shoreline. In any event, structures shall be set back an average of seventy-five (75) feet between structures and the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; in addition, for any building that is forty (40) feet or taller, then the setback of the building to the shoreline shall be equal to or greater than the height of the building.

     (b)   No parking spaces shall be provided within the ten (10) foot minimum setback across the lot front on any property. Driveways are allowed in the setback, but the driveways shall not be considered as landscaped area. No parking areas shall be located between any structure and the lot front, except for loading zones. Placement of parking shall be consistent with the design guidelines for the Shoreline subarea.

     (c)   To provide a view corridor, the width of a structure or combined structures on a lot shall not obstruct more than fifty (50) percent of the length of the property line on Bayshore Highway; and the development shall be consistent with the design guidelines for the Shoreline subarea.

     (d)   No structure shall exceed a maximum height of sixty-five (65) feet or five (5) stories, whichever is less;

     (e)   There shall be a maximum lot coverage of thirty-five (35) percent;

     (f)    There shall be a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. No property in the district shall be divided or subdivided into a lot with less area or less street frontage. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005))

 

25.45.045 Height and bulk of buildings.
     For every project hereafter constructed or reconstructed in the Shoreline zoning district, the height and bulk of buildings shall be further limited and based on the density of use established for the Shoreline subarea in the Bayfront Specific Plan. For a use whose density is based on floor area ratio, the building height and bulk is further limited and determined by the building or buildings relation to the area of the lot or lots upon which the building is located as determined by the adopted ratio. Where the density of the use is determined by some other standard than floor area ratio, the height and mass of the structure or structures shall be further limited and based on the adopted design guidelines the development constraints documented in the Bayfront Specific Plan and zoning regulations for the area in which the property is located. (Ord. 1756 § 3, (2005))

 

25.45.047 No variance for lot size or street frontage.
     No variances for lot size or street frontage shall be granted to any property within the Shoreline district. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005))

 

25.45.050 Landscaping and general design requirements.
     Standards for landscape and design in the Shoreline district are taken from the Bayfront Specific plan design guidelines and shall be supported in their implementation by incorporation of the adopted guidelines:

     (a)   A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total area of each property or group of properties to which a land use is applied shall be suitably landscaped and the landscaped portions shall be properly maintained. A landscape plan shall be submitted with any application for an approval under this title for any use on the lot.

     (b)   At least sixty (60) percent of the area between the front property line and the front of any building on a lot shall be landscaped. Where no building exists along a lot front, at least sixty (60) percent of the front setback area shall be landscaped. Landscaping may include walkways and seating features; driveways shall not be counted as landscaped area.

     (c)   A minimum of ten (10) percent of all parking areas shall be landscaped.

     (d)   Each building or group of buildings upon a lot or parcel of land shall provide a fully enclosed area for refuse, garbage, and recycling containers and such an enclosure shall be placed only at the sides or rear of the building or buildings, not within one hundred (100) feet of the rear property line, and outside the jurisdiction of the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. Details of the enclosure shall be submitted as part of the design review.

     (e)   Loading docks and truck loading access shall be fully enclosed and shall placed only at the sides or rear of the building, no closer than one hundred (100) feet to the rear property line, and outside the jurisdiction of the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. Details of the enclosure shall be submitted as part of the design review. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005))

 

25.45.052 Design review.
     Construction and alterations including substantial construction or change to more than fifty (50) percent of the front façade or change to more than fifty (50) percent of any façade facing a public or private street or parking lot shall be subject to design review based on the design guidelines for the Shoreline subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan and shall be processed as provided in Section 25.57.030.

     (a)   A design review application in the Shoreline district shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

     (1)   Support of the pattern of diverse architectural styles as defined in the design guidelines for the Shoreline subarea and the role of the shoreline in creating a network of interconnected open spaces;

     (2)   Respect and promotion of the streetscape by the placement of buildings to maximize the commercial use of the street frontage, off-street public spaces, and by locating parking so that it does not dominate street frontages, and for properties fronting on Bayshore Highway, that the design contributes to the interface with the Inner Bayshore subarea as directed in the Bayshore specific plan;

     (3)   On visually prominent and gateway sites, whether the design fits the site and is compatible with the surrounding development and consistent with the design guidelines for the Shoreline subarea;

     (4)   Compatibility of the architecture and landscaping with the design guidelines for the Shoreline subarea including materials used in existing development, location and use of plant materials, and compatibility with transitions where changes in land use occur nearby;

     (5)   Architectural design consistency by using a single architectural style on the lot that is consistent among primary elements of the structure(s) and with the directives of the design guidelines for the Shoreline subarea;

     (6)   Provision of site features identified in the design guidelines such as landscaping and pedestrian circulation which enriches the existing opportunities of the commercial neighborhood.

     (b)   When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structures shall be included in the design review.

     (c)   Exemptions from design review:

     (1)   Applications for building permits or planning approvals for development in the Shoreline district filed before July 20, 2005, and certain amendments to those applications or permits as specifically provided in Ordinance No. 1756.

     (2)   Any amendment to a project exempt from design review pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be subject to design review if the project involved would have otherwise been subject to design review under subsection (a) of this section, the project has not been completed, and the amendment would extend any structure involved in the application outside the envelope of the structure for which the approval was granted or sought in the underlying application or would change a façade. Changes to, additions of, or deletions of awnings as an amendment to a project shall not trigger design review under this subsection. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005): Ord. 1766 § 4, (2005))

 

25.45.060 Public access.
     (a)   An average of seventy-five (75) feet of the lot as measured from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall be maintained and developed for public access based on the city-adopted and Bay Conservation and Development Commission-approved public access guidelines for Burlingame.

     (b)   All areas improved for public access within the jurisdiction of the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall be maintained by the property owner and shall be available to the public in perpetuity as determined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005))

 

25.45.080 Parking requirements.
     All uses shall provide parking in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 25.70 of this code with the following changes or additions:

     (a)   Food Establishments. Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food and refreshments shall provide the following:

     (1)   Customer parking shall be provided on-site at the rate of one car space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area; and

     (2)   In addition, employee parking shall be provided on-site or within reasonable proximity, in the judgment of the director of community development, at the rate of one car space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.

     (b)   Bay Trail Parking. On sites with frontage on San Francisco Bay, the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall determine the number of on-site parking spaces to be designated for public Bay Trail Access parking; these on-site spaces shall be designated from the required parking for the site, shall be available to the public without charge during the hours that the Bay Trail is open, and shall be posted as public access parking by the property owner as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.

     (c)   Hotels. A hotel shall provide the following additional parking:

     (1)   One designated parking space for a shuttle bus; and

     (2)   For any food establishment on the hotel property that has an entrance separate from the hotel’s main entrance, the number of parking spaces required for a food establishment under Chapter 25.70.

     (d)   Gas Stations. For each gas station with retail sales provided on-site, there shall be two (2) on-site parking spaces provided and designated for retail sales customers in addition to on site parking required for minor automotive repair services provided on site. (Ord. 1756 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1806 § 16, (2007))

Chapter 25.46 T-P DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.46.010 Intent of regulations.
     It is the declared intent and purpose of this chapter to regulate uses of those areas of the city which are included in the Tidal Plain (T-P) district to provide open space; to assure that storm and sanitary drainage of the city will not be impaired; to prevent structures of such height as may create hazards to air transportation and otherwise to guard the health, safety and general welfare of the people. For the purposes of this chapter, the T-P classification may be applied to any area which, at the time of such classification, is below water level at any period of the tide cycle. The following regulations of this chapter shall apply to all T-P districts. (Ord. 825 § 1, (1965))

 

25.46.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in T-P districts:

     (a)   Removal of shells and other deposits from tidal area;

     (b)   Municipal parks and recreation areas and facilities. (Ord. 825 § 1, (1965))

 

25.46.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   Electronic devices or installations for the guidance or safety of air transportation;

     (b)   Any permanent structure permanently affixed to the land. (Ord. 825 § 1, (1965); Ord. 1078 § 17, (1976); Ord. 1603 § 36, (1998))

 

25.46.040 Prohibited uses.
     The following uses are prohibited:

     (a)   Buildings or structures designed or used for either temporary or permanent living quarters;

     (b)   Signs or billboards;

     (c)   No organic or inorganic materials may be deposited without first obtaining a permit therefor. The city council may grant such a permit after receiving and considering a report from the city engineer that such fill will not interfere with nor impair storm or sanitary drainage, or that methods for such drainage are provided; that the requirements of Section 8.16.030(c) of this code are met; and that such filling is in accord with the intent of these regulations. (Ord. 825 § 1, (1965))

Chapter 25.47 ANZA AREA
25.47.010 Scope and purpose of regulations.
     It is the purpose and policy of this chapter to establish and maintain land uses and the city and Bay Conservation and Development Commission design standards for the area designated as the Anza subarea in the Bayfront Specific Plan, and to cause development of buildings and structures that will benefit from their proximity to San Francisco Bay to encourage development which the open estuary areas of San Francisco Bay and will support and be beneficial to public access and use of this irreplaceable natural resource. Development of this area should contribute positively to the economic future of the city. In creating this district, the city asserts that economic as well as aesthetic advantages accrue to the land, the occupants and the public from the required controls and regulations. In addition, these regulations insure that new development can be supported by the local roadway system and other public infrastructure. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the Anza district:

     (a)   Restaurants with a maximum floor area ratio of 0.15;

     (b)   Motels and hotels with a maximum density of eighty-five (85) rooms to the acre and a floor area ratio of 1.0 or less; facilities provided on site may include such retail sales and personal service uses as meal and beverage services, barber and beauty shops, smoke shops, and shuttle bus service to serve only hotel guests so long as the operation does not use parking required for primary hotel use, convention and meeting facilities, and similar services which are clearly incidental and accessory to provision of lodging accommodations; and no more than one dwelling unit within the motel or hotel structure that is used exclusively by the owner or manager of the motel or hotel;

     (c)   Offices with a maximum floor area ratio of 0.6, including research and development offices with associated laboratory uses, as well as instructional activities associated with an office on the site; however, neither health services nor medical clinics are allowed;

     (d)   Accessory retail sales and personal service uses of no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet within an office building larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;

     (e)   Publicly owned recreation facilities;

     (f)    Adult oriented businesses that meet all of the requirements of Chapters 25.76 and 10.58 of this code. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.025 Conditional uses.
     The following are uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   Offices with a floor area ratio greater than 0.6, including research and development offices with associated laboratories, as well as instructional activities associated with an office on the site; however, neither health services nor medical clinics are allowed;

     (b)   Accessory retail sales and personal service uses of more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet located in office buildings of greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

     (c)   Motels and hotels with more than eighty-five (85) rooms to the acre or with a floor area ratio more than 1.0; facilities provided on site may include such retail sales and service uses as meal and beverage services, barber and beauty shops, smoke shops, automobile rental desks, and shuttle bus service to serve only hotel guests so long as the operation does not use parking required for primary hotel use, convention and meeting facilities, and similar services which are clearly incidental and accessory to provision of lodging accommodations, and no more than one dwelling unit within the motel or hotel structure that is used exclusively by the owner or manager of the motel or hotel;

     (d)   Extended stay hotels;

     (e)   As part of a hotel or motel use, an automobile rental desk or a park and fly program associate with renting of rooms and that does not affect the availability of on-site parking for or motel guests and the use and parking for any on-site meeting facilities;

     (f)    Commercial recreation facilities; these facilities may include the sale of merchandise and items which are related to the principal use that do not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of support retail sales area;

     (g)   Trade, professional and art schools located in buildings of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;

     (h)   Buildings and structures that exceed forty (40) feet in height when located within one hundred (100) feet of the San Francisco Bay shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC);

     (i)    All buildings, structures, and site plans that do not comply with the adopted measurable design guidelines for the Anza subarea as established by resolution of the city council;

     (j)    Drive-in services or take-out services associated with permitted and conditional uses;

     (k)   Commercial parking lots, but only as an interim use as described in the Bayfront Specific Plan as adopted by city council and that comply with at least all of the following criteria:

     (1)   The sole purpose of the use is the parking for one day or longer of vehicles of persons using the San Francisco International Airport, and

     (2)   A minimum site size of three (3) acres, and

     (3)   Permit term limited to five (5) years or less, and

     (4)   No more peak hour vehicle trips are generated than allowed by the traffic analyzer for the use designated for the site in the general plan, and

     (5)   The Anza subarea design guidelines from the adopted Bayfront Specific Plan and Bay Conservation and Development Commission public access requirements are met, and

     (6)   No parking is within a structure above or below grade.

     (l)    Structures over sixty-five (65) feet in height or five (5) stories;

     (m)  Interim uses which, after a public hearing, are found desirable and compatible with the purposes of the district and that conform to the Bayfront Specific Plan and are compatible with the following criteria:

     (1)   Do not impede or imperil the intent of the Bayfront Specific Plan, and

     (2)   Do not allow development which generates more p.m. peak hour vehicle trips than a permitted use on the site as determined by the Bayfront traffic analyzer,

     (3)   The design conforms to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) and Bay Conservation and Development Commission requirements, and

     (4)   The permit term is limited to five (5) years or less.

     (n)   Any use similar in nature to one which is permitted or for which a permit is required in this district at a density determined not to exceed the trip generation for the planned use of the site using the adopted Bayfront traffic analyzer. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.030 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited, including:

     (a)   Automobile wreckers and wrecking yards;

     (b)   Restaurants and food establishments with a floor area ratio that is more than 0.25;

     (c)   Retail sales, personal services, and service businesses that are free standing, including gasoline service stations, and that are not expressly allowed or limited as a permitted or conditional use in this chapter;

     (d)   Automobile rental agencies and car rental storage;

     (e)   Manufacturing and warehousing except as designated and limited in the permitted uses;

     (f)    Medical clinics and health services;

     (g)   Outdoor storage of merchandise, inventory, equipment, and materials, including storage of motorized recreation vehicles;

     (h)   Residential uses, including mobile homes, except for an owner/manager residence within a motel or hotel as expressly permitted above;

     (i)    Automobile dealers and sales lots, wholesale and retail, and automobile leasing, whether freestanding, in office buildings, or in connection with other uses. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.040 Setbacks, minimum lot sizes, height, and development standards.
     (a)   The following minimum setbacks shall apply to all buildings and structures or shall apply to any enlargement thereof:

     (1)   Front Setback. Any portion of a building that is two (2) stories or less in height shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the lot front, and any taller portion of the building shall be set back at least ten (10) feet further from the lower one- or two-story portion. Any portion of any building that is over two (2) stories in height shall be set back at least forty (40) feet from the lot front.

     (2)   Side Setback . On one side designated by the lot owner, the closest part of any structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the side property line; on the other side of the lot as designated by the lot owner, the closest part of any structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the side property line.

     (3)   Rear Setback. The minimum rear setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.

     (4)   Setback from San Francisco Bay and its Estuaries. The following minimum setbacks from San Francisco Bay and its estuaries Anza Lagoon, Sanchez Channel, and Burlingame Lagoon shall apply to any lot that is adjacent to these water features. In case of conflict between these provisions and other setback requirements in this section, the greatest minimum setback shall apply.

     (A)  On San Francisco Bay Proper. An average setback of seventy-five (75) feet between any structure and the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission approved Public Access Guidelines for the city of Burlingame.

     (B)   On the Estuaries Anza Lagoon, Sanchez Channel, and Burlingame Lagoon. An average setback of sixty-five (65) feet between any structure and the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission approved Public Access Guidelines for the city of Burlingame.

     (C)   In addition, for structures taller than forty (40) feet, the minimum setback from the Bay Conservation and Development Commission bayside jurisdiction line shall be equal to the height of the structure, and where there is no structure, the setback from the top of bank shall not be less than the minimum width for the Bay Trail as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.

     (5)   Parking Location. No parking spaces shall be provided within the front setback on any property; driveways shall be allowed in the front setback; parking spaces at the rear of a building shall be set back twenty (20) feet from the inner edge of the Bay Trail.

     (6)   View Corridor. To provide a view corridor, the width of any structure or combined structures on a lot shall not obstruct more than fifty (50) percent of the street frontages.

     (7)   Height.

     (A)  No structure shall exceed a maximum height of sixty-five (65) feet except on the properties with any frontage on Burlingame Lagoon on which the heights shall range from twenty-five (25) feet to sixty-five (65) feet as described in the Anza Area Features Map in the Bayfront Specific Plan;

     (B)   No building or structure shall exceed forty (40) feet when located within one hundred (100) feet of the San Francisco Bay shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission, except as allowed pursuant to a conditional use permit as provided in Section 25.47.025.

     (8)   Lot Coverage. There shall be a maximum lot coverage of thirty-five (35) percent. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.045 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     (a)   There shall be a minimum lot size of forty thousand (40,000) square feet and a minimum street frontage of one hundred (100) feet. No property in the district shall be divided or subdivided into a lot with less area or less street frontage.

     (b)   A ten (10) percent increase in floor area ratio and in hotel rooms per acre shall be allowed for a single project that combines one or more lots of less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet to create a single lot of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more with a lot front of at least one hundred (100) feet on the west side of Airport Boulevard. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.048 No variance for lot size and street frontage.
     No variances for lot size or street frontage shall be granted to any property within the Anza district. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.050 Landscaping and design requirements.
     Standards for landscape and design in the Anza subarea are taken from the Bayfront Specific Plan design guidelines and shall be supported in their implementation by incorporation of the adopted guidelines:

     (a)   A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total area of each property or group of properties to which a land use is applied shall be suitably landscaped and the landscaped portions shall be properly irrigated and maintained. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with any application for an approval under this title for any use on the lot;

     (b)   At least eighty (80) percent of the front setback shall be landscaped; landscaping may include walkways and seating features; driveways shall not be counted as landscaped area; in addition, all areas between the front setback and any building shall be landscaped;

     (c)   A minimum of ten (10) percent of all on-site parking areas shall be landscaped;

     (d)   Each building or group of buildings upon a lot or parcel of land shall provide a fully enclosed, attached or detached structure for refuse and garbage containers. These enclosures may be placed only at the sides of the building or buildings and shall be no closer than seventy five (75) feet to the rear property line. These facilities shall also be no closer than one hundred (100) feet from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. Details of the enclosure shall be submitted as part of the design review application;

     (e)   Loading docks and truck loading access shall be fully enclosed and placed only at the sides of the building and be no closer than seventy five (75) feet to the rear property line. If placed to the rear of the building, these facilities shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. Details of the enclosure shall be submitted as part of the design review application. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.052 Design review.
     Construction and alterations including substantial construction or change to more than fifty (50) percent of the front façade or change to more than fifty (50) percent of any façade facing a public or private street or parking lot shall be subject to design review based on the design guidelines for the Anza subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan and shall be processed as provided in Section 25.57.030.

     (a)   A design review application in the Anza Area district shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

     (1)   Support of the pattern of diverse architectural styles as defined in the design guidelines for the Anza subarea and the role of the shoreline in creating a network of interconnected open spaces; and

     (2)   Respect and promotion of the streetscape by the placement of buildings to maximize the commercial use of the street frontage, off-street public spaces, and by locating parking so that it does not dominate street frontages, and for properties with any water frontage, that the design is sensitive to the surrounding bodies of water, physical and visual presence of the Bay Trail, and the orientation of the prevailing winds; and

     (3)   On visually prominent sites and sites with shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission, the design shall fit the site, support the Bay Trail and its park and recreational uses, provide for maximum user access and support recreational use by those who work in the area as well as those who visit; and the design fits the site and is compatible with the surrounding development and consistent with the design guidelines for the Anza subarea; and

     (4)   Compatibility of the architecture and landscaping with the design guidelines for the Anza subarea including materials used in existing development, location and use of plant materials, and compatibility with transitions where changes in land use occur nearby; and

     (5)   Architectural design consistency by using a single architectural style on the lot that is consistent among primary elements of the structure(s) and with the directives of the design guidelines for the Anza subarea; and

     (6)   Provision of site features identified in the design guidelines such as orientation to minimize wind obstruction on San Francisco Bay, protection of the Bay environment, and landscaping and pedestrian circulation which enriches and enhances the existing recreation opportunities of the area, including extension of the Bay Trail as well as the commercial neighborhood.

     (b)   When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structures shall be included in the design review.

     (c)   Exemptions from design review:

     (1)   Applications for building permits or planning approvals for development in the Anza district filed before October 19, 2005.

     (2)   Any amendment to a project exempt from design review pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be subject to design review if the project involved would have otherwise been subject to design review under subsection (a) of this section, the project has not been completed, and the amendment would extend any structure involved in the application outside the envelope of the structure for which the approval was granted or sought in the underlying application or would change a façade. Changes to, additions of, or deletions of awnings as an amendment to a project shall not trigger design review under this subsection. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.060 Public access.
     Public access shall be maintained and developed based on the city-adopted and Bay Conservation and Development Commission-approved public access guidelines for Burlingame based on the applicable water frontage as follows:

     (a)   On San Francisco Bay Proper. An average setback of seventy-five (75) feet of the lot as measured from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; in no case shall the area as measured from the top of bank be less than the minimum width for the Bay Trail as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; and

     (b)   On Anza Lagoon, Sanchez Channel, and Burlingame Lagoon. An average setback of sixty-five (65) feet as measured from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; in no case shall the area as measured from the top of bank be less than the minimum width for the Bay Trail as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.

     (c)   All areas improved for public access within the jurisdiction of the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall be maintained by the property owner and shall be available to the public in perpetuity as determined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005))

 

25.47.080 Parking requirements.
     All uses shall provide parking in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 25.70 of this code with the following changes or additions:

 

     (a)   Food Establishments.

     (1)   Food establishments that are the primary use of the lot shall provide the following:

     (A)  Customer parking shall be provided on-site at the rate of one car space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, and

     (B)   In addition, employee parking shall be provided on-site or within reasonable proximity, in the judgment of the director of community development, at the rate of one car space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area;

     (2)   Food establishments that establishments that are located in an office building of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more or that are not the primary use of the lot shall provide parking on-site at the rate of one car space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area of food establishment. However, food establishments located within a hotel or motel are not required to provide the additional parking required under this subsection unless the food establishment has a public entrance that opens directly to the exterior of the building;

     (b)   Instructional Uses. Instructional uses related to a permitted or conditional use shall provide parking on-site at the rate of one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area;

     (c)   Bay Trail Parking. On sites with frontage on San Francisco Bay and its estuary including Anza Lagoon, Sanchez Channel, and Burlingame Lagoon, the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall determine the number of on-site parking spaces to be designated for public Bay Trail Access parking; these on-site spaces shall be designated from the required parking for the site, shall be available to the public without charge during the hours that the Bay Trail is open, and shall be posted as public access parking by the property owner as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.

     (d)   Hotels. A hotel shall provide one additional, designated parking space for a shuttle bus. (Ord. 1766 § 2, (2005); Ord. 1806 § 17, (2007))

Chapter 25.48 ANZA POINT NORTH (APN)
25.48.010 Scope and purpose of regulations.
     It is the purpose and policy of this chapter to establish and maintain land uses for the northern portion of the area designated as the Anza Point subarea in the Bayfront Specific Plan. The Anza Point subarea lies east of Sanchez Channel, is bounded on two sides by San Francisco Bay and by US 101 on the south side. The Anza Point subarea is divided into two sections: the northern one of currently vacant land served by Airport Boulevard. These provisions address the Anza Point North area which include all the properties north of Beach and Lang Road with frontage on Airport Boulevard. The purpose of these regulations is to direct the siting and development of structures which adhere to the development policies and adopted design guidelines of the Bayfront Plan in general and to the properties in the north portion of the Anza Point subarea specifically. The intention is to attract development which will benefit from the proximity to the open water areas of San Francisco Bay and its estuaries, will support public recreation and access along San Francisco Bay, and will protect this irreplaceable natural and recreation resource. Future development consistent with the Bayfront Specific Plan will create a viable transition from the heavy commercial uses along US 101 to the visitor oriented and office uses with Bay orientation to be developed on the vacant land at the north end of the Anza Point subarea, establish a bayside gateway to Burlingame on its eastern end, and contribute to the revenue base of the city. In creating this district, the city asserts that economic as well as aesthetic advantages accrue to the land, its occupants and the public from the required controls and regulations. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted in the Anza Point North district:

     (a)   Motels and hotels with a maximum density of eighty-five (85) rooms to the acre and a floor area ratio of 1.0 or less; facilities provided on-site may include such retail sales and personal service uses as meal and beverage services, barber and beauty shops, smoke shops, and shuttle bus service to serve only hotel guests so long as the operation does not use parking required for primary hotel use, convention and meeting facilities, and similar services which are clearly incidental and accessory to provision of lodging accommodations; and no more than one dwelling unit within the motel or hotel structure that is used exclusively by the owner or manager of the motel or hotel;

     (b)   Restaurants with a maximum floor area ratio of 0.15;

     (c)   Office uses with a maximum floor area ratio of 1.0, including research and development facilities and laboratories; however, manufacturing is not allowed, and health services or medical clinics are only allowed pursuant to Section 25.48.025 of this chapter;

     (d)   Training facilities associated with and related to a primary activity of research and development facilities located in the Anza Area, Anza Point North, or Anza Point South district;

     (e)   Commercial recreation facility with a maximum floor area ratio of 1.0; these facilities may include the sale of merchandise and items which are related to the principal use that do not exceed a total of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of support retail sales area located within the facility;

     (f)    Publicly owned recreation areas;

     (g)   Adult oriented businesses that meet all of the requirements of Chapters 25.76 and 10.58 of this code;

     (h)   Accessory uses which are necessary for the permitted uses under this section; and

     (i)    Incidental food establishments and retail uses in business campuses or professional buildings of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more, where the food establishment is not the primary use of the building or structure. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.025 Conditional uses.
     The following are uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   Commercial recreation facilities including gymnasiums with a floor area ratio of more than 0.5 or that include a total space of more than one thousand five hundred

 

(1,500) square feet of recreation business related merchandise which are related to the principal use in the facility;

     (b)   Commercial parking lots as an interim use as is described in the Bayfront Specific Plan as adopted by the city council, which comply with at least the following criteria:

     (1)   The sole purpose of the use is the parking for one day or longer of vehicles of persons using San Francisco International Airport, and

     (2)   A minimum lot size of three (3) acres, and

     (3)   Permit term limited to five (5) years, and

     (4)   No more peak hour vehicle trips are generated than allowed by the traffic analyzer for the use designated for the site in the general plan;

     (c)   Day care with on-site drop-off and parking as required by Chapter 25.70 of this code;

     (d)   Educational institutions, trade and technical schools in buildings with twenty thousand (20,000) or more gross square footage, with all educational uses in a single building occupying no more than a total of ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet and whose trip generation as calculated using the Bayfront traffic analyzer is no greater than that of a use permitted on the same site;

     (e)   Extended stay hotels;

     (f)    Motels and hotels with more than eighty-five (85) rooms to the acre or with a floor area ratio of more than 1.0; facilities provided on site may include such retail sales and service uses as meal and beverage services, barber and beauty shops, smoke shops, and shuttle bus service to serve only hotel guests so long as the operation does not use parking required for primary hotel use, convention and meeting facilities, and similar services which are clearly incidental and accessory to provision of lodging accommodations, including park and fly programs associated with the letting of hotel rooms which does not impact the availability of on-site parking for guests and the use and parking for any on-site meeting facilities; and no more than one dwelling unit within the motel or hotel structure that is used exclusively by the owner or manager of the motel or hotel;

     (g)   As part of a hotel or motel use, an automobile rental desk or a park and fly program associated with renting of rooms and that does not affect the availability of on-site parking for hotel or motel guests and the use and parking for any on-site meeting facilities;

     (h)   Health services and medical clinics that do not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet total in office structures over twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet, with parking as set forth in Section 25.48.080 of this chapter;

     (i)    Any building, structure or site plan that does not comply with the adopted design guidelines in the Bayfront Specific Plan for the Anza Point subarea as established by resolution of the city council;

     (j)    Drive-in services or take out services associated with permitted and conditional uses;

     (k)   Any use similar in nature to one which is permitted or for which a permit is required in this district that is:

     (1)   Consistent with planned land uses in the Anza Point subarea, and

     (2)   At a density determined not to exceed the trip generation for the planned use of the site using the adopted Bayfront traffic analyzer. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.027 Hours for health service uses and conditional use permit.
     A health service use shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. unless a conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 25.52 to allow use outside those hours. The hours limitation imposed by this section does not apply to an occasional medical emergency at a health service use. (Ord. 1793 § 32, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.030 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited, including:

     (a)   Automobile rental uses;

     (b)   Automobile dealers and sales lots;

     (c)   Automobile wrecking and junk yards, storage or baling of scraps, paper rags, sacks, or metals, including recycling facilities for green waste and other materials;

     (d)   Commercial parking lots except as expressly allowed pursuant to Section 25.48.025(b) of this chapter;

     (e)   Retail sales uses except as expressly allowed within the uses designated in Section 25.48.020 or 25.48.025 of this chapter;

     (f)    Service businesses, except as expressly allowed within the uses designated in Section 25.48.020 or 25.48.025 of this chapter;

     (g)   Personal services, except as expressly allowed within the uses designated in Section 25.48.020 or 25.48.025 of this chapter;

     (h)   Air courier, delivery or other trans-shipment services, including freight forwarding;

     (i)    Freestanding specialty food establishments or any specialty food establishment with direct external access within any building;

     (j)    Warehouse, storage and distribution of goods, materials, liquids and equipment;

     (k)   Outdoor storage of materials including contractors storage yards;

     (l)    Health services and medical clinics, except as expressly allowed under Section 25.48.025 of this chapter;

     (m)  Industrial and manufacturing uses;

     (n)   Massage, bathing or similar establishments;

     (o)   Residential uses and buildings, except for an owner/manager residence in a hotel or motel as expressly allowed under Section 25.48.020 or 25.48.025 of this chapter;

     (p)   Gasoline service stations and major and minor automobile repair, including auto body work;

     (q)   Time-share property;

     (r)    Any use determined to be obnoxious or offensive. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.040 Setbacks.
     The following minimum setbacks shall apply to all parcels, buildings and structures or any enlargement thereof located in the district:

     (a)   Front Setback. Structures shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet.

     (b)   Side Setback. There shall be a ten (10) foot side setback.

     (c)   Distance Between Buildings. To provide useable wind-sheltered outdoor area and to provide a visual connection to the Bay Trail, there shall be a distance of at least twenty (20) feet between buildings on the same lot.

     (d)   Rear Setback. Structures shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from rear property line.

     (e)   Setbacks from Shoreline. In any event, structures shall be set back an average of sixty-five (65) feet from Sanchez Channel and seventy-five (75) feet from San Francisco Bay and the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; in addition, for any building within one hundred (100) feet of the shoreline that is forty (40) feet or taller, the setback of the building to the shoreline shall be equal to or greater than the height of the building.

     (f)    Below grade construction adjacent to Airport Boulevard shall accommodate landscape plantings within the required setback consistent with landscape plans approved pursuant to Section 25.48.050.

     (g)   No parking spaces shall be provided within the ten (10) foot minimum setback across the lot front on any property. Driveways are allowed in the setback, but the driveways shall not be considered as landscaped area. Parking areas located between any structure and the lot front other than loading zones shall be separated from the sidewalk by a landscaped buffer of at least ten (10) feet average width including walkways. Placement of parking shall be consistent with the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.042 Height and bulk of structures.
     (a)   Maximum height shall be determined by impact on the prevailing wind and consistency with the community wind standards for the Anza Point North area.

     (b)   Maximum bulk and mass shall be determined by the floor area ratio established in the Bayfront Specific Plan for the land uses in the Anza Point subarea. Where no floor area ratio is provided, mass and bulk shall be based on the adopted design guidelines, the development constraints documented in the Bayfront Specific Plan, and the zoning regulations where the property is located. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.045 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     There shall be a minimum lot size of two (2) acres and a minimum street frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet. No property in the district may be divided or subdivided into a lot with less area or less street frontage. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.048 No variance for lot size or street frontage.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no variance for lot size or street frontage shall be granted to any property within this district. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.050 Landscaping.
     The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all lots:

     (a)   The landscape requirements of the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan as adopted by the city council shall be met; and

     (b)   A minimum of ten (10) percent of the parking area shall be landscaped; and

     (c)   A minimum of eighty (80) percent of the front setback shall be landscaped; and

     (d)   A minimum of forty (40) percent of the lot area within the Bay Conservation and Development Commission jurisdiction shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.052 Design review.
     Construction and alterations including substantial construction or change to more than fifty (50) percent of the front façade or change to more than fifty (50) percent of any façade facing a public or private street, parking lot, or the Bay Trail shall be subject to design review based on the design guidelines for the Anza Point North subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan and shall be processed as provided in Section 25.57.030 of this title.

     (a)   A design review application in the APN district shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

     (1)   Support of the pattern of diverse architectural styles as defined in the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea and the role of the shoreline in creating a network of interconnected open spaces;

     (2)   Respect and promotion of the streetscape by the placement of buildings to maximize the pedestrian use of street frontage, off-street public spaces, and by locating parking so that it does not dominate street frontages, and for properties fronting on Airport Boulevard, that the design is sensitive to the surrounding bodies of water, physical and visual presence of the Bay Trail, orientation of the prevailing winds and to the Coyote Point recreation area;

     (3)   On visually prominent and sites with shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission, the design shall fit the site, support the Bay Trail and its park and recreational uses, provide for maximum user access and support recreational use by those who work in the area as well as those who visit; and the design is compatible with the surrounding development and consistent with the design guidelines for the Anza Point sub-area;

     (4)   Compatibility of the architecture and landscaping with the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea including materials used in existing development, location and use of plant materials, and compatibility with transitions where changes in land use occur nearby;

     (5)   Architectural design consistency by using a single architectural style on the site that is consistent among primary elements of the structure(s) and consistent with the directives of the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea; and

     (6)   Provision of site features identified in the design guidelines such as orientation to minimize wind obstruction on San Francisco Bay, landscaping, and pedestrian circulation which enriches and enhances the existing recreation opportunities of the area, including extension of the Bay Trail.

     (b)   When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structures shall be included in the design review.

     (c)   Exemptions from design review:

     (1)   Applications for building permits or planning approvals for development in the Anza Point North district filed before May 17, 2006;

     (2)   Any amendment to a project exempt from design review pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be subject to design review if the project involved would have otherwise been subject to design review under subsection (a) above, the project has not been completed, and the amendment would extend any structure involved in the application outside the envelope of the structure for which the approval was granted or sought in the underlying application or would change a façade. Changes to, additions of, or deletions of awnings as an amendment to a project shall not trigger design review under this subsection. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.060 Public access.
     Public access shall be maintained and developed based on the city-adopted and Bay Conservation and Development Commission-approved Public Access Guidelines for Burlingame based on the applicable water frontage as follows:

     (a)   On San Francisco Bay proper: An average setback of seventy-five (75) feet of the lot as measured from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; in no case shall the area as measured from the top of bank be less than the minimum width for the Bay Trail as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; and

     (b)   On Sanchez Channel: An average setback of sixty-five (65) feet as measured from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; in no case shall the area as measured from the top of bank be less than the minimum width for the Bay Trail as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.

     (c)   All areas improved for public access within the jurisdiction of the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall be maintained by the property owner and shall be available to the public in perpetuity as determined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

 

25.48.080 Parking requirements.
     All uses shall provide parking in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 25.70 of this code with the following changes or additions:

     (a)   Food Establishments.

     (1)   Food establishments that are the primary use of the lot shall provide the following:

     (A)  Customer parking shall be provided on-site at the rate of one parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area; and

     (B)   In addition, employee parking shall be provided on-site or within reasonable proximity, in the judgment of the director of community development, at the rate of one car space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area;

     (2)   Food establishments that are located in an office building of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more or that are not the primary use of the lot shall provide parking on-site at the rate of one parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area of food establishment.

     (b)   Instructional Uses. Instructional uses related to a permitted or conditional use shall provide parking on-site at the rate of one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.

     (c)   Health Services and Medical Clinics. Health services and medical clinic uses shall provide parking on-site at the rate of one parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area occupied by the uses.

     (d)   Bay Trail Parking. On sites with frontage on San Francisco Bay and its estuary including Anza Lagoon, Sanchez Channel, and Burlingame Lagoon, the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall determine the number of on-site parking spaces to be designated for public Bay Trail access parking; these on-site spaces shall be designated from the required parking for the site, shall be available to the public without charge during the hours that the Bay Trail is open, and shall be posted as public access parking by the property owner as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.

     (e)   Hotels. A hotel shall provide one additional, designated parking space for a shuttle bus.

     (f)    Transportation Demand Management. Where a project proposes a transportation demand management (TDM) plan for a demand-generating use, the minimum requirements specified for that use in Chapter 25.70 may be reduced by the amount of parking demand offset by the approved TDM plan. The reduction in required parking spaces shall be determined by the Community Development Director. (Ord. 1780 § 2, (2006); Ord. 1806 § 18, (2007); Ord. 1875 § 4, (2012))

Chapter 25.49 ANZA POINT SOUTH (APS)
25.49.010 Scope and purpose of regulations.
     It is the purpose and policy of this chapter to establish and maintain land uses for the southern portion of the Anza Point subarea of the Bayshore Specific Area Plan. The Anza Point subarea lies east of Sanchez Channel, is bounded on two sides by San Francisco Bay and by U.S. 101 on the south side. The Anza Point subarea is divided into two sections the southern one served by Beach and Lang Roads is developed with light industrial uses. These provisions address the Anza Point South (Beach Lang Road) area of the Anza Point subarea. The purpose of these regulations is to direct the siting and development of structures, adhering to the development policies and adopted design guidelines of the Bayfront Plan. The intention is to attract development which will benefit from the proximity to the open water areas of San Francisco Bay and its estuaries will support public recreation and access along San Francisco Bay, will protect this irreplaceable natural and recreation resource. Future development consistent with the Bayfront Specific Plan will create a viable transition from the heavy commercial uses along U.S. 101 to the Bay-oriented uses to be developed on the vacant land to the north, establish a bayside gateway to Burlingame on its eastern end, and contribute to the revenue base of the city. In creating this district, the city asserts that economic as well as aesthetic advantages accrue to the land, its occupants and the public from the required controls and regulations. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

 

25.49.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted:

     (a)   Recreation-related retail sales uses located within a building of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more with the total retail sales area not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet on the lot;

     (b)   Publicly owned recreation facilities;

     (c)   Office uses with a maximum floor area ratio of 0.6, including research and development offices with associated laboratory uses; however, neither manufacturing activity nor health services nor medical clinics are allowed;

     (d)   Any light industrial or manufacturing use, such as electronics, furniture, biotechnology, drug, pharmaceutical and printing conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, including associated laboratories, which:

     (1)   Has a floor area ratio of not more than 0.5, and

     (2)   Does not use impact presses or over twenty (20) tons rated capacity or machine operated drop hammers, and

     (3)   Encloses compressors and generators so that there is no increase in the twenty-four (24) hour ambient noise level in excess of 3 dBA at any property line, and

     (4)   Does not create an obnoxious or offensive presence or emission of odor, dust, gas, noise, bright lights, smoke, vibration, harmful sewer waste or have a detrimental effect on permissible adjacent uses;

     (e)   Warehouse, storage, and distribution of goods, materials, liquids and equipment conducted wholly within an enclosed building with a maximum floor area ratio of 0.5;

     (f)    Outdoor storage of materials including contractors storage yards, incidental to permitted uses, subject to the following:

     (1)   Covers a maximum of ten (10) percent of the lot area, and

     (2)   Is limited to side and rear yards, and

     (3)   Is paved and drained according to city standards, and

     (4)   Is enclosed by an opaque fence or wall eight (8) feet in height;

     (g)   Service businesses including contractors, but not including personal service uses, so long as the following conditions are met:

     (1)   On-site parking for all company vehicles, and

     (2)   On-site parking for all employees, and

     (3)   Adequate on-site space is provided for loading and unloading goods, equipment and materials, and

     (4)   No taxable retail sales transactions occurring on the site;

     (h)   Air courier, delivery or other traps-shipment services, including freight forwarding, which provide on-site parking for all fleet vehicles and on-site parking for all employees;

     (i)    Accessory uses which are necessary for the permitted uses under this section. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.025 Conditional uses.
     The following are uses requiring a conditional use permit:

     (a)   Office uses with a floor area ratio of more than 0.6, including research and development offices with associated laboratory uses; however, neither health services nor medical clinics are allowed;

     (b)   Any light industrial or manufacturing use such as electronic, furniture, biotechnology, drug, pharmaceutical and printing conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, including associated laboratories, which exceeds any of the performance criteria of Section 25.49.020(d) of this chapter; however, approval of a variance shall be required to allow any such use to exceed 0.5 FAR;

     (c)   Day care facilities with on-site drop off and parking as required by Chapter 25.70;

     (d)   Outdoor storage of materials, including contractors storage yards, incidental to permitted uses for which one or more of the following applies:

     (1)   Outdoor storage covers more than ten (10) percent of the lot area, or

     (2)   Some or all of the outdoor storage is not located in aside or rear yard;

     (e)   Warehouse, storage and distribution of goods, materials, liquids and equipment conducted wholly within an enclosed building with greater than a 0.5 floor area ratio;

     (f)    All structures that are taller than the maximum height allowed pursuant to Section 25.49.042 of this chapter, if wind studies demonstrate that the additional height is consistent with the community wind standards; but in no event shall any structure be taller than ten (10) feet above those maximum heights allowed pursuant to Section 25.49.042;

     (g)   Any use similar in nature to one which is permitted or for which a conditional use permit is required which is:

     (1)   Consistent with planned land uses in the Anza Point subarea, and

     (2)   At a density and intensity determined not to exceed the trip generation for the planned use of the site using the adopted Bayfront traffic analyzer. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.030 Prohibited uses.
     Uses not listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited, including but not limited to the following:

     (a)   Automobile rental uses;

     (b)   Automobile dealers and sales lots;

     (c)   Automobile wrecking and junkyards, storage or baling of scraps, paper rags, sacks or metals, including recycling facilities for green waste and other materials;

     (d)   Adult oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 25.76;

     (e)   Commercial parking lots;

     (f)    Commercial recreation and gymnasiums;

     (g)   Food establishments;

     (h)   Gasoline service stations and major and minor automobile repair including auto body work;

     (i)    Health services and medical clinics;

     (j)    Massage, bathing or similar establishments;

     (k)   Personal services;

     (l)    Residential uses and buildings;

     (m)  Hotels or motels;

     (n)   Any use determined to be obnoxious or offensive. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.040 Setbacks.
     The following minimum setbacks shall apply to all parcels, buildings and structures or any enlargement thereof:

     (a)   Front Setbacks. All lots shall have a front setback of at least fifteen (15) feet.

     (b)   Side Setbacks. There shall be a minimum ten (10) foot side setback.

     (c)   Rear Setbacks. Except for lots with a lot front on the north side of Beach Road, there shall be no minimum rear setbacks. For lots with a lot front on the north side of Beach Road, there shall be a minimum rear setback of ten (10) feet. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.042 Height and bulk of buildings.
     (a)   Maximum height shall be determined by impact on the prevailing wind and shall be staggered with a maximum height of thirty (30) feet along the eastern side of the lot, increasing in a graduated manner to a maximum of fifty (50) feet along the western, or Sanchez Channel/Burlingame Lagoon, side of the lot, as established in the Anza Point subarea design guidelines and consistent with the community wind standards.

     (b)   Maximum bulk and mass shall be determined by the floor area ratio established in the Bayfront Specific Plan for the land uses in the Anza Point subarea. Where no floor area ratio is provided, mass and bulk shall be based on the adopted design guidelines, the development constraints documented in the Bayfront Specific Plan, and the zoning regulations where the property is located. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.045 Minimum lot size and street frontage.
     There shall be a minimum lot size of forty thousand (40,000) square feet and a minimum street frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet. No property in the district maybe divided or subdivided into a lot with less area or less street frontage. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.048 No variance for lot size and street frontage.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no variance for lot size or street frontage shall be granted to any property within this district. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.050 Landscaping.
     The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all lots:

     (a)   The landscape requirements of the design guidelines for the Anza Point South portion of the Anza Point subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan as adopted by the city council shall be met;

     (b)   A minimum of ten (10) percent of the parking area shall be landscaped;

     (c)   A minimum of eighty (80) percent of the front setback shall be landscaped; and

     (d)   A minimum of forty (40) percent of the lot area within the Bay Conservation and Development Commission jurisdiction shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.052 Design review.
     Construction and alterations including substantial construction or change to more than fifty (50) percent of the front facade or change to more than fifty (50) percent of any facade facing a public or private street, parking lot, or the Bay Trail shall be subject to design review based on the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea of the Bayfront Specific Plan and shall be processed as provided in Section 25.57.030.

     (a)   A design review application in the APS district shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

     (1)   Support of the pattern of diverse architectural styles as defined in the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea and the role of the shoreline in creating a network of interconnected open spaces;

     (2)   Respect and promotion of the streetscape by the placement of buildings to maximize the commercial use of the street frontage, off-street public spaces , and by locating parking so that it does not dominate street frontages, and for properties fronting on Airport Boulevard, that the design is sensitive to the surrounding bodies of water, orientation of the prevailing winds and to the Coyote Point recreation area;

     (3)   On visually prominent and gateway sites, whether the design fits the site and is compatible with the surrounding development and consistent with the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea;

     (4)   Compatibility of the architecture and landscaping with the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea including materials used in existing development, location and use of plant materials, and compatibility with transitions where changes in land use occur nearby;

     (5)   Architectural design consistency by using a single architectural style on the site that is consistent among primary elements of the structure(s) and consistent with the directives of the design guidelines for the Anza Point subarea; and

     (6)   Provision of site features identified in the design guidelines such as orientation to minimize wind obstruction on San Francisco Bay, landscaping, and pedestrian circulation which enriches and enhances the existing recreation opportunities of the area, including extension of the Bay Trail.

     (b)   When any part of a commercial structure is subject to design review, any awnings on the commercial structures shall be included in the design review.

     (c)   Exemptions from design review:

     (1)   Applications for building permits or planning approvals for development in the Anza Point district filed before October 19, 2005.

     (2)   Any amendment to a project exempt from design review pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be subject to design review if the project involved would have otherwise been subject to design review under subsection (a) of this section, the project has not been completed, and the amendment would extend any structure involved in the application outside the envelope of the structure for which the approval was granted or sought in the underlying application or would change a façade. Changes to, additions of, or deletions of awnings as an amendment to a project shall not trigger design review under this subsection. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.060 Public access.
     Public access shall be maintained and developed based on the city-adopted and Bay Conservation and Development Commission-approved Public Access Guidelines for Burlingame based on the applicable water frontage as follows:

 

     (a)   On San Francisco Bay Proper. An average setback of seventy-five (75) feet of the lot as measured from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; in no case shall the area as measured from the top of bank be less than the minimum width for the Bay Trail as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; and

     (b)   On Sanchez Channel and Burlingame Lagoon. An average setback of sixty-five (65) feet as measured from the shoreline as defined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission; in no case shall the area as measured from the top of bank be less than the minimum width for the Bay Trail as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission.

     (c)   All areas improved for public access within the jurisdiction of the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall be maintained by the property owner and shall be available to the public in perpetuity as determined by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

 

25.49.080 Parking requirements.
     All uses shall provide parking in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 25.70 of this code with the following changes or additions:

     (a)   Bay Trail Parking. On sites with frontage on San Francisco Bay, Sanchez Channel, and Burlingame Channel, the Bay Conservation and Development Commission shall determine the number of on-site parking spaces to be designated for public Bay Trail access parking; these on-site parking spaces shall be designated from the required parking for the site, shall be available to the public without charge during the hours that the Bay Trail is open, and shall be posted as public access parking by the property owner as required by the Bay Conservation and Development Commission. (Ord. 1762 § 2, (2005))

Chapter 25.50 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
25.50.010 Uses existing on effective date.
     Any use of structure or land which was a lawfully existing use at the effective date of this title or amendments thereto, which does not conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located may be continued for such time and in such manner as is set forth in this chapter. (1941 Code § 1935, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984))

 

25.50.020 Restriction of extension of nonconforming use.
     No nonconforming use shall be extended within the structure where it exists, beyond the confines of the structure which it occupies or the location upon which it is situated. Parking shall be considered a use. (1941 Code § 1936, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984); Ord. 1543 § 3, (1996))

 

25.50.025 Expansion of nonconforming uses—R-1 zone.
     (a)   This section shall only be applicable to R-1 zoned parcels which contain two (2) detached nonconforming residential units. Only the primary residence, as determined by the director of community development, may be increased in footprint or in any exterior dimension if the accessory detached unit is to be retained as a residential unit. A conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 25.16 shall be required for any such increase to a primary unit. Only maintenance and repairs as defined by the Uniform Building Code may be made to any accessory dwelling unit. The floor area or footprint of such an accessory unit shall not be expanded.

     (b)   Factors for determining the primary residence shall include, but not be limited to, relative age, size and conformity with zoning requirements of the two (2) residences. The property owner may request that the planning commission review any such determination by the director of community development. (Ord. 1954 § 4, (2018))

 

25.50.030 Change of use.
     No nonconforming use shall be changed to any other nonconforming use, whether within the same class or otherwise. When changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. (1941 Code § 1937, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984); Ord. 1543 § 3, (1996))

 

25.50.040 Nonconforming use—Automatic change by nonuse.
     When any portion of building or land which has been used other than in conformity with use regulations of the district of which it is a part is not used for such nonconforming use for a continuous period of six (6) months, such nonconforming use is abandoned and shall not be reestablished in that portion. The area shall thereafter be used only in conformity with the use regulation of the district in which it is situated. Remodeling shall not constitute abandonment of a nonconforming use so long as it complies with the applicable city construction codes and is completed within six (6) months of receiving a building permit or as determined on request by the planning commission with a public hearing.

     Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the use regulations of the district, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use, even though the building may have been originally designed or constructed for the prior nonconforming use. (1941 Code § 1938, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984))

 

25.50.050 Change of use because of dilapidation.
     When any building or land which has been used other than in conformity with the district of which it is a part and the council, after due notice and hearing thereon, has found that the use has become dangerous or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare by reason of dilapidation, neglect, decay or otherwise, such use shall forthwith revert to the classification to which it formed an exception, without further hearing or action thereon. (1941 Code § 1939, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984))

 

25.50.055 Nonconforming use—Additional provisions.
     Nonconforming uses are also subject to Sections 25.70.040 (off-street parking) and 25.36.040(d) (parking in Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area) of this code, except that in the Broadway Commercial Area, additional parking shall not be required if a structure is totally destroyed by catastrophe or natural disaster so long as the uses in the new structure are the same size as existed before the loss. (Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984); Ord. 1521 § 24, (1995); Ord. 1612 § 3, (1999))

 

25.50.060 Nonconforming structures—Restoration of damage.
     (a)   A nonconforming primary single-family structure which is partially or totally destroyed by catastrophe or natural disaster may be rebuilt to its pre-existing size and dimensions; provided, that any nonconforming use in said structure may not be continued. In the event of disagreement regarding the size or dimensions of the pre-existing structure, the property owner shall have the burden of proof. If any increase in size or floor area are made to said structure as a part of reconstruction or remodel the structure shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section.

     (b)   Any other nonconforming multifamily dwelling which is involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, other catastrophic event, or in the public enemy may be reconstructed pursuant to the provisions and limitations of Government Code Section 65852.25.

     (c)   Any other nonconforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its value may be rebuilt or used thereafter only in compliance with the regulations of the district of which it is a part.

     (d)   Any other nonconforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of less than fifty (50) percent its value may be rebuilt to its original condition and the same occupancy and use resumed.

     (e)   Any nonconforming structure in the Broadway Commercial Area which is partially or totally destroyed by catastrophe or natural disaster may be rebuilt to its pre-existing size and dimensions if the same amount of parking is provided on site as existed before the loss.

     (f)    Unless rebuilding is started within a period of six (6) months and completed within twelve (12) months, or a longer period as determined on request by the planning commission, the nonconforming status of the structure shall expire; provided, multifamily dwellings shall have two (2) years after the date of damage or destruction to obtain a building permit. (1941 Code § 1940, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984); Ord. 1378 § 7, (1988); Ord. 1521 § 25, (1995); Ord. 1553 § 1, (1996))

 

25.50.070 Nonconforming structures—Repairs and alterations.
     Normal maintenance and repairs may be made to a nonconforming building or structure. Such maintenance, repairs or alterations may not extend the area of nonconformity and structural alterations may be made only when required by law to assure the safety of occupants. (1941 Code § 1941, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984))

 

25.50.080 Nonconforming structures—Additions and enlargements.
     (a)   The footprint of a nonconforming structure may be enlarged only if the entire structure is made to conform to all parking and physical dimensional standards of the district in which it is located.

     (b)   The floor area of a nonconforming structure may be increased within the structure only if the entire structure is made to conform to all parking and physical dimensional standards of the district in which it is located.

     (c)   If a structure is nonconforming because its height violates height restrictions of the district in which it is located, the envelope of the structure may be enlarged only if the envelope is made to conform to the height standards of the district in which it is located and all other district standards are met, except that the envelope of a structure that is exclusively used as a single-family dwelling, duplex, or multifamily dwelling may be increased so long as there is no further intrusion above the maximum height established for the district and all other district standards are met.

     (d)   For a structure that is used exclusively for a single-family dwelling, duplex, or multifamily dwelling, the following exceptions apply also:

     (1)   If the structure is nonconforming because it intrudes into the required setback for a second or higher story, the envelope of the structure may be increased only if there is no further intrusion into or extension within any required setback for a second or higher story.

     (2)   If the structure is nonconforming because its envelope intrudes into the declining height envelope of the district in which it is located, the envelope of the structure may be increased only if there is no further intrusion into or extension within the declining height envelope and all other district standards are met.

     (3)   If the structure is nonconforming because it exceeds the lot coverage limitations or floor area ratio limitations, or both, of the district in which it is located, the structure may be altered so long as:

     (A)  The lot coverage is not increased and all other district standards are met, if only the lot coverage is nonconforming;

     (B)   The floor area ratio is not increased and all other district standards are met, if only the floor area ratio is nonconforming; or

     (C)   Neither the floor area ratio nor the lot coverage is increased, and all other district standards are met, if both the lot coverage and floor area ratio are nonconforming.

     (e)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) and in addition to the exception in subsection (c) above, in the case of only height and at-grade setback requirements for single family dwelling, duplex, and multifamily dwelling structures, the footprint of a nonconforming, structure that is exclusively used as a single-family dwelling, duplex, or multifamily dwelling may be enlarged so long as there is no increase in or extension of any height or setback nonconformity and all other district standards are met.

     (f)    For purposes of subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f), “single family dwelling, duplex, and multifamily dwelling structures” and “single family dwelling, duplex, or multifamily dwelling” does not include accessory living quarters or any other accessory structure on the same property. (1941 Code § 1942, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 762, (1962); Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984); Ord. 1521 § 26, (1995); Ord. 1543 § 3, (1996); Ord. 1612 § 2, (1999))

 

25.50.085 Nonconforming structures—Additional provisions.
     Nonconforming structures are also subject to the provisions of Section 25.36.040(d) of this code. (Ord. 1287 § 3, (1984); Ord. 1543 § 3, (1996); Ord. 1612 § 4, (1999))

Chapter 25.51 SPECIAL PERMIT
25.51.010 Issuance—Purpose.
     (a)   A special permit may be issued as provided in this chapter for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this article upon conditions designated by the planning commission.

     (b)   The purpose of the special permit is to allow the proper neighborhood integration of uses and features that may be suitable only in specific locations in a zoning district and only if such uses or features are designed or arranged on a location or in a structure in a particular manner;

     (c)   The planning commission may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, architectural features, architectural consistency within the structure, site planning and time limits for the special use permit as it deems necessary for the protection of adjacent properties, the streetscape, the neighborhood and the public interest. The commission may require tangible guarantees or evidence that those conditions are being, or will be, complied with. (Ord. 1603 § 7, (1998))

 

25.51.020 Findings and conditions.
     The planning commission may grant a special permit in accord with this title if, from the applicant and the facts presented at the public hearing, it finds:

     (a)   The blend of mass, scale and dominant structural characteristics of the new construction or addition are consistent with the existing structure’s design and with the existing street and neighborhood;

     (b)   The variety of roof line, façade, exterior finish materials and elevations of the proposed new structure or addition are consistent with the existing structure, street and neighborhood;

     (c)   The proposed project is consistent with the residential design guidelines adopted by the city; and

     (d)   Removal of any trees located within the footprint of any new structure or addition is necessary and is consistent with the city’s reforestation requirements, and the mitigation for the removal that is proposed is appropriate.

(Ord. 1603 § 7, (1998))

Chapter 25.52 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
25.52.010 Issuance—Purpose.
     (a)   Conditional use permits may be issued as provided in this chapter for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this article upon conditions designated by the planning commission.

     (b)   The purpose of the use permit is to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which may be suitable only in specific locations in a zoning district, or only if such uses are designed or arranged on the site in a particular manner.

     (c)   The planning commission may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance, operation, site planning, traffic control and time limits for the use permit as it deems necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. The commission may require tangible guarantees or evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with. (Ord. 1378 § 8, (1988))

 

25.52.020 Findings and conditions.
     The planning commission may grant a conditional use permit in accord with this title if, from the application or the facts presented at the public hearing, it finds:

     (a)   The proposed use, at the proposed location, will not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare or convenience;

     (b)   The proposed use will be located and conducted in a manner in accord with the Burlingame general plan and the purposes of this title;

     (c)   The planning commission may impose such reasonable conditions or restrictions as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this title and to assure operation of the use in a manner compatible with the aesthetics, mass, bulk and character of existing and potential uses on adjoining properties in the general vicinity. (Ord. 1378 § 8, (1988))

Chapter 25.54 VARIANCES
25.54.020 Power to grant variances—Scope of variances—Conditions for granting.
     Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the planning commission may vary the application of the zoning regulations theretofore or hereafter established and may impose reasonable regulations as conditions to granting variances and exceptions and such requirements shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title. Performance requirements for permitted uses are not be subject to review or appeal by the planning commission. Performance requirements for conditional uses may be subject to review or appeal by the planning commission.

     Variances shall run with the land and may be for a specific time.

     Variances may be granted, as herein provided, with reference to, but not limited to, the following: restrictions as to time for the use of the property; the type or nature of the buildings; plans therefor; materials for the use thereof; size thereof, including limitations as to height and area; building line restrictions; front, side and rear yard requirements; lot coverage; parking and motor vehicle storage requirements; persons who may use buildings or premises in accordance with any variance or exception which may be granted; and provisions for the time and manner of the return of such building, or other use or condition, to the former condition of such property.

     The variance may be granted provided that the commission finds, after a full investigation and public hearing, that all the following is true:

     (a)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved that do not apply generally to property in the same district;

     (b)   The granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, and to prevent unreasonable property loss or unnecessary hardship;

     (c)   The granting of the application will not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare or convenience;

     (d)   That the use of the property will be compatible with the aesthetics, mass, bulk and character of existing and potential uses of properties in the general vicinity. (1941 Code § 1944, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 1037 § 4, (1975); Ord. 1078 § 18, (1976); Ord. 1378 § 9, (1988); Ord. 1543 § 4, (1996))

Chapter 25.55 MINOR MODIFICATIONS
25.55.010 Minor modification defined.
     For the purpose of this code “minor modification” means:

     (a)   In the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts:

     (1)   A maximum increase in residential lot coverage to forty-one (41) percent or a maximum decrease in a required side or rear setback by twenty (20) percent;

     (2)   A maximum of twenty (20) percent increase in height limit in fence and hedge requirements, except in front setback;

     (3)   A maximum of ten (10) percent reduction in any dimension of aisles, driveways or parking spaces;

     (4)   Encroachment of a structure up to one foot into required seven and one half (7-1/2) foot side yard on corner lots if encroachment does not exceed ten (10) percent of the frontage and does not affect sight lines for motor vehicles;

     (5)   Encroachment by the primary structure into the required fifteen (15) foot rear setback of a single-family home if the average rear yard setback measurement equals fifteen (15) feet and no portion of the structure extends closer than twelve (12) feet to the rear property line;

     (6)   Garage accessory structures districts of six hundred thirty (630) square feet or less with no sewer or interior water connections and which comply with Section 25.60.010;

     (7)   Detached decks covered by an open lattice sun screen which do not exceed one hundred (100) square feet, which do not have more than one side enclosed by a solid wall or fence and which comply with all other standards of Section 25.60.010;

     (8)   Extending an existing first floor wall which encroaches into the side setback no closer than three (3) feet to the property line.

     (b)   In the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts, including subareas A, B, B-1, and D of the Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area unless noted:

     (1)   A maximum of ten (10) percent reduction in any dimension of aisles, driveways or parking spaces, provided no more than ten (10) percent of the parking spaces in a project may be affected by the dimensional adjustment;

     (2)   Increase in compact parking stalls up to thirty (30) percent for a commercial or industrial building;

     (3)   Classes associated with a retail or service use where classes are held after 5.00 p.m. weekdays and after 12:00 noon on Saturday and Sunday, except in subareas A and B-1;

     (4)   Schools above the first floor which operate outside of the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except in subarea A;

     (5)   Laundry and dry cleaning establishments without processing plants or machines on site, except in subareas A and B;

     (6)   Residential uses above the first floor;

     (7)   Parking lots for public use;

     (8)   In subareas B and B-1 of the Burlingame Avenue Commercial Area, real estate or financial institution uses with a maximum of six hundred (600) gross square feet in office area which are unrelated to any other office or use in the building and with a maximum of one proprietor and one employee.

     (c)   In the APS, IB, and RR zoning districts:

     (1)   A maximum of ten (10) percent reduction in any dimension of aisles, driveways or parking spaces, provided no more than twenty (20) percent of the parking spaces in a project may be affected by the dimensional adjustment;

     (2)   Increase in compact parking stalls up to thirty (30) percent for a commercial or industrial building. (Ord. 1286 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1324 § 1, (1986); Ord. 1415 § 1, (1990); Ord. 1510 § 1, (1994); Ord. 1528 § 5, (1995); Ord. 1586 § 43, (1998); Ord. 1793 § 33, (2006))

 

25.55.020 Granting a minor modification.
     Upon application of the property owner the director of community development may grant no more than two (2) minor modifications and shall make the findings required by Section 25.54.020 for variances; a public hearing shall not be required. An application which includes more than two (2) minor modifications or which also includes a variance, conditional use permit, or special permit shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 25.16. (Ord. 1286 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1415 § 2, (1990); Ord. 1603 § 37, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 20, (2007))

 

25.55.030 Public notice for minor modification.
     Notice of approval of minor modifications shall be mailed by the director of community development to owners of property within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property. The property owners shall be informed of their right of appeal. (Ord. 1286 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1510 § 2, (1994); Ord. 1806 § 21, (2007))

 

25.55.040 Appeals of minor modification determinations.
     Appeals from the decision of the director of community development shall be made to the planning commission within seven (7) days after the public notice of the action of the director of community development is mailed. Any member of the planning commission or council may request a review of a minor modification by making such request to the director of community development within seven (7) days of the date of mailing of the public notice. Upon receipt of an appeal, or a request for review by a commissioner or council member, the director of community development shall forward the records on the matter to the planning commission at the earliest available date and cause notice of such hearing to be given as set forth in Chapter 25.16. The planning commission shall consider the matter in the same manner as an application for a variance. The decision of the director of community development shall be final seven (7) days after the mailing of the public notice of the director of community development’s action, if no appeal is filed by any person or if no council member or commissioner requests review of the decision within that time. (Ord. 1286 § 1, (1984); Ord. 1586 § 44, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 22, (2007))

 

25.55.050 Fees for minor modification.
     Filing fees for minor modifications shall be set by the city council. (Ord. 1286 § 1, (1984))

Chapter 25.56 RENTAL OR LEASE OF VACANT SCHOOL PROPERTIES
25.56.010 Use of vacant school properties.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply whenever all or part of real property owned by a public school district is to be rented, leased or otherwise used for other than public school classroom or administration purposes by that district. (Ord. 1182 § 1, (1980))

 

25.56.020 Conditional use permit required.
     All uses of real property of a school district, whether individual classrooms or entire sites, other than for public school classroom or administration purposes of the district, shall be conditional uses requiring a conditional use permit pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 25.16. (Ord. 1182 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1603 § 38, (1998))

 

25.56.030 General regulations.
     Considerations in granting, denying or conditioning such a permit shall include, among others:

     (a)   Neighborhood character within the environs of the school site;

     (b)   Proximity to major streets and public transportation;

     (c)   On-site facilities available to the proposed lessee or other organization;

     (d)   Type of activity, hours of operation and number of employees or others regularly visiting the property;

     (e)   Parking and traffic impacts on adjacent streets;

     (f)    Changes to the existing school district facilities;

     (g)   Possible continued use of the site by neighborhood children and adults;

     (h)   Such neighborhood criteria as may be developed by the school district. (Ord. 1182 § 1, (1980))

Chapter 25.57 DESIGN REVIEW
25.57.010 Design review required.
     (a)   Single-Family Homes and Duplexes. Unless the proposed project has been reviewed pursuant to this chapter, no building or construction permit shall be issued in any R-1 and R-2 Districts and for single-family homes and duplexes constructed in R-3 and R-4 Districts for the following:

     (1)   Construction of a new single-family dwelling or duplex; or

     (2)   Addition to or construction of a second story or higher; or

     (3)   Substantial construction as defined in this title; or

     (4)   A single-family dwelling or duplex addition having a plate height greater than nine (9) feet above finished floor; or

     (5)   An increase to the height of the existing plate line of a single-family dwelling or duplex; or

     (6)   Construction of a garage attached to a single-family dwelling; or

     (7)   Any roof-top mounted mechanical equipment, except solar panels or other energy efficient installations which are pre-empted from such review by state or federal law.

     (b)   Multiple-Family Residential. Unless the proposed project has been reviewed pursuant to this chapter, no building or construction permit shall be issued in any R-3 and R-4 Districts for the following:

     (1)   New construction or substantial construction as defined in this title; or

     (2)   Addition to or construction of a second story or higher; or

     (3)   Changes to more than fifty (50) percent of the front façade.

     (c)   Commercial and Mixed Use. Unless the proposed project has been reviewed pursuant to this chapter, no building or construction permit shall be issued in any commercial, industrial or mixed use district for the following:

     (1)   Construction of a new building; or

     (2)   Substantial construction as defined in this title; or

     (3)   Addition to or construction of a second story or higher; or

     (4)   Change to more than fifty (50) percent of the front façade; or

     (5)   Change to more than fifty (50) percent of any façade facing a public or private street or parking lot.

     (d)   In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, no building or construction permit shall be issued for work on a building in the BAC District (Burlingame Avenue Commercial District) that involves any change to the front façade or any façade facing a public or private street or parking lot unless the proposed change has been reviewed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1602 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1620 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1656 § 6, (2001); Ord. 1753 § 5, (2005); Ord. 1863 § 11, (2011))

 

25.57.013 Minor design review.
     (a)   Within the BAC, Burlingame Avenue Commercial District, a façade improvement may qualify for an administrative minor design review process if it meets the following criteria:

     (1)   Changes in material on the front façade that are determined by the community development director to be equal to or higher quality than the existing material to be replaced; and

     (2)   Any other minor changes that are determined by the community development director to comply with the Design Guidelines of the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan.

     (b)   Minor Design Review Process. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the community development director shall have the authority to consider and take action on applications for minor design review.

     (1)   Findings. Any decision on an application under this chapter shall be supported by written findings addressing the criteria set forth in this section. In making a determination regarding an application, the following findings shall be made:

     (A)  The changes to the façade are minor in nature, and the change in materials are equivalent to or higher quality than the material being replaced,

     (B)   The blend of mass, scale and dominant characteristics of the façade change are consistent with the existing structure’s design and with the existing façades on the block, and

     (C)   The changes to the façade are found to be compatible with the Design and Character Chapter of the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan and the Commercial Design Guidebook;

     (2)   Decisions. If the requirements are met and the findings are made, the community development director shall issue a written determination of the action and may grant or deny the minor design review application based on the request meeting the findings outlined in subsection (b)(1);

     (3)   Public Notice for Minor Design Review. Notice of approval of an application for minor design review shall be mailed to owners of property within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property. The property owners shall be informed of their right to appeal;

     (4)   Appeals of Minor Design Review Determinations. Appeals from the decision of the community development director shall be made to the planning commission within seven (7) days after the public notice of the action of the community development director is mailed. Any member of the planning commission or council may request a review of a minor design review application by making such request to the community development director within seven (7) days of the date of mailing the public notice. Upon receipt of an appeal, or a request for review by a commissioner or council member, the community development director shall schedule a hearing before the planning commission at the earliest available date and cause notice to be given as set forth in Chapter 25.16. The planning commission shall consider the matter in the same manner as an application for design review. The decision of the community development director shall be final seven (7) days after the mailing of the public notice of the community development director’s action, if no appeal is filed by any person or if no council member or commissioner requests review of the decision within that time.

     (5)   Fees for Minor Design Review. Filing fees for minor design review applications shall be set by the city council in the master fee schedule. (Ord. 1863 § 11, (2011))

 

25.57.015 Exceptions.
     The following shall be exceptions to the requirement of a design review in commercial and mixed use districts:

     (a)   Any façade with twenty-five (25) feet or less of parking lot or public or private street frontage; and

     (b)   New or replacement awnings when the façade or building is not subject to design review. (Ord. 1652 § 6, (2001); Ord. 1863 § 11, (2011))

 

25.57.020 Design review panel.
     (a)   With the approval of the planning commission, the director of community development shall appoint one or more design professionals to advise the director of community development and the planning commission on applications in residential districts made under this chapter. The panel appointees shall be persons in the business of residential design who have practiced their design profession involving residential designs in the city and who are willing to contract with the city to provide advisory services under this chapter.

     (b)   For applications in the commercial, industrial and mixed use districts, with the approval of the planning commission, the director of community development shall appoint one or more design professionals who shall be persons in the business of commercial design and who are willing to contract with the city to provide advisory services under this chapter. (Ord. 1602 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1620 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1652 § 6, (2001); Ord. 1806 § 23, (2007); Ord. 1863 § 11, (2011))

 

25.57.030 Design review process.
     (a)   Any person seeking approval of construction to be reviewed under this chapter shall submit an application for design review to the director of community development in the same form and containing the same signatures as provided in Section 25.16.040 of this title. The schematic design plans submitted with the application shall demonstrate the architectural details of the proposal, and in the case of an addition, of the existing structure and the addition.

     (b)   Upon completion of the application, the schematic design plans and the application shall be referred to the planning commission for study. The study meeting shall be noticed in accordance with the provisions for notice in this title. If at the study meeting, the planning commission determines that formal design review is not required for the application or that only minor changes are needed, the planning commission may order that the application not be subject to subsection (c) below and will proceed directly to hearing under subsection (e). Criteria for review shall be established by the community development director, based on design guidelines contained in the adopted specific plan for the area. For properties outside the boundaries of a Specific Plan, design guidelines shall be developed by the community development department.

     (c)   If the commission instead refers the application for further design review, the plans submitted shall be referred by the director of community development on a random basis to the appointee professional described above for review and comment. The appointee’s analysis shall be forwarded to the planning commission.

     (d)   No prior mailed notice of the appointee’s review is necessary. However, notice of the commission’s review of and hearing on each application under this chapter shall be given as provided in Section 25.16.050.

     (e)   A design review application in R-1 and R-2 Districts shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

 

     (1)   Compatibility of the architectural style with that of the existing character of the neighborhood;

     (2)   Respect for the parking and garage patterns in the neighborhood;

     (3)   Architectural style and consistency and mass and bulk of structures, including accessory structures;

     (4)   Interface of the proposed structure with the structures on adjacent properties;

     (5)   Landscaping and its proportion to mass and bulk of structural components; and

     (6)   In the case of an addition, compatibility with the architectural style and character of the existing structure as remodeled.

     (f)    A design review application in multifamily residential (R-3 and R-4) Districts shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

     (1)   Compatibility with the existing character of the neighborhood;

     (2)   Respect the mass and fine scale of adjacent buildings even when using differing architectural styles;

     (3)   Maintain the tradition of architectural diversity, but with human scale regardless of the architectural style used; and

     (4)   Incorporate quality materials and thoughtful design which will last into the future.

     (g)   A design review application in commercial, industrial and mixed use districts shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the following considerations:

     (1)   Support of the pattern of diverse architectural styles that characterize the city’s commercial, industrial and mixed use areas; and

     (2)   Respect and promotion of pedestrian activity by placement of buildings to maximize commercial use of the street frontage, off-street public spaces, and by locating parking so that it does not dominate street frontages; and

     (3)   On visually prominent and gateway sites, whether the design fits the site and is compatible with the surrounding development; and

     (4)   Compatibility of the architecture with the mass, bulk, scale, and existing materials of existing development and compatibility with transitions where changes in land use occur nearby; and

     (5)   Architectural design consistency by using a single architectural style on the site that is consistent among primary elements of the structure, restores or retains existing or significant original architectural features, and is compatible in mass and bulk with other structures in the immediate area; and

     (6)   Provision of site features such as fencing, landscaping, and pedestrian circulation that enriches the existing opportunities of the commercial neighborhood.

     (h)   The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the applicant’s design and project comply with the design criteria set forth in subsection (e) or (f) above, as applicable. The commission may deny, deny without prejudice, approve, or approve with conditions any application under this chapter.

     (i)    Decisions of the planning commission under this chapter shall be subject to appeal to the city council and the effectiveness as provided in Sections 25.16.070 through 25.16.130. (Ord. 1602 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1620 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1626 § 2, (2000); Ord. 1652 § 6, (2001); Ord. 1806 §§ 24, 25, (2007); Ord. 1842 § 2, (2009); Ord. 1863 § 11, (2011))

 

25.57.040 Exemptions.
     The following applications are exempt from the chapter:

     (a)   Applications for building permits or planning approvals for developments in R-1 Districts filed before March 17, 1998 and certain amendments to those applications or permits as specifically provided in Ordinance No. 1602.

     (b)   Applications for building permits or planning approvals for developments in R-1 Districts filed before 5:00 p.m. on November 18, 1999, and certain amendments to those applications or permits as specifically provided in Ordinance No. 1620. (Ord. 1602 § 2, (1998); Ord. 1620 § 2, (1999); Ord. 1652 § 6, (2001); Ord. 1863 § 11, (2011))

Chapter 25.58 GENERAL USE PROVISIONS
25.58.010 Storage of certain materials prohibited in R districts.
     It is unlawful to utilize any yard, lot or portion thereof, in an R district for the storing of lumber, lime, cement, plaster, building materials, machinery or other equipment used in or for business. (1941 Code § 1926 (C), Ord. 749, (1962))

 

25.58.020 Gasoline storage.
     Facilities for the storage and dispensing of Class I and Class II flammable liquids (gasoline and diesel fuel) solely for private use is a permitted use in industrial zones and requires a conditional use permit in commercial and residential zones. Such facilities shall meet all requirements of this code concerning construction, installation and location. (Ord. 1152 § 1, (1979))

 

25.58.030 Required business access.
     Every business or every building containing one or more businesses shall have its primary entrance upon a city street at least twenty-five (25) feet in width. Access to such a city street shall not be across or through an alley, lane or street less than twenty-five (25) feet in width, or a public parking lot. Variance from the provisions of this section may be granted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 25.16. (Ord. 1237 § 1, (1982); Ord. 1501 § 1, (1994))

 

25.58.040 Required public safety communications equipment and wireless access point agreement.
     As a condition of approval of any structure over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the planning commission shall require a location to be agreed upon by the city and the property owner to locate public safety communications equipment and a wireless access point for city communications on the structure proposed. The property owner shall permit this equipment to be installed if the city determines that the structure interferes with city communications in the city. The applicant shall provide an electrical supply source for use by the equipment. The applicant shall permit authorized representatives of the city to gain access to the equipment location for purposes of installation, maintenance, adjustment, and repair upon reasonable notice to the property owner or owner’s successor in interest. This access and location agreement shall be recorded in terms that convey the intent and meaning of this condition. (Ord. 1764 § 3, (2005))

 

25.58.050 Mechanical equipment.
     (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, mechanical equipment shall include machines and devices, including HVAC units, fans, vents, generators and elevator motors, integral to the regular operation of climate control, electrical and similar building systems. Mechanical equipment shall not include water heaters (both “tank” and “tankless” style) and enclosures for such units.

     (b)   The following regulations apply to newly-installed mechanical equipment for new and existing residential dwellings and buildings:

     (1)   Mechanical equipment may only be located in the rear seventy-five (75) percent of the lot;

     (2)   Mechanical equipment shall not be located within the front yard between the building and the property line;

     (3)   Mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from any portion of adjacent streets by fences or hedges;

     (4)   Mechanical equipment shall not be mounted on sloping roofs. Mechanical equipment may be mounted on flat roofs with prior approval by the Planning Division provided the equipment is concealed with solid screening that is integrated into the overall architectural design;

     (5)   Equipment shall not exceed a Maximum Outdoor Noise Level (dBA) of sixty (60) dBA Daytime (7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.) or fifty (50) dBA Nighttime (10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.) as measured from the property line.

     (c)   An applicant subject to the regulations described in this section may apply to the Community Development Director for modification of those requirements, based on exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved that do not apply generally to property in the same district. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the Community Development Director upon submittal of the building permit application. An applicant who was denied an exemption from these standards by the Director may appeal that determination by submitting a letter to the Community Development Department within ten (10) days of the Director’s decision. That letter must set forth the applicant’s request for review by the Planning Commission as well as any arguments or grounds on which the applicant will rely before the Commission. Any arguments or grounds not set forth in the appeal notice will not be considered by the Commission. The matter will be set for review by the Commission, and its determination will be final. (Ord. 1942 § 1, (2017))

 

25.58.060 Regulations for cannabis (marijuana).
     (a)   Purpose. This section establishes regulations governing cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, labeling, or sale of cannabis (commonly known as “marijuana”) and cannabis products, whether for medicinal or adult use. The City finds it necessary to establish such regulations in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare to regulate all cannabis-related activities.

     (b)   Applicability. This section shall apply to the establishment of all land uses related to cannabis and cannabis products, whether for medicinal or adult use.

     (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

     (1)   “Cannabis” (also known as “marijuana”) means any or all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin or separated resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. “Cannabis” shall not include industrial hemp, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5.

     (2)   “Cannabis product” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

     (3)   “Commercial cannabis activity” means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, labeling, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products for commercial purposes, whether for profit or nonprofit, and for which a state license is required under Business and Professions Code Section 26000 et seq. Commercial cannabis activity shall not include delivery of cannabis and cannabis products as “delivery” is defined in state law.

     (4)   “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

     (5)   “Fully enclosed and secure structure” means a code-compliant space within a building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, and which is accessible only through one or more locking doors.

     (6)   “Indoor” means within a fully enclosed and secure structure as defined herein.

     (7)   “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling.

     (d)   Commercial Cannabis Activity Prohibited. Commercial cannabis activity is a prohibited use in all zoning districts.

     (e)   Cultivation of Cannabis Prohibited.

     (1)   Cannabis cultivation is a prohibited use in all zoning districts except as provided in paragraph 2 of this subsection.

     (2)   Notwithstanding the general prohibition in paragraph 1 of this subsection, indoor cultivation of no more than six (6) living cannabis plants for personal use is permitted in all zoning districts. No more than six (6) living cannabis plants may be possessed, planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a private residence at any one time, including within an accessory structure to a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure. The plants shall not be visible from a public place. Persons engaging in indoor cultivation must comply with state and local laws, including all applicable building, electrical, fire, and water codes and regulations.

     (f)    Violation—Penalty.

     (1)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to the enforcement remedies set forth in the Burlingame Municipal Code.

     (2)   Each violation of this section and each day of violation of this section shall be considered as separate and distinct violations thereof and the imposition of a penalty shall be as set forth in paragraph 1 of this subsection for each and every separate violation and each and every day of violation.

     (g)   Public Nuisance. Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the City pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Burlingame Municipal Code. (Ord. 1955 § 1, (2018))

Chapter 25.59 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
25.59.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs) in compliance with California Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22. This chapter is intended to implement the Housing Element of the Burlingame General Plan by providing for additional housing opportunities. This will be accomplished by increasing the number of units available within existing neighborhoods while maintaining the primarily single family and multifamily residential character of the area, and establishing standards for the development and occupancy of accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units to ensure that they are compatible with neighboring uses and structures, adequately equipped with public utility services, safe for human occupancy, and do not create unreasonable traffic and safety impacts.

     In cases of conflict between this chapter and any other provision of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. To the extent that any provision of this chapter is in conflict with State law, the applicable provision of State law shall control, but all other provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.

     An accessory residential dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit which conforms to the requirements of this chapter shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located and shall be deemed to be a residential use which is consistent with the existing General Plan and zoning designations for the lot. (Ord. 1865 § 8, (2011); Ord. 1939 § 2, (2017); Ord. 1954 § 1, (2018); Ord. 1978 § 1, (2020))

 

25.59.015 Definitions.
     The following terms shall have the following meanings for this chapter only and shall supersede the terms defined by Chapter 25.08 (Definitions):

     (a)   “Accessory dwelling unit” or “ADU” means an attached or detached residential dwelling unit ancillary to a primary dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary residence. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single family or multifamily dwelling is or will be situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes an efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code, and a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code. This chapter recognizes three (3) types of accessory dwelling units as defined below. Where a proposed accessory dwelling unit does not clearly fall into one of the defined types, the Community Development Director shall make a determination pursuant to Code Section 25.16.150.

     (1)   “Attached accessory dwelling unit” means an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed as a physical expansion (i.e., addition) of an existing primary dwelling unit, including construction of a new basement underneath a primary dwelling unit to accommodate an accessory dwelling unit.

     (2)   “Detached accessory dwelling unit” means an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed as a separate structure from the primary dwelling unit; or contained within the existing space of an accessory structure (as defined herein), including construction of a new basement underneath an accessory structure to accommodate an accessory dwelling unit.

     (3)   “Interior accessory dwelling unit” means an accessory dwelling unit that is contained within the existing space of a primary dwelling unit, including within its living area, basement, or attached garage; constructed as part of a proposed primary dwelling unit; or created from non-livable space of a multifamily dwelling.

     (b)   “Accessory structure” means a structure that is accessory and incidental to a dwelling located on the same lot.

     (c)   “Efficiency kitchen” means a kitchen that includes each of the following:

     (1)   A sink and cooking facility with appliances (e.g., microwave, toaster oven or hot plate).

     (2)   A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.

     (d)   “Junior accessory dwelling unit” or “JADU” means a residential dwelling unit that:

     (1)   Is no more than five hundred (500) square feet in size;

     (2)   Is contained entirely within an existing or proposed single family dwelling;

     (3)   Includes its own separate sanitation facilities (bathroom containing a sink, toilet, and shower or tub), or may share sanitation facilities with the existing or proposed single family structure; and

     (4)   Includes an efficiency kitchen, as defined in subsection (c) above.

     (e)   “Living area” means the interior habitable floor area of a dwelling unit, including basements and attics, but does not include a garage or any accessory structure.

     (f)    “Nonconforming zoning conditions” means a physical improvement on a property that does not conform with current zoning standards.

     (g)   “Passageway” means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to the entrance of an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit.

     (h)   “Public transit” means a location, including, but not limited to, a bus stop or train station, where the public may access buses, trains, subways, and other forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes, and are available to the public.

     (i)    “Tandem parking” means a parking configuration where two (2) or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another. (Ord. 1978 § 2, (2020))

 

25.59.020 Applications and processing.
     (a)   Applications for ADU and JADU permits shall be in writing and filed with the Community Development Department on a form approved by the Community Development Director.

     (b)   As established by council resolution, a fee will be charged for an application for an ADU or JADU permit under this chapter. All ADUs and JADUs are also subject to building permit fees.

     (c)   Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, the Community Development Department staff shall ministerially process for approval any application for an ADU or JADU permit pursuant to this chapter. Incomplete applications will be returned with an explanation of what additional information is required. Upon finding that the ADU or JADU meets the requirements of this chapter, the application shall be approved ministerially without discretionary review or public hearing and the applicant may proceed to acquire a building permit. All ADUs and JADUs are categorically exempt from CEQA pursuant to Sections 15301 and 15303 of the CEQA guidelines.

     (d)   If an application for an attached ADU or JADU is submitted with an application for an addition to an existing single family dwelling or construction of a new single family dwelling that is subject to design review or other discretionary permit for the same parcel, the application for the ADU or JADU permit shall not be acted upon until the application for design review or other discretionary permit is approved. Following the approval for design review or other discretionary permit for the primary dwelling unit, the ADU or JADU application will be ministerially processed within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application and approved if it meets the requirements of this chapter.

     (e)   If the applicant requests a delay, the sixty (60) day time period for approval shall be tolled for the period of the delay. (Ord. 1865 § 8, (2011); Ord. 1939 § 2, (2017); Ord. 1954 § 1, (2018); Ord. 1978 § 3, (2020))

 

25.59.030 Appeal.
     The applicant that requested the accessory dwelling unit permit may appeal the Community Development Director’s denial of the request. The appeal shall be submitted to the Community Development Director in writing within ten (10) days after the date of the Community Development Director’s decision. The appeal shall be heard by the Planning Commission in a public hearing pursuant to the procedures established for discretionary actions in Chapter 25.16. (Ord. 1865 § 8, (2011); Ord. 1939 § 2, (2017); Ord. 1954 § 1, (2018))

 

25.59.040 Revocation of permit.
     (a)   Grounds. An ADU or JADU permit granted pursuant to this chapter may be revoked on any one or more of the following grounds:

     (1)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter; or

     (2)   The ADU or JADU is no longer used for residential purposes; or

     (3)   The parking required by this chapter is no longer provided.

     (b)   Notice. Written notice to revoke an ADU or JADU permit shall be served on the property owner, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, either personally or by certified mail, and shall state:

     (1)   The reasons for the proposed revocation.

     (2)   That the proposed action will be taken by the Community Development Director unless a written request for a hearing before the Planning Commission is requested within fifteen (15) days after the date of said notice. If no response is received, the Community Development Director will revoke the ADU or JADU permit as set forth in the notice.

     (c)   Hearing. If a hearing is requested, at least ten (10) days’ notice thereof shall be given to the requested party. At the hearing, the property owner may call witnesses and present evidence in his or her behalf. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission will determine whether or not the permit will be revoked. Such determination may be appealed to the City Council in the same manner as for appeals taken on applications for the granting of conditional use permits or variances. (Ord. 1865 § 8, (2011); Ord. 1939 § 2, (2017); Ord. 1954 § 1, (2018); Ord. 1978 § 4, (2020))

 

25.59.055 Minimum standards for eligibility.
     (a)   No minimum lot area is required for creation of an ADU or JADU.

     (b)   An ADU or JADU shall only be allowed on a parcel which has been legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and Title 26 (Subdivisions), and where the ADU or JADU is developed with an existing or proposed single family dwelling, except for ADUs constructed on multifamily residential properties pursuant to Section 25.59.090.

     (c)   ADUs may only be permitted in districts zoned to allow single family dwelling or multifamily dwelling residential uses as a permitted use. ADUs are also permitted on any parcel that has a current and valid nonconforming single family or multifamily residential use, so long as the ADU complies with all other portions of this chapter.

     (d)   JADUs may only be permitted in districts zoned to allow a single family dwelling residential use as a permitted use. JADUs are also permitted on any parcel that has a current and valid nonconforming single family residential use, so long as the JADU complies with all other portions (Ord. 1978 § 6, (2020))

 

25.59.060 General requirements and restrictions.
     The following requirements and restrictions apply to all existing and new ADUs and JADUs, as applicable:

     (a)   ADUs and JADUs shall comply with all applicable provisions of this title and all applicable building, health and fire codes. However, ADUs and JADUs shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers unless required for the primary single family dwelling or multifamily dwelling structure.

     (b)   All development standards contained in the underlying zoning district, including Chapter 25.60, shall apply to ADUs and JADUs unless they are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, in which case the development standards of this chapter shall apply.

     (c)   Accessory Dwelling Units.

     (1)   ADUs may be rented separately from the single family dwelling or multifamily dwelling structure, but may not be sold or otherwise conveyed separately from the other dwellings on the lot, except as provided for by Government Code Section 65852.26.

     (2)   ADUs may not be rented for fewer than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days.

     (3     ADUs are not subject to any owner-occupancy requirement.

     (d)   Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.

     (1)   JADUs may be rented separately from the single family dwelling, but may not be sold or otherwise conveyed separately from the single family dwelling on the lot.

     (2)   JADUs may not be rented for fewer than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days.

     (3)   JADUs are subject to an owner-occupancy requirement. A person with legal or equitable title to the property shall reside on the property in either the primary dwelling or JADU as that person’s legal domicile and permanent residence. However, the owner-occupancy requirement of this paragraph does not apply if the property is entirely owned by another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization. Prior to issuance of a building permit for a JADU, the owner shall record a covenant in a form prescribed by the city attorney, which shall run with the land and provide for the following:

     (i)    A prohibition on the sale of the JADU separate from the sale of the single family dwelling;

     (ii)   A restriction on the size and attributes of the JADU consistent with this section;

     (iii)  A prohibition against renting the property for fewer than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days; and

     (iv)  A requirement that either the primary residence or the JADU unit be the owner’s bona fide principal residence, unless the owner is a governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.

     (e)   If an ADU or JADU which was created within a single family dwelling, accessory structure or multifamily dwelling structure is required to be removed or is voluntarily removed, the kitchen facility shall be removed and the space shall be converted back to its original use. If an ADU was newly constructed: (1) the space or structure shall be entirely removed; or (2) the kitchen facility shall be removed and the space shall be converted to a permitted use allowed within the underlying zoning district; or (3) the kitchen facility shall be removed and the applicant shall obtain the appropriate land use permit for the proposed use within the space.

     (f)    Certificates of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for an ADU shall not be issued before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the primary dwelling unit.

     (g)   Deed Restriction. Prior to issuance of a building permit for an ADU or JADU, a deed restriction must be recorded against the title of the property in the County Recorder’s office and a copy filed with the Community Development Department. The deed restriction must run with the land and bind all future owners. The form of the deed restriction will be provided by the City and must provide that:

     (1)   The ADU or JADU shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling.

     (2)   The ADU or JADU is restricted to the approved size and to other attributes allowed by this section.

     (3)   The deed restriction runs with the land and may be enforced against future property owners.

     (4)   The deed restriction may be removed if the owner eliminates the ADU or JADU, as evidenced by, for example, removal of the kitchen facilities. To remove the deed restriction, an owner may make a written request of the City, providing evidence that the ADU or JADU has in fact been eliminated. The City may then determine whether the evidence supports the claim that the ADU or JADU has been eliminated. Appeal may be taken from the City’s determination consistent with other provisions of this Code. If the ADU or JADU is not entirely physically removed, but is only eliminated by virtue of having a necessary component of an ADU or JADU removed, the remaining structure and improvements must otherwise comply with applicable provisions of this Code.

     (5)   The deed restriction is enforceable by the Community Development Director or his or her designee for the benefit of the City. Failure of this property owner to comply with the deed restriction may result in legal action against the property owner, and the City is authorized to obtain any remedy available to it at law or equity, including, but not limited to, obtaining an injunction enjoining the use of the ADU or JADU in violation of the recorded restrictions or abatement of the illegal unit. (Ord. 1978 § 7, (2020))

 

25.59.070 Development standards for accessory dwelling units.
     An ADU shall be constructed only in accordance with the following development standards:

     (a)   Location and Number. Only one ADU shall be permitted per lot which contains an existing or proposed single family dwelling. ADUs may be located in any of the following:

     (1)   Within the walls of an existing or proposed single family dwelling;

     (2)   Attached to an existing or proposed single family dwelling;

     (3)   Within an existing accessory structure; or

     (4)   Detached from the single family dwelling, but located on the same lot as the existing or proposed single family dwelling.

     (b)   Minimum Size. No ADU shall be smaller than the size required to allow an efficiency unit pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1.

     (c)   Maximum Size. The maximum floor area for an ADU shall be eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or one thousand (1,000) square feet for two (2) or more bedrooms.

     (1)   Notwithstanding subsection (c), if there is an existing primary dwelling, an attached ADU shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the living area of the existing primary dwelling.

     (2)   If the ADU is created by converting space within an existing single family dwelling or accessory structure:

     (i)    An expansion limited to one hundred fifty (150) square feet beyond the physical dimensions of the existing single family dwelling or accessory structure is permitted strictly to accommodate ingress and egress to the ADU; this additional square footage shall be exempt from lot coverage and floor area ratio requirements. The side and rear setback requirements for the single family dwelling may be reduced to no less than four (4) feet to accommodate an exterior stair and landing that provide required access to the ADU if it is located on the second story; and

     (ii)   The ADU must have side and rear setbacks sufficient for fire and safety, as dictated by applicable building and fire codes.

     (d)   Floor Area Ratio and Lot Coverage. An ADU measuring no more than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet in size shall be exempt from floor area ratio and lot coverage requirements. An ADU greater than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet shall comply with the floor area ratio and lot coverage regulations as specified by the applicable zoning district.

     (e)   Setbacks. An ADU (attached or detached) shall conform to the following setback standards:

     (1)   A setback of four (4) feet is required from the side and rear property lines; however, no setbacks shall be required under the following circumstances:

     (i)    Existing livable space or an existing accessory structure that is converted, in whole or in part, to an ADU;

     (ii)   The ADU is constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing structure that is demolished solely for the purpose of constructing the ADU; or

     (iii)  Construction of a new detached ADU entirely located within the rear thirty (30) percent of the lot. If any portion of the detached ADU is located forward of the rear thirty (30) percent of the lot, it shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district in which it is located; for detached ADUs that are no greater than eight hundred (800) square feet and no taller than sixteen (16) feet, no more than four (4) foot side or rear setbacks shall be required.

     (2)   There shall be a minimum four (4) foot separation between a detached ADU and any other structure on the lot, as measured between the exterior walls of the structures.

     (f)    Maximum Height and Stories.

     (1)   Detached ADUs.

     (i)    All detached ADUs shall be limited to one story in height and shall not be constructed above detached garages or detached accessory structures except for accessory dwelling units created entirely within an existing legal two-story detached accessory structure.

     (ii)   The maximum allowed building height for a detached ADU is sixteen (16) feet, as measured from average adjacent grade to the top of the highest roof ridge, and shall comply with the maximum allowed plate height requirements in subsection (iii).

     (iii)  The maximum allowed plate height is nine (9) feet, as measured from average adjacent grade to the top of plate. For detached ADUs containing a single slope, one side of the structure shall be allowed to have a plate height greater than nine (9) feet; the plate height of walls parallel with side and rear property lines shall not exceed nine (9) feet in height. For ADUs located within a designated flood zone, the maximum plate height shall be measured from finished floor.

     (2)   Attached ADUs. Attached ADUs may be constructed on the first or second floor of an existing or proposed single family dwelling and shall be subject to the height requirements of the applicable zoning district in which it is located.

     (g)   Entrance. An ADU shall have a separate exterior entrance from the main entrance to the existing or proposed single family dwelling. For an ADU located entirely on a second story, this shall require a separate interior or exterior stairway. The entrance to the ADU shall not face the same public street as the entrance to the single family dwelling, unless it is the only location determined to comply with applicable building and fire codes. A passageway from the ADU to a public street may be created, but is not required.

     (h)   Windows and Skylights. Windows and glazed openings on walls parallel with property lines shall be located at least three (3) feet from property line. Skylights shall be allowed on sloping roofs facing interior yards, on sloping roofs facing side yards as long as the skylight is located at least ten (10) feet from property line, and on flat roofs. The placement of windows and skylights in ADUs shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes.

     (i)    Balconies/Decks. Balconies, second story decks, and rooftop terraces are prohibited for all ADUs. A green roof shall not be considered a balcony, second story deck or rooftop terrace.

     (j)    Interior Connection. Attached and interior ADUs may, but are not be required, to contain an interior doorway connection between the single family dwelling and ADU.

     (k)   Permanent Foundations.

     (1)   All ADUs shall be permanently attached to a permanent foundation.

     (2)   A recreational vehicle, commercial coach, trailer, motor home, camper, camping trailer, boat or similar vehicle shall not be used as an ADU.

     (l)    Existing ADUs built before January 1, 1954. For existing ADUs built before January 1, 1954 the following additional criteria shall be met:

     (1)   The ADU shall conform to the requirements of the California Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, and the Uniform Housing Code as adopted by Section 17922;

     (2)   Improvements may be made to the ADU so long as it conforms to the requirements of this chapter and corrects any violation of Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3 and the Uniform Housing Code. (Ord. 1978 § 8, (2020))

 

25.59.080 Development standards for junior accessory dwelling units.
     A junior accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed only in accordance with the following development standards:

     (a)   Location. The JADU may only be located within the walls of an existing or proposed single family dwelling. The JADU must have side and rear setbacks sufficient for fire and safety, as dictated by applicable building and fire codes.

     (b)   Number. Only one JADU shall be permitted per lot which contains an existing or proposed single family dwelling. A JADU may be allowed in conjunction with one detached ADU on the same lot as long as the ADU does not exceed eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.

     (c)   Minimum Size. No JADU shall be smaller than the size required to allow an efficiency unit pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1.

     (d)   Maximum Size. The JADU shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in area. An expansion limited to one hundred fifty (150) square foot beyond the physical dimensions of the existing single family dwelling is permitted strictly to accommodate ingress and egress to the JADU; this additional square footage shall be exempt from lot coverage and floor area ratio requirements. The side and rear setback requirements for the single family dwelling may be reduced to no less than four (4) feet to accommodate an exterior stair and landing that provide required access to the JADU if it is located on the second story.

     (e)   Kitchen. The JADU shall contain an efficiency kitchen satisfying the following the criteria:

     (1)   Contains a sink and cooking facility with appliances (e.g., microwave, toaster oven or hot plate).

     (2)   Contains a food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the JADU.

     (f)    Bathroom. The JADU may have a separate bathroom, or may share a bathroom with the single family dwelling. The bathroom shall contain a sink, toilet, and shower or tub. If the bathroom is shared, there must be a connecting door between the JADU and the single family dwelling.

     (g)   Entrance. The JADU shall have a separate exterior entrance from the main entrance to the existing or proposed single family dwelling. The entrance to the JADU shall not face the same public street as the entrance to the primary dwelling, unless it is the only location determined to comply with applicable building and fire codes. A passageway from the ADU to a public street may be created, but shall not be required.

     (h)   A JADU is not considered a separate or new dwelling for purposes of fire safety or life safety. (Ord. 1978 § 9, (2020))

 

25.59.090 Accessory dwelling units on multifamily residential properties.
     The following requirements and restrictions apply to creation of ADUs on multifamily residential properties:

     (a)   For the purposes of this section, the term “multifamily dwelling structure” means two (2) or more residential units contained within one or more buildings on the same lot.

     (b)   Conversion. A minimum of one and up to twenty-five (25) percent of the existing dwelling units within a multifamily dwelling structure may be created within existing non-livable space(s), including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, provided that the dwellings comply with building and fire codes. An ADU shall not be created within any portion of the habitable area of an existing dwelling unit in a multifamily structure. When calculating the number of allowed ADUs based on the percentage of existing multifamily units, round down to the nearest integer.

     (c)   New Detached ADUs. In addition to ADUs allowed by subsection (b), up to two (2) new detached accessory dwelling units may be allowed provided that the height does not exceed sixteen (16) feet and that four (4) foot side and rear yard setbacks are maintained. These ADUs shall be subject to the standards, requirements, and restrictions of this chapter.

     (1)   There shall be a minimum four (4) foot separation between a detached ADU and any other structure on the lot, as measured between the exterior walls of the structures. (Ord. 1978 § 10, (2020))

 

25.59.100 Design.
     The design of accessory dwelling units shall conform with the following standards:

     (a)   Attached and Detached Accessory Dwelling Units. The design of attached and detached accessory dwelling units shall be compatible or complementary in appearance with the primary structure located on the property, including coordination of exterior building materials and other architectural elements.

     (b)   Interior Accessory Dwelling Units. Interior accessory dwelling units contained within the existing space of an attached garage shall include removal of garage doors which shall be replaced with architectural features the same as those of the primary dwelling unit, including the same wall cladding, window type and trim that remove any appearance that the structure was originally a garage. This wall shall contain at least one window that is consistent in size and type with other existing windows on the same building façade. (Ord. 1978 § 11, (2020))

 

25.59.110 Parking.
     (a)   Unless otherwise provided in this section, one off-street parking space shall be provided for the ADU in addition to the off-street parking spaces required for the single family dwelling or multifamily residential structure. All parking shall be provided on a hard, all-weather surface.

     (b)   The parking space may be provided in setback areas or as tandem parking, unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions.

     (c)   No parking shall be required for an ADU in any of the following instances:

     (1)   The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance of public transit. For the purposes of this section only, public transit is defined as a location, including, but not limited to, a bus stop or train station, where the public may access buses, trains, subways, and other forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes, and are available to the public.

     (2)   The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

     (3)   The ADU is part of the proposed or existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure.

     (4)   When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU.

     (5)   When there is an established car share vehicle stop located within one block of the ADU.

     (d)   No parking shall be required for a JADU and any parking displaced by its construction, including conversion of all or part of an existing attached garage, are not required to be replaced.

     (e)   When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an ADU or converted to an ADU, those off-street parking spaces are not required to be replaced. (Ord. 1978 § 12, (2020))

 

25.59.120 Utilities and impact fees.
     (a)   No ADU or JADU shall be permitted if it is determined that there is not adequate water or sewer service to the property, as determined by the City.

     (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c), an ADU may be required to have a new or separate utility connection, including a separate sewer lateral, between the ADU and the utility. A connection fee or capacity charge may be charged that is proportionate to the size in square feet of the ADU or its drainage fixture unit (DFU) values. Separate electric and water meters shall be required for the ADU.

     (c)   The following ADUs shall be exempt from any requirement to install a new or separate utility connection and to pay any associated connection or capacity fees or charges:

     (1)   Junior accessory dwelling units.

     (2)   Standard ADUs converted from interior space, unless the unit is constructed within a new single family home.

     (d)   Impact Fees.

     (1)   No impact fees may be imposed on ADUs that are less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in size. For purposes of this section, “impact fees” include the fees specified in Sections 66000 and 66477 of the Government Code, but do not include utility connection fees or capacity charges.

     (2)   For ADUs that have a floor area of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or more, impact fees shall be charged proportionately in relation to the square footage of the primary dwelling unit. (Ord. 1978 § 13, (2020))

 

25.59.130 Delay of enforcement of building standards.
     (a)   Prior to January 1, 2030, the owner of an ADU that was built prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, may submit a written request to the Chief Building Official requesting that correction of any violation of building standards be delayed for five (5) years. For purposes of this section, “building standards” refers to those standards enforced by local agencies under the authority of Section 17960 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     (b)   The Chief Building Official will grant the application if the Chief Building Official determines that enforcement of the building standard is not necessary to protect health and safety. In making this determination, the Chief Building Official will consult with the Fire Marshal.

     (c)   No applications pursuant to this section shall be approved on or after January 1, 2030. However, any delay that was approved by the City before January 1, 2030, shall be valid for the full term of the delay that was approved at the time of the approval of the application.

     (d)   Until January 1, 2030, any notice to correct a violation of building standard that is issued to the owner of an ADU built prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall include a statement that the owner has a right to request a delay in enforcement of the building standard for an ADU pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1978 § 14, (2020))

Chapter 25.60 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS
25.60.010 Conditional use permit requirements.
     Accessory structures in the R-1 or R-2 Districts shall be a conditional use requiring a conditional use permit if any of the following will exist:

     (a)   Two (2) or more accessory structures, each having over one hundred twenty (120) square feet gross floor area, will exist on a single lot, except that there may be two (2) accessory structures if one is an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit;

     (b)   Any single accessory structure will exceed six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area; except that an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit may be up to eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or one thousand (1,000) square feet for two (2) or more bedrooms;

     (c)   All accessory structures on a single lot will exceed a total of eight hundred (800) square feet gross floor area; except that an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit may be up to eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or one thousand (1,000) square feet for two (2) or more bedrooms;

     (d)   An accessory structure will occupy any portion of the lot in front of the main building; provided, where a dwelling has been erected on the rear sixty (60) percent of the lot prior to January 15, 1954, a garage may be erected in front of the main building, but not in any portion of the front setback; an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit may be located in front of the main building;

     (e)   An accessory structure will be erected closer than four (4) feet to any other structure on the same lot, as measured between the exterior walls of the structures;

     (f)    Accessory structures will cover more than fifty (50) percent of the rear thirty (30) percent of a lot; an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit shall not be included in this calculation;

     (g)   The plate line of the accessory structure will be more than nine (9) feet above grade at the closest point between the plate line and adjacent grade; except that an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit with a shed (single slope) roof which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit shall be allowed to have a plate height greater than nine (9) feet on one side of the structure; the plate height of walls parallel with side and rear property lines shall not exceed nine (9) feet in height;

     (h)   The roof height of the accessory structure will exceed ten (10) feet above grade, except the height may be increased one foot for each foot of separation from an adjacent property line, up to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, provided:

     (1)   The roof height of an accessory structure may have a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet above grade when the roof is pitched from ridge to plate on at least two (2) sides, and the ridge is no closer than five (5) feet to a side property line, and the rear plate line does not exceed nine (9) feet above the natural grade; except that an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit may be up to sixteen (16) feet above grade, and

     (2)   No portion of the space within any accessory structure between the top of plate and the lowest portion of the roof structure including any dormer shall exceed seven (7) feet in height; this subsection shall not apply to an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit;

     (i)    Windows and glazed openings of the accessory structure on walls parallel with property lines that are located within three (3) feet of the property line; skylights on sloping roofs facing side yards located within ten (10) feet of property line or skylights on sloping roofs facing the rear property line;

     (j)    Water or sewer connections to the accessory structure will exceed building code minimums or the accessory structure will contain any shower, bath or toilet, except for an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit;

     (k)   The accessory structure will enclose mechanical equipment, excluding air conditioning equipment, which is designed to operate on a regular or continuous basis, which may be objectionable because of loudness, hours of operation, odor or other reason, and which is to be located less than twenty (20) feet from any structure for habitation, or less than ten (10) feet from any property line; provided such shall be allowed without a special permit if the building official approves the structure as adequately sound insulated;

     (l)    Storage of household goods, tools or equipment in the accessory structure will exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the main dwelling structure;

     (m)  Any portion of the accessory structure will be used for accessory living quarters, recreation purposes or for use in a home occupation; except for an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59 and obtains an accessory dwelling unit permit does not require a conditional use permit;

     (n)   The accessory structure will be a greenhouse, trellis, lanai, patio shelter or similar structure exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet of gross floor area. (Ord. 1954 § 5, (2018); Ord. 1978 § 15, (2020))

Chapter 25.61 ADDITIONS TO OR MODIFICATIONS OF RESIDENCES IN HILLSIDE AREAS
25.61.010 Affected areas.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas in the city designated on the map attached to Ordinance 1448, on file in the office of the city clerk, and to any parcels contiguous to such areas which are annexed to the city after January 1, 1992. (Ord. 1388 § 2, (1989); Ord. 1448 § 1, (1992))

 

25.61.020 Hillside area construction permits.
     No new structure or any addition to all or a portion of an existing structure shall be constructed within the affected area without a hillside area construction permit. (Ord. 1388 § 2, (1989); Ord. 1447 § 2, (1991); Ord. 1793 § 35, (2006))

 

25.61.030 Procedures when variance, conditional use permit, or special permit required.
     If such construction requires a variance, conditional use permit, or special permit under any other provision of this code, the hillside area construction permit shall be heard at the same time as the variance, conditional use permit, or special permit; the review criteria of Section 25.61.060 shall apply. If such construction does not require a variance, conditional use permit, or special permit the procedures hereinafter set forth shall also apply. (Ord. 1388 § 2, (1989); Ord. 1603 § 40, (1998))

 

25.61.040 Procedure when variance, conditional use permit, or special permit not required.
     If such construction does not require a variance, conditional use permit, or special permit, the following procedures shall apply. Upon receipt of a completed application for a hillside area construction permit, the director of community development shall give mailed notice of the application to all owners of property within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property. They shall be informed of their right to request review under Section 25.61.050. Notice of the application shall also be mailed to the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 1388 § 2, (1989); Ord. 1482 § 8, (1993); Ord. 1603 § 41, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 28, (2007))

 

25.61.050 Review of application.
     Any noticed property owner may request review of the application by written request to the director of community development within seven (7) days after the mailing of the notice of application. Review of the application may be requested by any member of the planning commission or council by making such request before the close of the meeting of the legislative body at which the notice is received. Upon receipt of a request for review, the director of community development shall thereafter process the application in the same manner as an application for a conditional use permit. Unless review of the application is requested, the hillside area construction permit shall be deemed approved upon the adjournment of the later of the planning commission or city council meeting following notice of the application. (Ord. 1388 § 2, (1989); Ord. 1603 § 42, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 29, (2007))

 

25.61.060 Review criteria.
     Review by the planning commission or city council shall be based upon the obstruction by the construction of the existing distant views of nearby properties. Emphasis shall be given to the obstruction of distant views from habitable areas within a dwelling unit. (Ord. 1388 § 2, (1989))

 

25.61.070 Fees.
     Filing fees for approvals under this chapter shall be set by the city council. (Ord. 1388 § 2, (1989))

Chapter 25.63 DENSITY BONUS
25.63.010 Purpose.
     (a)   It is the City Council’s intent that this chapter be implemented in a manner consistent with the provisions set forth in Government Code Sections 65915 through 65919, hereinafter the “density bonus law.” This chapter creates procedures for identifying qualifying developments, and the submission, review, and granting of incentives and concessions consistent with state law.

     (b)   All applicable provisions of the density bonus law are hereby incorporated by reference and shall be the default law unless otherwise provided by this chapter.

     (c)   This chapter shall not abrogate any other requirements set forth by federal, state, or local law, including, but not limited to, California Environmental Quality Act requirements and Burlingame Municipal Code. (Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

 

25.63.015 Definitions.
     The following terms shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter. All other terms shall be interpreted consistent with the meaning set forth in the density bonus law.

     (a)   “Affordable units” shall collectively mean units qualifying as “very low,” “lower,” and “moderate” income units as used in this chapter and in the density bonus law.

     (b)   “Applicant” shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, entity, or any combination thereof, who seeks a density bonus and/or concessions as defined in this section.

     (c)   “Child care facility” shall mean a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and schoolage child care centers.

     (d)   “Concessions” shall be interchangeable with “incentives,” unless otherwise indicated. The meaning shall be consistent with Government Code Section 65915(k).

     (e)   “Density bonus” shall mean a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of the application.

     (f)    “Development” shall have the meaning set forth in Government Code Section 65915(i).

     (g)   “Incentives” shall be interchangeable with “concessions,” unless otherwise indicated. The meaning shall be consistent with Government Code Section 65915(k).

     (h)   “Lower income” shall have the same definition set forth in Health and Safely Code Section 50079.5.

     (i)    “Moderate income” shall have the same definition set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

     (j)    “Specific adverse impact” shall have the same definition as set forth in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2).

     (k)   “Very low income” shall have the same definition as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50105. (Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

 

25.63.020 Density bonus.
     This section describes the density bonuses that will be provided, at the request of an applicant, when that applicant provides restricted affordable units as described below.

     (a)   The City shall grant a twenty (20) percent density bonus when an applicant for a development of five (5) or more dwelling units seeks and agrees to construct at least any one of the following in accordance with the requirements of this section and Government Code Section 65915:

     (1)   At least ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units of the development as restricted affordable units affordable to lower income households. For each one (1) percent  increase in the percentage of restricted lower income units, a development will receive an additional one and one-half (1.5) percent  density bonus up to thirty-five (35) percent  of the maximum residential density; or

     (2)   At least five (5) percent of the total dwelling units of the development as restricted affordable units affordable to very low income households. For each one (1) percent increase in the percentage of restricted very low income units, a development will receive an additional two and one-half (2.5) percent density bonus up to thirty-five (35) percent  of the maximum residential density; or

     (3)   A senior citizen housing development; or

     (4)   A qualifying mobile home park.

     (b)   The City shall grant a five (5) percent density bonus when an applicant for a development of five (5) or more additional dwelling units seeks and agrees to construct, in accordance with the requirements of this section and Government Code Section 65915, at least ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development as defined in California Civil Code Section 4100 for moderate income households, provided that all dwelling units in the development are offered to the public for purchase. For each one (1) percent increase in the percentage of restricted moderate income units, a development will receive an additional one (1) percent density bonus up to thirty-five (35) percent of the maximum residential density.

     (c)   No additional density bonus shall be authorized for a senior citizen development or qualifying mobile home park beyond the density bonus authorized by subsection (a) of this section.

     (d)   When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any fractions of units shall be rounded to the next highest number. An applicant may elect to receive a density bonus that is less than the amount permitted by this section; however, the City shall not be required to similarly reduce the number of restricted affordable units required to be dedicated pursuant to this section and Government Code Section 65915(b).

     (e)   Each development is entitled to only one density bonus, which shall be selected by the applicant based on the percentage of very low restricted affordable units, lower income restricted affordable units, or moderate income restricted affordable units, or the development’s status as a senior citizen housing development or qualifying mobile home park. Density bonuses from more than one category may not be combined. In no case shall a development be entitled to a density bonus of more than thirty-five (35) percent.

     (f)    The density bonus units shall not be included when determining the number of restricted affordable units required to qualify for a density bonus. When calculating the required number of restricted affordable units, any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer.

     (g)   Certain other types of development activities are specifically eligible for a density bonus pursuant to state law:

     (1)   A development may be eligible for a density bonus in return for land donation pursuant to the requirements set forth in Government Code Section 65915(g).

     (2)   A condominium conversion may be eligible for a density bonus or concession pursuant to the requirements set forth in Government Code Section 65915.5.

     (h)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, all developments must satisfy all applicable requirements of any below market rate housing program adopted by the City, which may impose requirements for restricted affordable units in addition to those required to receive a density bonus or concessions.

     Table 1 summarizes the density bonus provisions described in this section.

 

Table 1: Density Bonus Summary Table

 

Restricted Affordable Units or Category

Minimum Percentage of Restricted Affordable Units

Percentage of Density Bonus Granted

Additional Bonus for Each 1% Increase in Restricted Affordable Units

Percentage of Restricted Units Required for Maximum 35% Density Bonus

Very Low Income

5%

20%

2.50%

11%

Lower Income

10%

20%

1.50%

20%

Moderate Income

10%

5%

1%

40%

Senior Citizen Housing

100%

20%

———

———

Qualifying Mobile Park

100%

20%

———

———

Note: A density bonus may be selected from only one category up to a maximum of 35% of the maximum residential density.

 

(Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

 

25.63.030 Development standards for affordable units.
     The affordable housing standards are as follows:

     (a)   Concurrent Construction. The required affordable dwelling units shall be constructed concurrently with market-rate units unless both the final decision-making authority of the City and developer agree within the affordable housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development.

     (b)   Moderate income restricted affordable units shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated income group for a minimum period of thirty (30) years (or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program). Very low and lower restricted affordable units shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated income group for a period of thirty (30) years for both rental and for-sale units (or a longer period of time if required by a construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program).

     (c)   Design. Restricted affordable units shall be built on-site and be dispersed within the development. The number of bedrooms of the restricted affordable units shall be equivalent to the bedroom mix and average sizes of the non-restricted units in the development; except that the applicant may include a higher proportion of restricted affordable units with more bedrooms. The design and construction of the affordable dwelling units shall be consistent with the design, unit layout, and construction of the total project development in terms of appearance, exterior construction materials, and unit layout, and be consistent with any affordable residential development standards that may be prepared by the City.

     (d)   A regulatory agreement, as described in Section 25.63.080, shall be made a condition of the discretionary permits for all developments pursuant to this chapter. The regulatory agreement shall be recorded as a restriction on the development. (Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

 

25.63.040 Development concessions and incentives.
     (a)   By Right Parking Incentives. Upon request by the applicant a development that is eligible for a density bonus may provide parking as provided in this subsection (a), consistent with Government Code Section 65915(p), inclusive of accessible and guest parking:

     (1)   Zero- to one-bedroom unit: one (1) on-site parking space;

     (2)   Two- to three-bedroom unit: two (2) on-site parking spaces;

     (3)   Four- or more bedroom unit: two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces.

     (b)   Other Incentives and Concessions. A development is eligible for other concessions or incentives as follows:

 

 

% very low income units

% lower income units

% moderate income units

1 incentive

5

10

10

2 incentives

10

20

20

3 incentives

15

30

30

 

     (c)   In submitting a request for concessions or incentives, an applicant may request the specific concessions set forth below. The following concessions and incentives are deemed not to have a specific adverse impact:

     (1)   In zoning districts where a Conditional Use Permit is required for buildings or structures more than thirty-five (35) feet in height, a height up to forty-six (46) feet without a Conditional Use Permit; or

     (2)   Reduction of common open space in the rear yard of a residential development by up to fifty (50) percent or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is more, without necessity of a variance, so long as no dimension of the common open space provided is less than ten (10) feet in any direction; or

     (3)   Use of unistall parking spaces each with a clear interior measurement of eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length without necessity of a variance; or

     (4)   Allowance of up to fifty (50) percent of the required parking as compact parking stalls as defined in Chapter 25.70, without necessity of a variance.

     (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the provision of direct financial concessions for the development, including the provision of publicly owned land by the City or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. (Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

 

25.63.050 Waiver/modification of development standards.
     An applicant may apply for a waiver or modification of development standards that will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter. The developer must demonstrate that development standards that are requested to be waived or modified will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of subsection (a) of Section 25.63.020 at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

 

25.63.060 Child care facilities.
     (a)   An applicant otherwise qualifying for density bonuses and/or incentives under this chapter may be eligible for the following density bonuses or incentives if they propose to construct a qualifying child care facility, consistent with Section 65915(h).

     (b)   The density bonus shall be in an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility.

     (c)   The incentive shall be granted if it contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

     (d)   The City may deny the density bonus or incentives described in this section if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. (Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

 

 

25.63.070 Application and review process.
     (a)   An application for a density bonus or incentive shall be made to the Community Development Department on forms provided by the City. The application shall include the following information:

     (1)   A brief description of the proposed housing development, including the total number of dwelling units, affordable housing units, and density bonus units proposed.

     (2)   The requested density bonus amount and requested incentives, if any.

     (3)   Site plans showing the location of market-rate, density bonus, and affordable housing units.

     (4)   Any other such information as is necessary to verify that the applicant and/or the housing development meets all requirements set forth by state and local law.

     (b)   The application, or an incentive therein, may be wholly or partially denied for any of the following reasons:

     (1)   The application is incomplete.

     (2)   The application contains a material misrepresentation.

     (3)   The incentive has an insufficient relationship to providing affordable housing.

     (4)   The incentive has a specific, adverse impact as defined in this chapter.

     (5)   The incentive is contrary to federal or state law.

     (c)   The applicant may file an appeal to the City Council within fourteen (14) days of being notified of his or her application’s final denial. (Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

 

25.63.080 Regulatory agreement.
     (a)   After approval of the application as detailed in Section 25.63.050, applicant shall enter into a regulatory agreement with the City. The terms of this agreement shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney’s Office, and reviewed and revised as appropriate by the reviewing City official. This agreement shall be on a form provided by the City, and shall include the following terms:

     (1)   The affordability of very low, lower, and moderate income housing shall be assured in a manner consistent with Government Code Section 65915(c)(1).

     (2)   An equity sharing agreement pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(c)(2).

     (3)   The location, dwelling unit sizes, rental cost, and number of bedrooms of the affordable units.

     (4)   A description of any bonuses and incentives, if any, provided by the City.

     (5)   Any other terms as required to ensure implementation and compliance with this section, and the applicable sections of the density bonus law.

     (b)   This agreement shall be binding on all future owners and successors in interest. The agreement required by this section shall be a condition of all development approvals and shall be fully executed and recorded prior to the issuance of any building or construction permit for the project in question. (Ord. 1909 § 1, (2015))

Chapter 25.66 REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR ACCESSIBILITY
25.66.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide a formal procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures, and to establish relevant criteria to be used when considering such requests. (Ord. 1865 § 10, (2011))

 

25.66.020 Applicability.
     In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, any person may request a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. Typical improvements which may be considered for reasonable accommodation provisions include ramps, walls, handrails, elevators or lifts, or other similar physical improvements necessary to accommodate a person’s disability. The reasonable accommodation would allow exceptions to setback, lot coverage and floor area provisions of the zoning code that are deemed necessary to accommodate these improvements.

     A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment, or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This chapter applies only to those person who are defined as disabled under the Acts. (Ord. 1865 § 10, (2011))

 

25.66.030 Application requirements.
     (a)   Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be initiated by submitting a completed application form to the community development director, signed by the property owner, together with the appropriate fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council, and shall be filed in the office of the planning division of the community development department. The following information shall be included with the application:

     (1)   The applicant’s name, address and telephone number;

     (2)   Address of the property for which the request is being made;

     (3)   The current use of the property;

     (4)   The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts, including supporting medical documentation from a qualified medical expert in support of the request for accommodation;

     (5)   The zoning code provision or other city regulation or policy from which the reasonable accommodation is being requested; and

     (6)   An explanation of why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual.

     (b)   Review with Other Planning Applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval under this title (including, but not limited to, design review, conditional use permit, or variance), the application shall be submitted and reviewed at the same time as the related applications. (Ord. 1865 § 10, (2011))

 

25.66.040 Review procedure.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the community development director shall have the authority to consider and take action on requests for reasonable accommodation. The application shall be reviewed ministerially without discretionary review or public hearing. If the application is granted because the requirements are met and the findings made, the applicant may proceed with a building permit. If the application is submitted concurrent with an application requiring discretionary review, the procedures for the discretionary review shall be followed. (Ord. 1865 § 10, (2011))

 

25.66.050 Findings.
     Required Findings for Reasonable Accommodations. Any decision on an application under this chapter shall be supported by written findings addressing the criteria set forth in this section. In making a determination regarding the reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the following findings shall be made:

     (a)   The housing that is subject to the request for reasonable accommodation will be used for an individual with a disability under the Acts.

 

     (b)   The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts.

     (c)   The requested reasonable accommodation does not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the community and does not require a fundamental alteration to the city’s zoning requirements, development standards, policies or procedures.

     (d)   The requested reasonable accommodation would not adversely impact surrounding properties or uses.

     (e)   There are no reasonable alternatives that would provide an equivalent level of benefit without requiring a modification or exception to the city’s applicable rules, standards and practices. (Ord. 1865 § 10, (2011))

 

25.66.060 Decisions.
     The community development director shall issue a written determination of the action and may grant or deny the accommodation request based on the request meeting the findings outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 1865 § 10, (2011))

 

25.66.070 Appeals.
     The applicant requesting the reasonable accommodation may appeal the community development director’s denial of the request. The appeal shall be submitted to the community development department within ten (10) calendar days of the community development director’s decision. The appeal shall be heard by the planning commission in a public hearing pursuant to the procedures established for discretionary actions in Chapter 25.16. (Ord. 1865 § 10, (2011))

 

25.66.080 Effect of chapter.
     This chapter shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with the Acts; nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to create greater rights than exist under the Acts. (Ord. 1865 § 10, (2011))

Chapter 25.68 HOME OCCUPATIONS
25.68.010 Home occupation requirements.
     “Home occupation” means any use customarily carried on within a dwelling which use is incidental to the residential use of the dwelling, and one of the following applies:

     (a)   All of the following requirements are met:

     (1)   Except for such outdoor uses as teaching swimming or tennis, the use is confined within the primary dwelling unit, does not occupy required parking, open space or yard and, unless a conditional use permit has been obtained, does not occupy any accessory structures, including attached or detached garage;

     (2)   Any merchandise is either produced on the premises or directly related to and incidental to the service offered and is not sold directly from the premises on a regular basis, either at wholesale or retail;

     (3)   Equipment or materials are displayed, stored or maintained indoors;

     (4)   The appearance of the building is unaltered and the occupation conducted in a manner which does not cause the premises to differ from its residential character in colors, materials, construction or lighting, or by the emission of sounds, noises, smoke, odors, vibrations, liquid or solid waste, television or radio interference, or create other nuisance;

     (5)   A maximum of two (2) persons are on the premises in the conduct of the home occupation, one of whom must be a resident;

     (6)   Traffic and parking meet standards normally associated with the subject dwelling, as defined by the city code allowing for any existing nonconformity;

     (7)   Signs are limited to those specified for the district in which the dwelling is located;

     (8)   Only mechanical or electrical equipment incidental to a dwelling is maintained or installed;

     (9)   Vehicles used for home occupation purposes are three-quarter ton carrying capacity or less;

     (10) No instruction shall occur which involves more than three (3) people, including the resident, at one time.

     (b)   The use qualifies as a “cottage food operation” by meeting all of the following requirements:

     (1)   The use is consistent with the definitions set forth in Section 113758 of the California Health and Safety Code as it may be amended from time to time;

     (2)   The owner of the cottage food operation has registered with the County of San Mateo Environmental Health Services Division;

     (3)   The owner of the cottage food operation has obtained a permit from the director of community development by meeting all requirements set forth in Section 25.68.015(b);

     (4)   The owner of the cottage food operation complies with Section 25.68.015(c) of this chapter;

     (5)   The use complies with all other sections of this code, except where otherwise indicated. (Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1521 § 28, (1995); Ord. 1603 § 43, (1998); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.015 Cottage food operations.
     (a)   It is the city council’s intent that all sections in this chapter applying to cottage food operations incorporate all applicable definitions set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758.

     (b)   A permit shall be issued to cottage food operations if the cottage food operator submits an application containing all of the following:

     (1)   A completed home occupancy/cottage food operations form;

     (2)   A copy of the operation’s registration from the county of San Mateo environmental health services division;

     (3)   A copy of the cottage food operator’s business license; and

     (4)   A valid form of government identification.

     (c)   A cottage food operation shall:

     (1)   Maintain a valid and current registration from the county of San Mateo for as long as operations continue;

     (2)   Produce and sell only foods on the approved food products list as promulgated by the State Public Health Officer pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 114365.5;

     (3)   Submit to inspections by local enforcement agency representatives after receipt of a consumer complaint giving rise to a suspicion that unsafe food has been produced by the cottage food operation, or that the cottage food operation has violated this chapter;

     (4)   Operate in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, including, but not limited to, California Health and Safety Code Sections 113758, 113789, 114021, 114023, 114088, 114365, 114390, 114405, and 114409. (Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.020 Excluded occupations.
     Except as provided in Section 25.68.025, the following occupations and those considered to be of similar character by the director of community development shall be specifically prohibited as home occupations: contractor’s office where employees report or assemble as a part of the job for other than administrative or bookkeeping purposes; barbershop; beauty salon; massage studio; automobile repairing or painting; landscape contractor; clinic; hospital; kennel or other boarding of pets; legal, medical, or dental offices. (Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1369 § 1, (1988); Ord. 1586 § 47, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 31, (2007); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.025 Limited occupations.
     The following occupations and those considered to be of similar character by the director of community development may be carried on as home occupation subject to the requirements of Section 25.68.010 and the additional limitations set forth hereinafter: accountants, attorneys, investment advisors or brokers, psychic services, insurance and real estate agents. The additional limitations are:

     (a)   The applicant shall be the sole person engaged in the business;

     (b)   There shall be no other employees on-site or off-site; and

     (c)   No clients shall come to the site. (Ord. 1369 § 2, (1988); Ord. 1586 § 48, (1998); Ord. 1588 § 5, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 32, (2007); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.030 Home occupation permits.
     No person shall commence or carry on any home occupation, as set forth above, within the city without first having procured a permit from the director of community development. The director of community development shall issue a permit when the applicant shows that the home occupation meets all requirements of Section 25.68.010. Every home occupation shall fully comply with all city, county and state codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1806 § 33, (2007); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.040 Permit applications—Form and content.
     Applications for home occupation permits shall be filed, in writing, with the director of community development by the person who intends commencing or carrying on a home occupation. The application shall be upon forms furnished by and in the same manner prescribed by the director of community development. Where the applicant is not the owner of the lot on which the home occupation is proposed to be conducted, the application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or his or her agent. (Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1806 § 34, (2007); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.050 Permit not transferable.
     No home occupation permit shall be transferred or assigned, nor shall the permit authorize any person, other than the person named therein, to commence or carry on the home occupation for which the permit was issued. (Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.060 Notices and appeals.
     Within ten (10) working days after the filing of an application for a home occupation permit, the director of community development shall either issue or deny the permit and shall serve notice of such action upon the applicant by mailing a copy of such notice to the applicant at the address appearing on the application. Appeals from the decision of the director of community development may be made to the planning commission within seven (7) days after the action of the director of community development. Upon receipt of an appeal, the director of community development shall forward the same, together with the records on the matter, to the planning commission. The commission shall set the matter for hearing before the planning commission at the earliest available date. (Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1806 § 35, (2007); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.070 Suspension, revocation and appeals.
     (a)   Any home occupation permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the director of community development when it appears that the home occupation authorized by the permit has been or is being conducted:

     (1)   In violation of any conditions of approval or of any city, county and/or state code, ordinance, rule or regulation, including the provisions of this section;

     (2)   In a disorderly manner;

     (3)   To the detriment of the general public;

     (4)   When home occupation being carried on is different from that for which the permit was issued; or

     (5)   The home occupation has not been carried on for more than ninety (90) days.

     (b)   Any home occupation permit which has been issued shall be revoked or suspended by written notice from the director of community development to the holder of the permit. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for revoking or suspending the permit; such notice shall be sent to the person to be notified at the address appearing on the permit. Appeals to the planning commission shall be processed as set forth in Section 25.16.060. (Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1806 § 36, (2007); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

 

25.68.080 Business license required.
     Every home occupation permittee shall obtain a business license. (Ord. 1301 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1897 § 1, (2014))

Chapter 25.70 OFF-STREET PARKING
25.70.010 Vehicle parking spaces to be provided.
     (a)   Parking Required. At the time of erection of any building or structure, or at the time any building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, there shall be provided off-street parking spaces with adequate and proper provision for ingress and egress by standard size automobiles.

      (b)  Parking with Remodel or Reconstruction. When any building is remodeled, reconstructed or changed in use by the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, change in type of use or intensified use, such additional garage or parking facilities as may be required must be provided, except for accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units approved per Chapter 25.59.

     (c)   Minimum Requirements. The regulations which follow are the minimum requirements unless specific requirements are made for a particular use in a district. Additional spaces may be provided. Unless otherwise expressly permitted by a section of this chapter, parking required by this chapter is to be provided on the same lot as the use for which the parking is required. (Ord. 1954 § 7, (2018); Ord. 1978 § 18, (2020))

 

25.70.020 Standards for parking spaces.
     The following are established as minimum parking space dimensions:

     (a)   Open parking spaces, garages or carports for multiple-family residential uses, except when lesser dimensions are hereinafter allowed, shall have a clear interior measurement of nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length; open parking spaces and garages for commercial and industrial uses, except when lesser dimensions are hereinafter allowed, shall have a clear interior measurement of eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length;

     (b)   Garages and carports for single-family dwellings shall have a clear interior measurement of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length; and open parking spaces for single-family dwellings shall have a clear interior measurement of nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length;

     (c)   Compact car spaces, where allowed, shall have a clear interior measurement of eight (8) feet in width and seventeen (17) feet in length;

     (d)   A parking space bordered in whole or in part by a structure, wall or fence along one or both lateral sides shall provide one additional foot in width for each enclosed side;

     (e)   A column may project not more than six (6) inches into any parking space and shall not interfere with opening of car doors or with car turning movements;

     (f)    Any parking space dimension shall be increased to size acceptable to the department of public works if more than three (3) vehicle movements are required to enter or exit the space;

     (g)   All parking spaces shall have an unobstructed vertical clearance from floor to lowest projections on the ceiling within the parking area of seven (7) feet. (1941

Code § 1971.1, Ord. 763, (1962); Ord. 911 § 2, (1970); Ord. 1153 § 1, (1979); Ord. 1183 § 1, (1980); Ord. 1306 § 1, (1985); Ord. 1341 § 3, (1987); Ord. 1466 § 2, (1992); Ord. 1521 § 29, (1995); Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.025 Standards for parking aisles and driveways.
     The following are established as minimum aisle and driveway dimensions:

     (a)   Aisles. Required parking spaces shall open directly upon an aisle of the following minimums:

     (1)   A thirteen (13) foot wide aisle shall be provided for forty-five (45) degree parking;

     (2)   An eighteen (18) foot wide aisle shall be provided for sixty (60) degree parking;

     (3)   A twenty-four (24) foot wide aisle shall be provided for ninety (90) degree parking;

     (4)   Where parking is provided parallel with the entrance driveway, and where a second aisle at right angles to the first is not available for regular use of such parallel spaces, aisle width shall be increased to twenty-eight (28) feet for a minimum aisle length of twenty-seven (27) feet; the minimum width of parking spaces with ingress and egress from such an aisle may be reduced by six (6) inches from the minimum elsewhere required;

     (5)   A separate means of egress shall be provided for all parking spaces at angles less than ninety (90) degrees unless an area is provided on site which allows a motor vehicle exiting such spaces to do so within three (3) movements. A turning radius of twenty-eight (28) feet for outside clearance and fourteen (14) feet for inside clearance shall be assumed;

     (6)   Aisles with traffic moving in two (2) directions shall be not less than eighteen (18) feet wide;

     (7)   All aisles shall have an unobstructed vertical clearance of seven (7) feet.

     (b)   Driveways. A driveway is the entrance into parking spaces or a parking facility from a public street or other traveled way.

     (1)   The minimum driveway width for single-family and duplex residences shall be nine and one-half (9 1/2) feet; a driveway shall be no wider than the garage or parking area it serves;

     (2)   In all other cases, the minimum driveway width shall be twelve (12) feet for parking areas with not more than thirty (30) vehicles. Parking in areas with more than thirty (30) vehicle spaces shall have either two (2) twelve (12) foot wide driveways or one eighteen (18) foot wide driveway;

     (3)   Egress into a public right-of-way shall be in the forward direction, except that backing into a public right-of-way shall be allowed for single-family homes or duplexes;

     (4)   Maximum driveway slopes shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent at any point without special approval of the department of public works; slopes in excess of twenty (20) percent shall require approval of the planning commission. Transitional slopes are required for driveways which exceed ten (10) percent maximum slope. No transitional slope shall extend into a required parking space;

     (5)   A seven (7) foot minimum vertical clearance, measured at right angles to the slope, shall be maintained at all points on the driveway. However, a knockout bar with not less than six (6) feet nine (9) inches vertical clearance may be installed at each entry or exit point with permission of the department of public works;

     (6)   A six (6) inch rise above curb grade shall be installed at the property line for flood protection when required by the department of public works. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.030 Requirements for single-family dwellings.
     The following are parking requirements for single-family dwellings.

      (a)  Parking Space Requirements. Each single-family dwelling shall provide off-street parking spaces for at least two (2) vehicles, one of which must be covered by a garage or carport. The following further requirements apply to certain additions and to new single-family dwellings:

     (1)   An existing single-family dwelling increased in size to three (3) or four (4) bedrooms and a new single-family dwelling with up to four (4) bedrooms shall provide off-street parking spaces to current code dimensions for at least two (2) vehicles, one of which must be covered by a garage or carport;

     (2)   A single-family dwelling hereafter increased in size to five (5) or more bedrooms and a new single-family dwelling with five (5) or more bedrooms shall provide off-street parking to current code dimensions for at least three (3) vehicles, two (2) of which must be covered by a garage or carport;

     (3)   For the purposes of subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section, an existing garage not less than eighteen (18) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet deep interior dimension shall be considered to provide two (2) covered off-street parking places;

     (4)   Bedrooms that are within accessory dwelling units or junior accessory dwelling units shall not be counted toward the overall number of bedrooms for the primary single-family dwelling on the lot on which it is located; parking for accessory dwelling units shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25.59.

 

     (b)   Parking Aisles and Driveways. Covered parking spaces shall have a twenty-four (24) foot back-up area or be designed to be entered or exited in no more than three (3) maneuvers. All spaces must allow entry in three (3) maneuvers in the forward direction.

     (c)   Parking Limitations.

     (1)   A vehicle shall not be parked between a structure and the front or side property line except in a garage, driveway or other approved parking; except for parking for an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59;

     (2)   Inoperative vehicles, vehicle parts, boats and campers (as defined by Section 243 of the Vehicle Code) shall not be stored or parked in driveways or between a structure and front or side property line;

     (3)   Required covered parking shall not be provided in tandem configuration; except for an accessory dwelling unit which complies with the provisions of Chapter 25.59;

     (4)   For an addition to an existing single-family dwelling and for accessory dwelling units, required uncovered spaces may be provided in tandem configuration and may extend:

     (A)  In areas with sidewalks, to the inner edge of the sidewalk,

     (B)   In areas without sidewalks to five (5) feet from the inner edge of the curb,

     (C)   In areas without either sidewalks or curbs, to five (5) feet from the edge of pavement. (Ord. 1954 § 8, (2018)); Ord. 1978 § 19, (2020))

 

25.70.032 Requirements for duplexes, apartment hotels and condominiums.
     (a)   Except as specified below for properties within certain portions of downtown Burlingame as identified in Figure 3-4 of the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan, the following are parking requirements for duplexes, apartments, apartment hotels and condominiums:

     (1)   There shall be at least one and one-half (1 1/2) permanently maintained parking spaces on the same lot with the building for each studio or one-bedroom dwelling unit in the building.

     (2)   For each dwelling unit containing two (2) bedrooms, or two (2) potential bedrooms, there shall be provided at least two (2) parking spaces.

     (3)   For each dwelling unit containing three (3) or more bedrooms, there shall be provided at least two and one-half (2 1/2) parking spaces.

     (b)   For properties within the area identified in Figure 3-4 of the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan, the following are parking requirements for duplexes, apartments, apartment hotels and condominiums:

     (1)   There shall be at least one permanently maintained parking space on the same lot with the building for each studio or one-bedroom dwelling unit in the building.

     (2)   For each dwelling unit containing two (2) bedrooms, or two (2) potential bedrooms, there shall be provided at least one and one-half (1 1/2) permanently maintained parking spaces.

 

 

 



 

     (3)   For each dwelling unit containing three (3) or more bedrooms, there shall be provided at least two (2) permanently maintained parking spaces.

     (c)   Accessory Dwelling Units. Where accessory dwelling units are allowed in compliance with Chapter 25.59, parking shall be provided with the provisions of Chapter 25.59.

     (d)   Eighty (80) percent of the total required parking spaces shall be covered or within a garage or carport. Parking spaces shall not be situated in the front or side setback areas. A vehicle shall not be parked between a structure and the front or side property lines except in a garage, driveway or other approved parking.

     (e)   Inoperative vehicles, vehicles, vehicle parts, boats and campers (as defined by Section 243 of the Vehicle Code) shall not be stored or parked in driveways or between a structure and front or side property lines. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011); Ord. 1978 § 20, (2020))

 

25.70.034 Requirements for rooming houses, motels, hotels, group residential facilities for the elderly.
     The following are parking requirements for rooming houses, motels, hotels, and group residential facilities for the elderly:

     (a)   Lodging Houses, Rooming Houses. There shall be provided one parking space for each two (2) lodging rooms plus one parking space for each two (2) persons employed on the premises, including the owner or manager.

     (b)   Motels, Hotels. There shall be provided one parking space for each dwelling unit or lodging room, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section.

     (c)   Group Residential Facilities for Elderly People. There shall be provided one parking space for each three (3) residential units where such facilities are designed as separate units; if designed as lodging rooms, one space for each four (4) lodgers, plus one space for each two (2) people employed on the premises.

     (d)   Parking Reductions. Required parking for motels or hotels may be reduced through approval of a Conditional Use Permit.

     (1)   Criteria for Approval.

     (A)  Special conditions—including, but not limited to, proximity to frequent transit service; transportation characteristics of persons residing, working, or visiting the site; or because the applicant has undertaken a transportation demand management program—exist that will reduce parking demand at the site;

     (B)   The use will adequately be served by the proposed on-site parking; and

     (C)   Parking demand generated by the project will not exceed the capacity of or have a detrimental impact on the supply of on-street parking in the surrounding area.

     (2)   Parking Demand Study. In order to evaluate a proposed project’s compliance with the above criteria, the community development director may require submittal of a parking demand study that substantiates the basis for granting a reduced number of spaces. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011); Ord. 1956 § 2, (2018))

 

25.70.035 Requirements for emergency shelters for the homeless.
     The following is the parking requirement for emergency shelters for the homeless:

     (a)   There shall be provided one parking space for each three (3) beds. (Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.036 Requirements for hospitals, including critical care, convalescent and extended care.
     The following are parking requirements for hospitals including critical care, convalescent and extended care:

     (a)   Critical Care Hospitals. There shall be provided one car space for each one and one-half (1 1/2) beds.

     (b)   Convalescent and Extended Care Hospitals. There shall be provided one car space for each three and one-half (3 1/2) beds. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.038 Requirements for churches and places of public assembly.
     The following are parking requirements for churches and places of public assembly:

     (a)   There shall be provided parking spaces in the ratio of one space for each six (6) permanent seats or, if there are no fixed seats, one space for each sixty (60) square feet of floor space in the assembly area. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.040 Requirements for commercial and industrial uses.
     The following are parking requirements for commercial and industrial uses. Parking spaces on the same lot shall be provided for commercial and industrial buildings as set forth in the following table of requirements:

 

Health services

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area

All other offices

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. gross floor area

Retail stores

1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food and refreshments

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Classes as a part of another business or in an office or industrial building

1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area for instruction

Furniture stores, appliance stores, bulk merchandise

1 space for each 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Repair shops, service shops, machine shops, laboratories, any shop engaged in repairing, testing, manufacturing, or processing materials or products

1 space for each 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Commercial recreation, gymnasiums and health clubs

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Industrial buildings, wholesale establishments, warehouses

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Gasoline service stations

At least 2 parking spaces for employees shall be provided on the property

Animal shelter or animal rescue center

1 space per 625 sq. ft. of gross floor area and 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. for outdoor habitat that is accessory to such a facility

 

(Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1760 § 3, (2005); Ord. 1812 § 2, (2007); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.042 Requirements of other uses.
     For uses not listed in the above schedule of required parking, spaces shall be supplied on the same basis as provided for the most similar use, or as determined by the director of community development. For such determination such matters as type of use and user, number of employees, number of visitors and similar factors shall be considered; in any case, where the decision of the director of community development is contested by the applicant, his or her decision may be appealed to the planning commission. The commission may approve, disapprove or modify the decision of the director of community development. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1806 § 37, (2007); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.044 Requirements for compact car spaces.
     Compact car spaces shall be allowed within industrial and commercial districts in the following ratio:

 

Required Parking Spaces

Allowable Compact Spaces

1-11

0

11-20

1

Over 20

20% of spaces over 20

 

     Each compact car space shall be clearly marked “COMPACT CAR.” The compact car spaces shall be distributed throughout the parking area. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.050 Exceptions for the AA, APN, APS, C-1, C-2, C-R, IB, RR, and SL districts and for nonconformities.
     (a)   All uses in the AA, APN, APS, C-1, C-2, C-R, IB, RR, and SL districts shall conform to the parking requirements of this chapter unless specific parking requirements are imposed by the chapter of this code governing the particular district.

     (b)   Existing uses which become nonconforming as a result of the adoption of parking requirements may be remodeled so long as the gross floor area occupied by the use is not increased. If the gross floor area is increased, parking shall be provided as required for the additional floor area.

     (c)   Any existing parking spaces which form the basis for credit against any parking assessment shall be maintained in a usable operating condition. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1793 § 38, (2006); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.060 Computation where result is a fractional space.
     When the determination of the number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space, one parking space shall be provided. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.070 Computation of spaces for mixed uses.
     The ratio of required spaces to floor area shall be computed by measuring within the gross floor area of the building. Where a building is used or intended to be used for a combination of purposes, the parking spaces shall be provided in relation to the proportion of the building assigned to each use and shall be the total of the combination of uses. (Ord. 911 § 5, (1970); Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.080 Use of required parking spaces.
     Required parking spaces and any portion of the area on a site encompassing the required parking and the required landscaping within the parking area on a site, shall not be rented or leased to any party on or off the site or used for some purpose other than that permitted or allowed on the site; these spaces shall be made available and maintained in safe, useable condition for the tenants and their clients or customers, at no charge. (Ord. 1586 § 49, (1998); Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011))

 

25.70.090 Vehicle parking in the parking sector of the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the following shall apply to vehicle parking requirements in the parking sector of the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan, as shown on the Parking Sector Boundaries Map, Figure 3-3 of the Burlingame Downtown Specific Plan:

 

     (a)   Retail, personal service, food establishment, and commercial recreation uses located on the first floor within the parking sector shall be exempt from providing off-street parking. Any other uses on the first floor, and all uses above or below the first floor shall provide off-street parking as required by this chapter.

     (b)   Any new development, except reconstruction because of catastrophe or natural disaster, shall provide on-site parking, except that the first floor of such new development in the parking sector shall be exempt from parking requirements if the first floor is used for retail, personal service or food establishment uses.

     (c)   Buildings reconstructed after catastrophe or natural disaster shall be required to provide parking only for the square footage over and above the square footage existing at the time of the disaster. This parking shall be provided on-site.

 
(Ord. 1863 § 12, (2011); Ord. 1966 § 2, (2019))



Chapter 25.74 AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOTS, SALES LOTS AND SERVICE STATIONS
25.74.010 Development of parking lots and sales areas.
     Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public parking area, or automobile or trailer sales area, shall be developed, subject to approval of plans by the building inspector, as follows:

     (a)   Such area shall be paved with an asphaltic or concrete or equal surfacing, shall have appropriate bumper guards where necessary, and shall be properly enclosed with an ornamental fence, wall or compact evergreen hedge, maintained at a height of not less than two (2) feet nor more than six (6) feet;

     (b)   Such fence, wall or hedge shall be located at the required front setback line for the district in which it is located, and such required area between the front setback line and the street line shall be landscaped with evergreen ground cover and properly maintained;

     (c)   Where such area adjoins a lot in an R district, a strip three (3) feet in width shall be planted and maintained with suitable evergreen planting; provided, however, that such planted strip shall not extend into the area within the front setback line and the street line;

     (d)   Where such area adjoins a lot in a C district or the RR district, and such lot is occupied by a building extending to the lot line, the fence will not be required on that portion of the common lot line occupied by the building;

     (e)   On any parking lot or sales area where attendants or salesmen are employed, sanitary services properly housed will be required;

     (f)    The planning commission may require the installation of floodlighting or such other illumination as it deems necessary for the safety of the area. (1941 Code § 1972, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 1793 § 39, (2006))

 

25.74.020 Required conditions for granting permits for gasoline service stations.
     Permits for gasoline service stations may not be granted unless the location of the gasoline service station meets the following qualifications and restrictions:

     (a)   That the location is on a main street or artery at an arterial stop intersection;

     (b)   That both sides of the street are in either commercial or industrial districts;

     (c)   That there is a distance of four hundred ninety (490) feet, exclusive of the width of intervening streets, between the closest boundary of the location and the closest boundary of any existing gasoline service station;

     (d)   Conditional use permits for gasoline service stations may be granted if the proposed development plans are first approved as provided in Sections 25.16.040 through 25.16.080, inclusive, and upon showing that the development and maintenance of structures, fences, walls and screening, drainage, landscaping, lighting, spaces for storage of waste products, appurtenant equipment, vending machines and off-street parking, serve the interest of the business community and the health, safety, peace, comfort and general welfare of the public;

     (e)   An economic feasibility report may be required to accompany an application for a special permit at either a new or an expanded old location. (1941 Code § 1973, Ord. 539, (9154); Ord. 964 § 1, (9172); Ord. 1603 § 44, (1998); Ord. 1728 § 6, (2004))

 

25.74.025 Lapse of conditional use permit for nonuse.
     If the use for which a conditional use permit for a gasoline service station has been granted is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, such conditional use permit shall terminate, and the property shall then be subject to the permitted uses and regulations provided for in the district in which such property is situated.

     A conditional use permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance unless the property affected thereby has been used or occupied in conformity with such permit. (Ord. 1025 § 12, (1974); Ord. 1603 § 45, (1998))

Chapter 25.76 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
25.76.010 Purpose.
     It is the intent of this chapter to prevent community-wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, churches, city athletic facilities, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The city council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult-oriented Businesses in certain areas. Over the history of the city, the zoning regulations have allowed adult-oriented businesses under certain conditions and in certain areas, and to the knowledge of the city, there are currently no existing adult-oriented businesses in the city. (Ord. 1426 § 18, (1990); Ord. 1727 § 2, (2004))

 

25.76.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions apply to this chapter:

     (a)   “Adult-oriented business” or “adult-oriented businesses” has the same meaning as defined in Section 10.58.015 of this code and incorporating into that term the definitions contained in that section.

     (b)   “Church” is a structure that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.

     (c) “City athletic facility” means an athletic facility operated by or for the city and that regularly attracts minors to participate in or witness athletic skills or competition. The definition does not include a passive recreation area, such as open space, or a bicycle path or similar trail or walking area.

     (d)   “Establish” means and includes any and all of the following:

     (1)   The opening or commencement, or re-opening or recommencement, of any adult-oriented business as a new or restarted business; or

     (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business as defined in this section; or

     (3)   The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined in this section to any other existing adult-oriented business; or

     (4)   The relocation of any such adult-oriented business.

     (e)   “School” means any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. (Ord. 1426 § 18, (1990); Ord. 1727 § 2, (2004))

 

25.76.030 Location requirements.
     (a)   No adult-oriented business shall be established or located in any zone in the city other than the Anza Area (AA), Anza Point North (APN), or Shoreline (SL) zone.

     (b)   Within these designated zones, an adult-oriented business shall not be established or located within the following minimum distances:

     (1)   Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other adult-oriented business.

     (2)   Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any then-existing church, school, or city athletic facility.

     (c)   The distances set forth above shall be measured as a radius from the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business to the property lines of the property so used without regard to intervening structures. (Ord. 1426 § 18, (1990); Ord. 1727 § 2, (2004); Ord. 1793 § 40, (2006))

 

25.76.040 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 1426 § 18, (1990); Ord. 1727 § 2, (2004))

Chapter 25.77 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
25.77.010 Purpose.
     Based upon the principles of the Burlingame General Plan and the Specific Area Plans, the purpose of this chapter is to maintain and more importantly, to facilitate modernization of Burlingame’s communications infrastructure in a manner that improves the quality of the City’s environment, the pleasant aesthetics of the City’s neighborhoods, the City’s architectural traditions dating to the early 20th century and the visual quality in the non-residential areas of the City. More specifically, the purpose of this chapter is to regulate, as allowed by state and federal law and regulations, the location of communications facilities in the City of Burlingame in a manner that recognizes the community benefits of communications technology, which provides clear guidance to the communications industry but also recognizes the strong need to preserve the City’s aesthetic traditions.

     The objectives of this chapter include:

     (a)   Promoting wholesome, attractive, harmonious and economic use of property, building construction, civic service, activities and operations in conformity with and preserving the overall aesthetics of City neighborhoods.

     (b)   Ensuring the character of City neighborhoods and preserving the century old architectural traditions of Burlingame.

     (c)   Reducing and wherever possible camouflaging the visual effects of communications facilities throughout the City, whether on private property or in the public right-of-way.

     (d)   Encouraging the installation of communications facilities at locations where other such facilities already exist without aesthetically overwhelming those locations with additional facilities.

     (e)   Encouraging the installation of such facilities in locations to minimize potential adverse aesthetic impacts.

     (f)    Creating a transparent and open process by which City staff, citizens, and communications providers can collaboratively achieve solutions to the placement of telecommunications facilities to achieve these goals.

     (g)   Encouraging industry to adopt best practices in all deployments, to utilize designs to minimize visual impacts, to share with the City future plans for deployments so that the cumulative impacts can be understood and planned for, and to fairly compensate the City for the reasonable staff time and costs incurred as a result of the applicant’s request to use public assets such as rights-of-way and utility poles. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are hereby defined. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; unless more specifically defined, the word “building” is interchangeable with the word “structure,” the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. All equipment not specifically described herein shall be regulated in conformity with that equipment described herein which is most substantially similar, from a functionality standpoint. Reference to “facility” is interchangeable with “wireless communications facility” unless otherwise noted.

     (a)   “Antenna” shall mean a device used in wireless communications which transmits or receives radio or any other sort of electronic type of signal, which may include electromagnetic waves.

 

     (b)   “Applicant” or “provider” shall mean the person or entity applying for a permit to install wireless communications facilities.

 

     (c)   “Co-location” shall mean the placement or installation of wireless communications facilities, including antennas, and related equipment, on, in, or immediately adjacent to, an already existing wireless communications facility which has been designed as a co-location facility, has been granted a use permit pursuant to this chapter.

     (d)   “Cessation of operation” shall mean that a facility, for whatever reason, has not functioned for a period of twelve (12) months.

     (e)   “Burlingame Downtown Districts” shall mean the downtown Burlingame Avenue Specific Plan Area and the Broadway Avenue commercial district as delineated in the City of Burlingame zoning map.

     (f)    “Equipment facility” shall mean a cabinet or structure used to house equipment associated with wireless communication antennas.

     (g)   “Façade-mounted antennas” shall mean any type of wireless communications facility in which antennas are mounted on the wall of a structure.

     (h)   “Microwave antenna” shall mean a bowl-shaped antenna used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data in a specific directional pattern.

     (i)    “Monopole” shall mean a free-standing pole like a slim line, flagpole, or similar structure.

     (j)    “Owner” shall mean the person or entity that has legal ownership or control over the tangible wireless communications facilities.

     (k)   “Lattice tower” shall mean an open lattice type structure; it does not include electric power transmission towers.

     (l)    “Electric power transmission tower” shall mean those towers used by electric utilities for transmitting electric power; they can be either lattice or monopoles.

     (m)  “Non-residential Zoning Districts” shall mean those zoning districts within the City of Burlingame which are neither Residential Zoning Districts nor Burlingame Downtown Districts.

     (n)   “Radio frequency radiation (RFR)” shall mean electromagnetic radiation in the portion of the spectrum from three (3) kHz (kiloHertz) to three hundred (300) gHz (gigaHertz).

     (o)   “Reasonably feasible” or “feasible” shall mean that a requirement is not impossible, not costly out of proportion with the facility, not impractical or beyond industry capabilities.

     (p)   “Roof-mounted” shall mean any type of facility in which antennas are mounted on the roof, parapet or similar feature of a structure and extends past the roofline of the building.

     (q)   “Residential Zoning District” shall mean the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 residential zoning districts as delineated on the City of Burlingame zoning map.

     (r)    “Stealth design” shall mean any design which, utilizing the industry’s best effort and most current technology, as of the time of the current application, screens from view, camouflages, integrates a facility into the architectural features of a building or structure or in any other manner reduces to insignificant the visual impact of wireless communication facility components including, but not limited to, antenna, transmitters, relays, receivers, equipment cabinets or any other portion or component of a wireless communication facility.

     (s)    “Stealth structures” shall mean a structure which utilizes stealth design to screen from view, camouflage, integrate into the architectural features of a building or otherwise eliminates or reduces to insignificant the visual impact of wireless communication facilities. Such structures include, but are not limited to, tree designs, rooftop structures, simulations of building features, designs matching adjacent architectural and vegetation features, antennas encased within poles or radomes and similar structures which can eliminate or reduce the aesthetic impact of the facility.

     (t)    “Support structure” shall mean a ground placed structure in which or to which wireless communications facilities are attached or housed.

     (u)   “Wireless communications facilities” and “facilities” shall mean commercial transmitting, relaying and/or receiving antennas, antenna support structures and/or ancillary facilities, including, but not limited to, equipment cabinets, facility components and similar structures or equipment and/or overhead service/transmission lines used for the purpose of transmitting, relaying and/or transmitting and/or receiving data, voice and/or paging services. Communications facilities shall also include those intended to be operated for a limited time such as facilities mounted on a mobile vehicle or trailer. For purposes of this chapter, communications facilities do not include those facilities specifically protected pursuant to Section 207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. In the instance of a distributed antenna system (DAS) or functional equivalent (e.g., distribution of the signal via multiple distribution points), the wireless communication facilities shall mean all distributed points and connecting cables and support equipment for the DAS system. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

 

25.77.030 Applicability.
     This chapter shall apply to all wireless communication facilities which transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals in order to provide services, including, but not limited to, personal communications services (such as mobile telephone services, internet services, location and monitoring services, data, e-mail, texting, streaming video and audio and paging) fixed microwave services, and mobile data services. This chapter shall apply to the entire area within the City of Burlingame city limits including all zoning districts, all public property and all public right-of-way. This chapter shall not be applied or interpreted, to prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting wireless communications services, to regulate the placement, construction or modification of wireless communications facilities on the sole basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, provided that such facilities comply with Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”) regulations, or to unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless communications services.

     This chapter shall not apply to:

     (a)   Wireless communications facilities which are located completely enclosed within a permitted structure are incidental to a permitted use in that structure and are located within a non-residential Zoning District.

     (b)   Hand-held mobile, marine, and portable radio transmitters and/or receivers which are not affixed to land or a structure.

     (c)   Wireless communications facilities required on a temporary basis during an officially declared emergency by local, state or federal authority.

     (d)   Traditional terrestrial radio and television mobile broadcast facilities.

     Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this chapter and any other City codes, ordinances, resolutions, guidelines or regulations, the more restrictive provision shall control unless otherwise specified or mandated by law. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.040 Non-conforming facilities.
     Any wireless communication facility that was lawfully erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter. The non-conforming wireless communications facilities shall be allowed to continue as they exist as of the effective date of this ordinance, but will be considered as lawful nonconforming legal uses and shall be subject to the restrictions of Chapter 25.50 of this code. The foregoing notwithstanding, non-conforming wireless communication facilities shall be required to comply with the requirements of this chapter if any non-conforming facility or component of a non-conforming facility is modified as defined in Section 25.77.165. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.050 Permit requirement.
     (a)   Permit Requirement for Location of Wireless Communications Facilities. No wireless communication facility shall be constructed, erected or placed anywhere within the City without first obtaining a permit from the Planning Commission or the Community Development Director pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and without obtaining any permits required under any other applicable state federal or local laws or regulations, unless exempt pursuant to Section 25.77.030. Applications for approval of wireless communication facility shall be submitted to and processed by the Planning Division of the City’s Community Development Department and shall be reviewed and either approved, modified or denied by the Community Development Director or the Planning Commission, depending upon the application’s classification as defined in this chapter. If the Community Development Director cannot support the findings of this chapter based upon the proposed project, then the Director may refer the application that would otherwise be subject to an administrative use permit, for review and approval by the Planning Commission.

     (b)   Administrative Use Permit. An administrative use permit for wireless communications facilities may be granted by the Community Development Director if the proposed facility:

     (1)   Will be placed entirely within a non-residential zoning district, not within the Burlingame downtown districts and not within five hundred (500) feet from any residential zoning district or the Burlingame downtown districts.

     (2)   Will be co-located on, in or immediately adjacent to an existing wireless communication facility.

     (c)   Conditional Use Permit. Except for facilities permitted under subsection (b), above, all wireless communication facilities shall require a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit application for wireless communication facilities shall be submitted to and processed by the Community Development Department to determine that the proposed facility complies with all the requirements of this chapter and with all the applicable requirements of other chapters of the Burlingame Municipal Code. Once the application is complete, it shall be placed on the action calendar of the next available Planning Commission meeting for consideration. A conditional use permit for wireless communication facilities may be granted only after a public hearing before and approval by, the Burlingame Planning Commission. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.055 Pre-application meeting.
     Prior to filing an application for a use permit for the installation of wireless communication facility, an applicant is encouraged to schedule a pre-application meeting with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposed facility, all of the requirements of this chapter and any potential impacts of the proposed facility. The applicant will be encouraged to perform an early stage outreach with residents and property owners near the proposed facilities in order to address and, if possible, resolve any impacts of the proposed facilities on the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.060 Contents of permit application.
     (a)   Conditional Use Permit. An applicant for a wireless communication facility conditional use permit shall complete and submit an application, together with all required information, to the Community Development Department for review and processing. The application shall contain and include all of the following:

     (1)   Name, address, phone number, email address of:

     (A)  The owner of the proposed facility;

     (B)   The applicant if different than owner;

     (C)   Any proposed service provider tenant.

     (2)   If the proposed facility is to be located in the public right-of-way, a copy of the CPUC documentation granting right of owner to locate utility facilities in right-of-way.

     (3)   A clear written description of the proposed facility that includes the number of antennas, the location and length of fiber/cable, the location and dimensions of all related equipment (cabinets, generators, batteries, cooling, transmitters, hubs etc.); such written description shall provide how this facility relates to the overall wireless network for the carrier(s) it is servicing as well as how this facility relates to other wireless facility projects in process of being constructed and/or planned in or near the City of Burlingame.

     (4)   A site plan with photos, depicting the location and dimension of the proposed wireless communication facilities and of the existing surrounding area features including structures, roads, trees, and similar items.

     (5)   A map identifying the applicant’s existing and planned wireless communications facilities within city limits. The map shall include an illustration of the estimated coverage area (search area) for all existing and proposed wireless communication facility sites for the applicant and/or service provider and shall include an explanation of how the proposed wireless communication facility fits into the individual service provider’s network of existing and proposed wireless communication facility sites within a tentative two (2) year plan.

     (6)   An explanation of the wireless communication facility site selection process including information about other sites which were considered, the reasons for the rejection of other sites, the reason that this particular facility is required to cover a gap in service, and the reason why the gap in service cannot be covered with another location or another technology.

     (7)   Visual impact demonstrations using clear, accurate and readable photo-simulations of all of the proposed wireless communication facilities. The simulations should contain dimensions, height measurements and color, size and shape (proper coloration and blending of the facility with the proposed site) of the proposed facilities in order to facilitate determination of potential visual impacts.

     (8)   If applicable, landscape plan that shows existing vegetation, indicating any vegetation proposed for removal l, and identifying proposed plantings by type, size and location.

     (9)   Information regarding potential environmental impacts (e.g., noise, visual, traffic, etc.) that may result from the installation of the wireless communication facility.

     (10) Certification by a qualified third party that the proposed wireless communication facility will comply with applicable radio frequency (RF) emission standards as established by the FCC. Such documentation may be satisfied by a written demonstration of compliance with FCC Bulletin OET-65, as amended.

     (11) Written description of any noise, light and/or heat generated by the facility, including, but not limited to, retractable monopole motors, antenna rotators, power generation, cooling equipment and similar items.

     (12) If applicable, an explanation for any deviation of the proposed facility from any of the design standards or other requirements of this chapter. Deviations are discouraged and shall only be granted where required by state or federal law.

     (13) Additional information the Community Development Director deems necessary to process the application in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. This may include, but is not limited to, information concerning noise that might be generated by equipment associated with a wireless communication facility, such as air conditioning equipment.

     (14) At the applicant’s expense, the City may require verification of the applicant’s submitted technical data by a qualified independent third party selected by the City. The technical data subject to third party verification shall be limited to the determinations that:

     (A)  The wireless communications facilities are compliant with FCC regulations; and

     (B)   The facilities are required to cover a gap in service.

     (b)   Administrative Use Permit. An applicant for an administrative use permit for wireless communication facility shall complete and submit an application, together with all required information, to the Community Development Department for review and processing. The application shall contain and include information required under subsection (a)(1) through (7), (10), (13) and (14).

     (c)   If an applicant fails to provide all of the information required in the application or any additional information required in support of the application, the application will not be deemed complete. No action will be taken on an incomplete application. If the application remains incomplete for more than sixty (60) days, the application will be deemed withdrawn and no further action will be taken in regard to it. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.070 Application fee.
     The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount necessary to recover the City’s reasonable cost of processing the application. The fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council and included in the City’s master fee schedule. Failure to include the fee with the application shall render the application incomplete and no action will be taken on the application until the fee is paid. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.080 General requirements.
     (a)   State or Federal Requirements. All wireless communication facilities shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FCC, the FAA, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed and are made applicable to existing facilities, the owners of the facilities governed by this chapter shall bring such facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring wireless communication facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the facilities at the owner’s expense, revocation of any permit or imposition of any other applicable penalty.

     (b)   Building Codes and Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of wireless communication facilities, the owner shall ensure that the facility is constructed and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a wireless communication facility fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner and the opportunity to be heard as afforded by the applicable building code, the owner shall have ninety (90) days to bring such facility into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such facility into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the facility at the owner’s expense, revocation of any permit or imposition of any other applicable penalty.

     (c)   Location Preference Order. In determining the location of proposed wireless communication facilities, applicants should use best efforts to comply with the location preference order outlined herein. If applicable, the applicant shall include an explanation of the reason that the proposed facilities cannot be deployed at a higher-preference location. Wireless communication facilities must be located where feasible in the following locations by descending priority:

     (1)   Locations within Non-Residential Zoning Districts, which are more than five hundred (500) feet from Residential Zoning Districts or the Burlingame Downtown Districts and which are not within the Burlingame Downtown Districts:

     (A)  Completely enclosed within existing, permitted buildings.

     (B)   Located on electric power transmission towers.

     (C)   Co-located on existing wireless communications facilities.

     (D)  The roof of existing structures (buildings, water tanks, etc), designed to blend in with the building, camouflaged or screened from the public right-of-way which constitutes a pedestrian travel corridor.

     (E)   The side of existing structures (buildings, water tanks, etc.), designed to blend in with the building, camouflaged or screened from the public right-of-way which constitutes a pedestrian travel corridor.

     (F)   Camouflaged stealth structure (a false tree, building, artifice, etc).

     (G)  Existing utility poles, with all ancillary equipment placed underground if feasible, camouflaged or screened.

     (H)  Existing utility distribution poles and street lights.

     (I)    Slim line monopole, with antennas in a canister at the same diameter as the pole.

     (J)    Standard monopole with attached flush-mounted (not extending more than twenty-four (24) inches from the pole) antenna elements.

     (2)   Non-Residential Zoning Districts within five hundred (500) feet of Residential Zoning Districts or the Burlingame Downtown Districts, and the Burlingame Downtown Districts.

     (A)  Integrated into non-residential uses (libraries, churches, temples, etc.) designed to blend in with open space (playing fields, parking lots, parks, etc.); hidden from pedestrian view by means of stealth design, stealth structures, architectural integration or screening.

     (B)   Co-located on existing wireless communications facilities which are in compliance with the provision of this chapter.

     (C)   In public right-of-way, within new light poles with interior stealth installations of cabling and antenna, and to the extent feasible, control equipment.

     (D)  In public right-of-way, on existing utility or light poles, with all ancillary equipment either underground, if feasible, camouflaged, screened or painted to blend into the surrounding structure.

     (3)   Residential Zoning Districts.

     (A)  Integrated into non-residential uses (libraries, churches, temples, etc.) or designed to blend in with open space (playing fields, parking lots, parks, etc.); hidden from view by means of stealth design, stealth structures, architectural integration or screening.

     (B)   Co-located in existing wireless communications facilities which are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

     (C)   In public right-of-way, within new light poles with interior stealth installations of cabling and antennae, and to the extent feasible, control equipment.

     (D)  In public right-of-way, on existing utility or light poles, with all ancillary equipment either underground, if feasible, camouflaged, screened or painted to blend into the surrounding structure. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.090 Design criteria for wireless communications facilities.
     The goal of these regulations is to reduce to the greatest extent possible all visual impacts resulting from the installation of wireless communications facilities. Stealth design and stealth structures for these facilities shall be considered the normal standard for all wireless communications facilities. Non-stealth designs and structures shall not be approved without evidence, independently verified, that it is not possible (using best efforts by applicant) to stealth such facilities. Applications shall be reviewed to determine compliance with the following criteria. If the applicant’s proposed facility cannot comply with the following criteria, the application shall include a detailed explanation of why it is not reasonably feasible to comply with the criteria.

     (a)   Wireless communication facilities should be co-located where feasible and where the co-location does not create an adverse aesthetic impact due to such factors as increasing the bulk, the height or the amount of noise created by the proposed co-located facilities.

     (b)   Wireless communication facilities should to the greatest extent feasible, not be located in Residential Zoning Districts.

     (c)   Wireless communication facilities should be designed, located and constructed in a manner that minimizes visual and auditory impacts of the facilities. The wireless communication facilities shall blend into the surrounding environment and/or shall be architecturally integrated into a structure, considering the color, design and character of the surrounding context (e.g., public art, clock towers, flagpoles, trees/vegetation, rocks, water tank, existing office/industrial buildings, and church steeples). Specifically, the proposed facilities shall comply, to the greatest extent feasible, with the following:

     (1)   The facilities should be concealed, screened or camouflaged by the surrounding topography, vegetation, buildings, or other setting.

     (2)   The facilities should be proportional in size relative to surrounding and supporting structures and ability for co-location by other providers.

     (3)   Roof-mounted facilities should be, out of view and screened; these facilities shall be set back at least one foot from the edge of the roof for every one foot of antenna height and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height above the roof surface.

     (4)   Wall-mounted facilities should be compatible in scale and design with the building, shall be flush mounted, i.e., not extending from the face of the building more than twenty-four (24) inches and shall be painted and/or textured to match the wall of the building. All cables and brackets, wires, shall also be hidden.

     (5)   All facilities should be constructed of graffiti-resistant materials.

     (6)   All concealing, screening, painting, camouflaging and/or use of stealth designs and stealth structures should be consistent with Section 25.77.010 (Purpose) including, but not limited to, promoting wholesome, attractive, harmonious and economic use of property, building construction, civic service, activities and operations in conformity with and preserving the overall aesthetics of City neighborhoods including its character and its century old architectural traditions.

     (d)   Where applicable, appropriate landscaping should be installed in and around the proposed wireless communication facilities.

     (e)   Any exterior lighting on the facilities should have a manual on/off switch and be contained on-site.

     (f)    Ground equipment of the facilities should be concealed, screened, camouflaged or hidden using stealth design, stealth structures, underground installation or landscaping and fencing.

     (g)   Signage in, on or near any facilities should be prohibited with the exception of warning and informational signs, which shall be designed with minimal aesthetic impact.

     (h)   Wireless communication facilities should be discouraged in areas subject to the City’s hillside construction permit as designated in Section 25.61.010; if facilities cannot be avoided in the hillside areas, then visual impacts should be eliminated through stealth design, stealth structures and landscaping.

     (i)    Support wires for structures should be discouraged.

     (j)    The wireless communication facilities should be designed to discourage unauthorized access. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.100 Wireless Communications Facility Guidelines.
     (a)   By resolution, the City Council will provide Wireless Communications Facilities Guidelines which shall describe and provide pictorial examples of stealth designs for wireless communication facilities, preferred types of screening, landscaping and camouflaging, preferred locations for ground-mounted, roof-mounted and side-mounted facilities and dimensions for height, setback and bulk. The Community Development Department will update the Guidelines for City Council approval periodically, but no less than once every two (2) years, in order to consider the inclusion of new technologies, innovations and current best examples which would further the goal of reducing the impacts of facilities. The Guidelines are examples of facilities which may comply with the design standards contained in this chapter. However, the design standards and the findings of the Planning Commission shall have precedence over the Guidelines. Because of the speed of technological change and the time between updates of the City Guidelines, the applicant should understand that the Guidelines are intended to assist the applicant in choosing potentially preferred designs, but are not intended to suggest that such examples will be approved or that such examples are mandated.

     (b)   The Guidelines document shall include photos and descriptions of:

     (1)   Monopoles that blend into surrounding vegetation, minimize the lattice structure, and avoid guy wires, while still meeting safety standards.

     (2)   Facilities utilizing existing towers or utility poles to extend wireless service area. When appropriately mounted on suitable utility poles, the additional antenna facilities have an insignificant visual impact beyond that which the existing structure presents.

     (3)   Stealth structures and design features which exhibit uniform consistency in size, character and color to that of the surrounding environment (e.g., public art, foliage, trees, buildings, rocks, church steeples or other structures, including samples of size and coloring).

     (4)   Ground-mounted, roof-mounted and side-mounted facilities with dimensions, and measurements for height, setback and bulk of the facilities. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.110 Conditional use permit—Notice of public hearing to property owners—Action by Planning Commission.
     (a)   Notice of Public Hearing. Once the application and all supporting information and documentation has been received, notice of a public hearing before the Planning Commission regarding the conditional use permit for wireless communications facilities shall be given according to the provision of Section 25.16.050. Notice shall be mailed to owners and occupants within three hundred (300) feet on either side of the boundary of the proposed wireless communication facility.

     In addition to the information required by Section 25.16.050, the following information shall also be provided with the notice:

     (1)   Project description and site plan, as provided in the application.

     (2)   Map of entire project as provided in the application.

     (3)   Complete photo simulations which accurately depict facilities as provided in the application. Applicant shall ensure that photo simulations do not mislead residents as to the aesthetic impacts of the facilities.

     More detailed information, including, but not limited to, elevations and alternatives analysis, as provided in the application, shall be placed on the City’s website and this information shall be referenced in the notice.

     (b)   Notice Posted on Site. The notice of public hearing shall also be posted in a conspicuous location on or near the site of the proposed facilities.

     (c)   Action by Planning Commission. On the time and date set for the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall conduct the public hearing regarding the application for conditional use permit for wireless communication facilities and shall take action pursuant to Burlingame Municipal Code Section 25.16.060. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.120 Administrative use permit—Notice of project to property owners—Action by Community Development Director.
     (a)   Once the application and all supporting information and documentation have been received, notice of the application for the proposed wireless communication facilities shall be given according to the provision of Section 25.16.050. Notice shall be given to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of any of the proposed facilities. In addition to the information required by Section 25.16.050 to be included in the notice, the following information shall also be provided:

     (1)   Project description and site plan as provided in the application.

     (2)   Map which accurately and clearly depicts location of entire project as provided in the application.

     More detailed information, including, but not limited to, photo simulations, elevations and alternatives analysis, as provided in the application, shall be placed on the City’s website and this information shall be referenced in the notice.

     The notice shall also state that, unless a written request for a public hearing is received by the Community Development Department within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the notice, the Community Development Director shall take action on the application and may either grant or deny the administrative use permit and may impose conditions as applicable.

     (b)   Action by Community Development Director. If no written request for a public hearing regarding the application for administrative use permit for the wireless communication facilities is received by the Community Development Department within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the notice, the Community Development Director shall take action on the application and may either grant or deny the administrative use permit and may impose conditions as applicable. If a written request for a public hearing is received, within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the notice, the Community Development Director shall schedule the application for a public hearing before the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 25.16.060. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.125 Wireless facilities in public right-of-way—DPW review.
     Review of an application for a wireless communication facilities use permit in the public right-of-way will be processed by the Community Development Department pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It is acknowledged that the City’s regulations of utilities properly certified by the State Public Utilities Commission and proposed for location in the public right-of-way must be imposed in a manner consistent with Sections 7901 and 7901.1 of the Public Utilities Code. In reviewing the application for placement of facilities in the public right-of-way, the Director shall apply the design criteria of this chapter to determine, in a manner consistent with the Public Utilities Code, the appropriate restrictions for the proposed facilities. The application for facilities within the public right-of-way shall be referred to and reviewed by the Public Works Department to ensure that the proposed facilities will not interfere with, present a hazard to, or otherwise incommode the use of the right-of-way. A use permit issued by the City for the installation of wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way shall also constitute an encroachment permit. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.130 Conditions of approval.
     In approving a use permit pursuant to this chapter, the approving authority may impose conditions, not prohibited by applicable federal and state law, which are deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the Burlingame Municipal Code and the provisions of any other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.140 Post-approval requirements.
     To ensure that the wireless communication facilities continue to meet the requirements of this chapter, periodic post-installation verification shall be required. Failure to provide this information or to comply with these requirements may be grounds for permit revocation.

     (a)   Validation of Proper Operation. Within forty-five (45) days of commencement of the facilities operation, the applicant shall provide verification by independent qualified experts that the RF levels of the facilities comply with FCC regulations and with the City noise regulations.

     (b)   Five (5) Year Review. The applicant shall report to the City every five (5) years from the date of commencement of the facilities operation, a review of the condition of the facilities, of the facilities compliance with federal and state regulations and of the facilities compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the conditions of approval. The applicant shall also provide updated contact information for the owner and the applicant and verifiable confirmation information as to what carrier(s) are using the facility.

     (c)   City Business License. The applicant shall procure and maintain a City business license, contact information for the applicant, for the agent responsible for maintenance of the facilities and for emergency contact.

     (d)   Security Bond to Remove facility. The applicant shall either secure a bond, letter of credit or other similar financial assurance, in a form acceptable to the City, for the removal of the facility in the event that its use is abandoned, its operation is ceased or the approval is terminated.

     (e)   Maintenance. Maintenance and repairs to wireless communication facilities shall be permitted provided that such maintenance and repair does not enlarge or extend the facilities structure or equipment enclosures or change the number, type, dimensions, of the antenna or related equipment. All facilities shall be operated and maintained in compliance with the following requirements:

     (1)   Where applicable and feasible, each wireless communication facilities site shall have a sign visible from a publicly accessible area, identifying the name, address, twenty-four (24) hour local or toll-free contact telephone number for both the applicant and the party responsible for maintenance of the facility. Information shall be updated in the event of any changes.

     (2)   Current contact information of the person or entity responsible for maintaining and repairing the facility shall be provided to and maintained by the Community Development Department.

     (3)   Wireless communication facilities and sites shall be kept clean and free of graffiti, litter and debris. Lighting, fences, shields, cabinets, and poles, shall be maintained in good repair and free of graffiti and other forms of vandalism, and any damage from any cause, including degradation from wind and weather, shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight. Graffiti shall be removed from any facility as soon as practicable, and in no instance more than two (2) business days from the time of notification by any person or entity.

     (4)   Where applicable, the owner or provider of wireless communication facilities shall be responsible for maintaining landscaping in accordance with the approved landscape plan and for replacing any damaged or dead trees, foliage, or other landscaping elements shown on the approved plan. A landscape performance and maintenance agreement with the City may be required to ensure the installation and establishment of the landscaping. Amendments or modifications to the landscape plan shall be submitted to the Planning Director for approval.

     (5)   To the greatest extent possible, wireless communication facilities shall be operated in a manner that will minimize noise impacts to surrounding properties.

     (A)  Except for emergency repairs, testing and maintenance activities that will be audible beyond the property line shall only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.

     (B)   Noise originating from any equipment shall be mitigated to the extent necessary to ensure compliance with applicable noise limitations under the Burlingame Municipal Code.

     (C)   Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages or for testing during a set period. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.150 Term.
     A conditional or administrative use permit for wireless communication facilities shall be valid for ten (10) years from the date of approval. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.160 Renewal.
     An applicant may renew a conditional or administrative use permit for wireless communication facilities pursuant to the provisions of this section.

     (a)   At least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the expiration of the initial ten (10) year term, the applicant shall complete and submit a renewal application to the Community Development Director. The application shall be in the same form as the application for a new facility and shall contain and include the following information:

     (1)   Name, address, phone number, email address of the owner of the proposed facility and of the applicant if different than owner; if proposed facility is to be in the right-of-way, a copy of the CPUC documentation granting right of owner to locate utility facilities in right-of-way.

     (2)   Accurate photos and final construction drawings of all of the currently existing wireless communication facilities authorized by the use permit which is the subject of the renewal application.

     (3)   As applicable, supplement original application with current, updated information.

     (4)   Information describing new technologies, stealth design and stealth structures which may be applied to modify the current wireless communications facilities and, if applicable, stated reasons for the failure to employ such new technology and design on the current facilities which are the subject of the renewal application.

     (b)   Fee. The renewal application shall be accompanied by a fee designed to recover the reasonable cost of processing the application. Failure to include the fee with the renewal application shall render the application incomplete and no action will be taken on it until the fee is paid.

     (c)   Notice. Notice of the renewal application for the existing wireless communication facilities shall be given according to the provision of Section 25.16.050. Notice shall be given to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the facilities.

     (d)   Action by Community Development Director.

 

     (1)   If no written request for a public hearing regarding the application for renewal of the conditional or administrative use permit for the wireless communications facilities is received by the Community Development Department within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the notice, the Community Development Director shall take action on the application pursuant to the design guidelines and criteria contained within this chapter and may either grant or deny the administrative use permit and may impose conditions as applicable.

     (2)   If a written request for a public hearing is received within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the notice, the Community Development Director shall schedule the application for a public hearing before the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 25.16.060.

     (3)   If the Community Development Director cannot make the findings of this chapter based upon the renewal application and supporting materials, the Director may refer the application that otherwise would be subject to renewal as an administrative use permit, for review and approval by the Planning Commission at a public hearing.

     (e)   Action by Planning Commission. On the time and date set for the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall conduct the public hearing regarding the renewal application for conditional use permit for wireless communication facilities and shall take action pursuant to Burlingame Municipal Code Section 25.16.060. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.165 Modification.
     (a)   If an owner or applicant seeks to change, alter, revise or add to the wireless communications facilities, the following shall apply:

     (1)   If the facilities are modified in a “like for like” manner that results in a decrease of size of any component or an increase in size of any one component not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the base component size, a permit under this chapter would not be required. If applicable, applicant shall obtain a building permit.

     (2)   If the facilities are modified in a manner resulting in an increase of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the size of any component of the facility when compared to the base component size, the applicant shall submit an application for the same permit which such facility would have required if it were a new facility, pursuant to Section 25.77.060.

     (3)   If the addition of antennas or other equipment on the facility increases the visual (e.g., height, bulk) or audio impact of the facility, then the applicant shall submit an application for the same permit which such facility would have required if it were a new facility, pursuant to Section 25.77.060.

     (4)   If the addition or modification of ground-mounted equipment significantly changes the visual or audio impact of the facility, the applicant shall submit an application for an administrative review by the Community Development Director to ensure compliance with existing conditions of approval. If the Director determines that the proposed modification does not significantly comply with the existing conditions of approval, the applicant shall submit an application for the same permit which such facility would have required if it were a new facility, pursuant to Section 25.77.060.

     (b)   “Base component size” as used in this section, means the smaller of the size of the originally approved component or of the size of the component as subsequently reduced pursuant to a previous modification.

     (c)   Any permit application required under Section 25.77.165(a), whether for an administrative or a conditional use permit, shall be processed in the same manner and with the same requirements as an application for new facilities pursuant to Sections 25.77.070 to 25.77.150. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

 

25.77.168 Wireless facility modification under 47 U.S.C. § 1455.
     (a)   Notwithstanding anything contrary in this chapter, any applicant for a permit required by Section 25.77.050 who believes that its application qualifies under Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (codified at 47 U.S.C. Section 1455) as implemented by 47 C.F.R. 1.40001 shall expressly request approval under this section when submitting its initial application and shall provide the City with such evidence as reasonably required by the City to demonstrate that its application qualifies for submittal under this section. Upon application submittal, the Community Development Director shall review the application to determine if it qualifies for submittal hereunder. The Community Development Director may require additional information from the applicant as necessary to make this determination. No applicant requesting approval under this section shall be required to include the information required under Section 25.77.060(a)(6) with its initial application but the applicant may be required to provide this information to complete its application if the Community Development Director determines that the application does not qualify for submittal under this section and the section under which the application does qualify requires such information to be submitted.

     (b)   If the Community Development Director determines that an application qualifies under subsection (a), the Community Development Director shall process the application in a similar manner as an application for an administrative use permit under this chapter. If the application is approved, the Community Development Director shall issue an administrative use permit that indicates that the permit is granted pursuant to this section. Moreover, except as expressly prohibited by federal law, the administrative use permit shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of this chapter and other lawfully imposed conditions of approval.

     (c)   This section shall be interpreted narrowly to preserve City discretion over wireless communication facilities to the fullest extent permitted by applicable federal law. This section does not and shall not be construed to grant any rights beyond those granted by 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 as implemented by 47 C.F.R. 1.40001, including subsequent changes adopted, enacted or imposed by the Federal Communications Commission, federal legislation and case law. (Ord. 1914 § 2, (2015); Ord. 1915 § 2, (2015))

 

25.77.170 Cessation of operations.
     (a)   Vacation. The service provider shall notify the Community Development Director of the intent to vacate a site at least thirty (30) days prior to the vacation.

     (b)   Cessation of Operations. If a wireless communication facilities site is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, the conditional or administrative use permit for that facility shall be deemed terminated unless before the end of the twelve (12) month period:

     (1)   The Community Development Director has determined that the same operator resumed operation; or

     (2)   The City has received an application to transfer the permit to another service provider.

     (c)   No later than ninety (90) days from the date the facility is determined to have ceased operation or the Provider has notified the Community Development Director of the intent to vacate the site, the owner of the wireless communication facilities or the owner of the property on which the facilities are sited shall remove all equipment and improvements associated with the use and shall restore the site to its original condition as required by the Community Development Director. The provider or owner may use any bond or other assurances provided by the operator to do so. The owner or his or her agent shall provide written verification of the removal of the facilities within thirty (30) days of the date the removal is completed.

     (d)   If the facility is not removed within thirty (30) days after the permit has been discontinued pursuant to either subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the site shall be deemed to be a nuisance pursuant to Chapter 1.18 of the Burlingame Municipal Code, Nuisance Abatement, and the City may cause the facility to be removed at the owners’ expense or by calling any bond or other financial assurance to pay for removal. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall apply to the abandoned antenna but not become effective for the tower until all users cease using the tower. The requirement for removal of equipment in compliance with this section shall be included as a provision in any lease of private property for placement of wireless communication facilities. (Ord. 1870 § 2, (2012); Ord. 1869 § 3, (2012))

Chapter 25.78 FENCES AND HEDGES
25.78.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions will apply:

     “Fence” means a structure of wood, masonry, metal or other solid material built on or close to a property line for the purpose of physically separating properties.

     “Hedge” means a compact planting of any type of plant or shrub which is, or is intended, to act as a fence. (1941 Code § 1974, Ord. 539, (1954))

 

25.78.020 Height of fences in R districts.
     (a)   In any R district, no fence or hedge which exceeds five (5) feet in height, measured from the average of the ground level at both sides of the fence, is permitted in that part of the lot which is the front setback. However, one arbor that is no taller than nine (9) feet overall when measured from adjacent grade, and no wider than eight (8) feet, and no deeper than four (4) feet, may be placed in the front setback.

     (b)   In any R district, fences seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted at side and rear property lines, provided the last foot in height is of an open design freely allowing light and air to pass through; all other fences in these locations shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. (1941 Code § 1975, Ord. 539, (9154); Ord. 1934 § 3, (1989); Ord. 1728 § 4, (2004))

 

25.78.025 Fence height in all other districts.
     In all other districts, except as required or permitted in the RR district in Chapter 25.44, fences seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted, provided the last foot in height is of an open design freely allowing light and air to pass through. (Ord. 1394 § 4, (1989); Ord. 1586 § 51, (1998); Ord. 1793 § 41, (2006))

 

25.78.030 Measurement of height.
     Except as provided in Section 25.78.020(a), the height of a fence or hedge shall be measured from the highest adjacent grade. (1941 Code § 1976, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 1394 § 5, (1989))

 

25.78.035 Building permit required.
     Any fence exceeding six (6) feet in height, whether alone or atop a wall exceeding six (6) feet in total height, shall require a building permit. In addition, a building permit shall be required for any fence three (3) feet or taller located on any corner lot. (Ord. 1394 § 6 (1989); Ord. 1586 § 52, (1998))

 

25.78.040 Fences on corner lots.
     On all corner lots, on that portion of the property lines which extend for fifteen (15) feet in each direction from the external corner of the lot, no fence or hedge shall exceed three (3) feet in height, measured from the curb level. When the corner lot is on a curve, the point from which measurement starts is the point of intersection of the tangents of that curve. (1941 Code § 1977, Ord. 539, (1954))

 

25.78.045 Fences and hedges on El Camino Real.
     No fence or hedge which exceeds three feet (3) in height is permitted within twenty (20) feet of any property line on El Camino Real when such property line is crossed by a driveway for regular vehicle ingress and egress. (Ord. 1178 § 1, (1980))

 

25.78.050 Exceptions from permitted heights.
     Fences of a greater height than herein permitted may be approved by the planning commission upon presentation of a petition. The petitioner must make sufficient showing:

     (a)   That there are exceptional circumstances;

     (b)   That there is no public hazard;

     (c)   That neighboring properties will not be materially damaged;

     (d)   That the regulations cause unnecessary hardship upon the petitioner. (1941 Code § 1978, Ord. 539, (1954); Ord. 1031 § 4, (1975))

 

 

25.78.060 Nonconforming fences and hedges.
     Any fence or hedge existing at the effective date hereof whose height exceeds that specified is nonconforming. The city council may order a nonconforming fence or hedge to be caused to conform upon its conclusion that a public hazard or public inconvenience results from such nonconformance. (1941 Code § 1979, Ord. 539, (1954))

 

25.78.070 Exceptions for schools and playgrounds.
     The regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the construction of metal fences for the protection of schools and playgrounds. (1941 Code § 1980, Ord. 539, (1954))

 

25.78.075 Conformance with other provision of the code.
     Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, no fence shall violate the requirements of this code, in particular Chapter 11.12. (Ord. 1586 § 53, (1998))

Chapter 25.80 PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPACT FEES
25.80.010 Definitions.
     Words, when used in this chapter and in resolutions adopted thereunder, shall have the following meanings:

     (a)   “Development permit” means any building permit, electrical permit, plumbing permit, demolition permit, moving permit, or any other permit required by this code for issuance before construction, reconstruction, remodeling, moving structures or any similar activity can be lawfully undertaken on a parcel of property in the city.

     (b)   “Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. “Development project” includes a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, but not a permit to operate.

     (c)   “Fee” means a money exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by the city to an applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to the development project.

     (d)   “Public facility” includes public improvements, public services and community amenities. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.020 Collection of public facilities impact fees.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, public facilities impact fees shall be paid pursuant to this chapter before the issuance of any development permit. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.030 Conditions for collection.
     (a)   The following public facilities impact fees are established and imposed on the issuance of development permits within the city as determined by resolution of the city council:

     (1)   General Facilities and Equipment. A development fee is established for general facilities and equipment.

     (2)   Libraries. A development fee is established for library facilities, equipment and materials.

     (3)   Police. A development fee is established for police facilities and equipment.

     (4)   Parks and Recreation. A development fee is established for parks and recreation facilities and equipment.

     (5)   Streets and Traffic. A development fee is established for street sand traffic facilities and equipment.

     (6)   Fire. A development fee is established for fire facilities and equipment.

     (7)   Storm Drainage. A development fee is established for storm drainage facilities and equipment.

     (b)   In establishing and imposing the schedule and application of the public facilities impact fees by resolution, the city council will do the following:

     (1)   Identify the purpose of the fee;

     (2)   Identify the use to which the fee is to be put;

     (3) Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the fees used and the type of development on which the fee is imposed; and

     (4) Determine that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facility and the impacts caused by the type of development project on which the fee is imposed. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.040 Deposit of fees.
     (a)   Upon receipt of a fee subject to this chapter, the city shall deposit, invest, account for and expend the fees pursuant to Government Code Section 66006. The city shall retain fee interest accrued and allocate it to the accounts for which the original fee was imposed.

     (b)   Each fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund created to hold the revenue generated by each such fee. Moneys within each such fund may be expended only by appropriation by the city council for specific projects which are of the same category as that for which the money was collected. In this regard, the following special funds are created and established for the purposes indicated:

 

     (1)   A General Facilities and Equipment Fund is Established. The general facilities and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the general municipal facilities within the city, including any required acquisition of land.

     (2)   A Library Facilities, Materials and Equipment Fund is Established. The library facilities, material, and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of library facilities, materials and equipment, including any required acquisition of land.

     (3)   A Police Facilities and Equipment Fund is Established. The police facilities and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of police facilities and equipment, including any required acquisition of land.

     (4)   A Parks and Recreation Facilities and Equipment Fund is Established. The parks and recreation facilities and equipment fund is a fund for the payment of the actual or estimated costs of parks and recreation facilities and equipment, including any required acquisition of land.

     (5)   A Streets and Traffic Facilities and Equipment Fund is Established. The streets and traffic facilities and equipment fund is a fund for the payment of the actual or estimated costs of streets and traffic facilities and equipment, including any required acquisition of land.

     (6)   A Fire Facilities and Equipment Fund is Established. The fire facilities and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of fire facilities and equipment, including any required acquisition of land.

     (7)   A Storm Drainage Facilities and Equipment Fund is Established. The storm drainage facilities and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the storm drain facilities and for associated equipment, including any required acquisition of land.

     (c)   The city manager shall provide a report on these funds to the city council no less than once a year in accordance with Government Code Section 66006. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.050 Computation of fee.
     (a)   The uses in the development project approved by the city shall be utilized in the computation of fees required to be paid with respect to any property. If a parcel contains more than one use, then the applicable fees shall be prorated by square footage or dwelling units, as appropriate, attributable to each use.

     (b)   The fees shall be based on the uses, the number of dwelling units, and the amount of square footage to be located on the property after completion of the development project. New development that, through demolition or conversion, will eliminate existing development is entitled to a fee credit offset if the existing development is a lawful use under this title, including a nonconforming use.

     (c)   New development that will replace development that was partially or totally destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake, mudslide, or other casualty or act of God, is entitled to a fee credit offset if the development that was partially or totally destroyed was a lawful use under this title, including a nonconforming use, at the time of the destruction.

     (d)   All fees due under this chapter shall be determined and calculated by the director of community development or the director’s designee. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.060 Natural disaster fee exemption.
     No fee adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be applied by the city to the reconstruction of any residential, commercial or industrial development project that is damaged or destroyed as a result of a natural disaster as declared by the governor of the state insofar as the reconstruction is substantially equivalent in size and use as defined under Government Code Section 66011. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.070 Exemption for existing buildings and uses.
     (a)   The following shall be exempted from payment of applicable public facilities impact fees:

     (1)   Alterations, renovations or expansion of an existing residential building or structure where no additional dwelling units are created and the use is not changed.

     (2)   Alterations or renovations of an existing commercial or industrial building or structure where no expansion occurs and the use is not changed.

     (b)   For purposes of this section:

     (1)   “Expansion” shall be defined as any increase in the gross floor area of the existing building or structure.

     (2)   “Change of use” shall be defined as a change or intensification of the use of a portion or all of a building or structure in such a way that additional parking is required by this title. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.080 Fee payment.
     (a)   Fees shall be paid at or before the time of issuance of the first required development permit for a development project. However, if the development project is a residential project as defined in Government Code

Section 66007, then the time for payment of fees shall be governed by the provisions of Section 66007.

     (b)   The fee shall be determined by the fee schedule in effect on the date the vesting tentative map or vesting parcel map is approved, or the date a development permit is issued.

     (c)   When application is made for a new building permit following the expiration of a previously issued building permit for which fees were paid, a new fee payment shall not be required, unless the fee schedule has been amended during the interim; in this event, the appropriate increase or decrease shall be applied to permit issuance.

     (d)   In the event that development has already lawfully occurred on a parcel for which public facilities impact fees were imposed, fees shall be required only for additional square footage of development that was not included in computing a prior fee.

     (e)   When a fee is paid for a development project and that project is subsequently reduced so that it would have been entitled to a lower fee, the city shall issue a prorated refund of the paid fee.

     (f)    When a fee is paid for a development project and the project is subsequently and irrevocably abandoned in writing without any further activity beyond the obtaining of a first development permit, the payer shall be entitled to a refund of the fee paid, minus the administrative portion of the fee. A written request for a refund of a fee paid in connection with an expired or abandoned development project must be made to the director of community development within one hundred twenty (120) days of the expiration of the permit. Failure to submit the request within this time limit shall constitute a waiver of any right to any refund of the fee, and the fee shall be retained in and expended from the fund to which it was deposited. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.090 In-lieu construction or provision of facilities or equipment.
     (a)   In-lieu Credit.

     (1)   A developer that has been required by the city to construct any facilities or improvements, or a portion thereof, referenced in a resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter as a condition of approval of a development permit may request an in-lieu credit of the specific public facilities impact fee for the same development. Upon request, an in-lieu credit of fees shall be granted for facilities or improvements that mitigate all or a portion of the need therefor that is attributable to and reasonably related to the given development.

     (2)   Only costs proportional to the amount of the improvement or facility that mitigates the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development shall be eligible for in-lieu credit, and then only against the specific, relevant fees involved to which the facility or improvement relates.

     (3)   Fees required under this chapter shall be reduced by the actual construction costs of the facilities or improvements that relate to the fee, as demonstrated by the applicant and reviewed and approved by the director of community development, and consistent with the provisions of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section. Subject to the applicable provisions of subsection (b) of this section, if the cost of the facilities or improvements is greater than required relevant fees, this chapter does not create an obligation on the city to pay the applicant the excess amount.

     (4)   An amount of in-lieu credit that is greater than the specific fee required under this chapter may be reserved and credited toward the fee of any subsequent phases of the same development, if determined appropriate by the director of community development. The director may set a time limit for reservation of the credit.

     (b)   Developer Construction of Facilities Exceeding Needs Related to Development Project. Whenever an applicant is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct any facility or improvement (or a portion thereof) referenced in a resolution adopted which is determined by the city to exceed the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development project, a reimbursement agreement with the applicant and a credit against the specific relevant fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project shall be offered. The credit shall be applied with respect to that portion of the improvement or facility which is attributable to and reasonably related to the need therefor caused by the development, and shall be determined, administered and processed in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 25.80.140. The amount to be reimbursed shall be that portion of the cost of the improvement or facility which exceeds the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. The reimbursement agreement shall contain terms and conditions mutually agreeable to the developer and the city, and shall be approved by the city council. Reimbursement shall be provided from fees which are deposited into the relevant fund or funds by other applicants for development projects.

     (c)   Site-Related Improvements. Credit shall not be given for site-related improvements, including, but not limited to, traffic signals, right-of-way dedications, or providing paved access to the property, which are specifically required by the project in order to serve it and which do not constitute facilities or improvements specified in the resolution referenced in Section 15.80.030 of this chapter.

     (d)   Determination of Credit. The developer seeking credit and/or reimbursement for construction of improvements or facilities, or dedication of land or rights-of-way, shall submit such documentation, including without limitation, engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates, and utilize such methods as may be appropriate and acceptable to the director of community development to support the request for credit or reimbursement. The director shall determine credit for construction of improvements or facilities based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if the director determines that such estimates submitted by the developer are either unreliable or inaccurate. The director shall determine whether facilities or improvements are eligible for credit or reimbursement.

     (e)   Time for Making Claim for Credit. Any claim for credit must be made no later than the application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.

     (f)    Transferability of Credit—Council Approval. Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another.

     (g)   Appeal of Determinations of Director of Community Development. Determinations made by the director of community development pursuant to this section may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Section 25.16.150 within ten (10) days of the determination of the director. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.100 Use of funds.
     (a)   Funds collected from public facilities impact fees shall be used for the purpose of:

     (1)   Paying the actual or estimated costs of constructing or improving the public facilities within the city or purchasing materials or equipment for the public facilities within the city to which the specific fee or fees relate, including any required acquisition of land or rights-of-way therefor; or

     (2)   Reimbursing the city for the development project’s share of those public facilities already constructed by the city or to reimburse the city for costs advanced, including without limitation, administrative costs incurred with respect to a specific public facility project; or

     (3)   Reimbursing other developers who have constructed public facilities described in the resolution, where those facilities were beyond those needed to mitigate the impact of the earlier developer’s project or projects.

     (b)   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of public facilities for which public facilities impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type to which the fees involved relate. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.110 Conditions for reimbursement.
     (a)   The city manager shall report to the city council once each fiscal year regarding any portion of a fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in an account five (5) or more years after deposit and identify the purpose for which the fee was collected. The city council shall make findings at least once every fifth year thereafter with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in its account five (5) or more years after deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose to which the fee is put and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged.

     (b)   A refund of unexpended or uncommitted fees for which a need cannot be demonstrated along with accrued interest may be made to the current owner(s) of the development project(s) on a prorated basis. The city manager may refund unexpended and uncommitted fees that have been found by the city council to be no longer needed, by direct payment or by offsetting other obligations owed to the city by the current owners of the development project.

     (c)   If the administrative costs of refunding unexpended and uncommitted revenues collected pursuant to this section exceed the amount to be refunded, the city council, after a public hearing for which notice has been published pursuant to Government Code Section 6061 and posted in three prominent places within the area of the development project, may determine that the revenues shall be allocated for some other purpose for which the fees are collected subject to this chapter that serve the project on which the fee was originally imposed. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.120 Capital improvement plan.
     (a)   The city may adopt or incorporate a capital improvement plan which indicates the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimates of costs for public facilities or improvements to be financed with public facility impact fees.

     (b)   The city manager shall annually submit the capital improvement plan to the city council for adoption at a noticed public hearing.

     (c)   The public facility impact fee schedule adopted by the city council by resolution shall be annually reviewed by the council for consistency with the capital improvement plan, and any necessary amendments shall be made by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.130 Procedure for adoption of fees.
     The adoption of public facility impact fees is a legislative act and shall be enacted by resolution after a public hearing before the city council. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

 

25.80.140 Fee adjustments or waiver.
     (a)   A developer of any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the director of community development for reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed.

     (b)   The application shall be made in writing and filed with the director of community development not later than:

     (1)   Twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission on the development project application under this title, or

     (2)   If no hearing before the planning commission is required by this title, at the time of the filing of the application for a development permit.

     The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment.

     (c)   The planning commission shall consider the application at a public hearing held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. The decision of the planning commission is subject to appeal to the city council pursuant to this title. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the development project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 1830 § 2, (2008); Ord. 1835 § 2, (2008))

Chapter 25.81 COMMERCIAL LINKAGE FEES
25.81.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to:

     (a)   Encourage the development and availability of housing affordable to a broad range of households with varying income levels within the City as mandated by State law, California Government Code Section 65580 and following.

     (b)   Offset the demand for affordable housing that is created by new development and mitigate environmental and other impacts that accompany new commercial development by protecting the economic diversity of the City’s housing stock; reducing traffic, transit and related air quality impacts; promoting jobs/housing balance; and reducing the demands placed on transportation infrastructure in the region.

     (c)   Promote the City’s policy to provide an adequate number of affordable housing units to the City’s housing stock in proportion to the existing or projected need in the community, as identified by the Housing Element.

     (d)   Support the Housing Element goal of providing housing opportunities for those who work in Burlingame.

     (e)   Support the Housing Element goal of achieving increased affordability of housing.

     (f)    Support the Housing Element policy of developing of a variety of housing types that are affordable to very low and extremely low income households.

     (g)   Support the Housing Element goal of preserving residential character by encouraging maintenance, improvement and rehabilitation of the City’s neighborhoods and housing stock. (Ord. 1943 § 1, (2017))

 

25.81.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

     (a)   “Administrator” means the Community Development Director of the City or other person designated by the City Manager.

     (b)   “Builder” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks City approvals for all or part of a commercial development project.

     (c)   “Building permit” includes full structural building permits as well as partial permits such as foundation-only permits.

     (d)   “Commercial” use includes hotels, retail uses, restaurants, services and offices.

     (e)   “Commercial development project” means an application for a planning permit or building permit that includes the new construction of gross square feet of commercial space or the conversion of a residential use to a commercial use.

     (f)    “Commercial linkage fee” means the fee paid by builders of commercial development projects to mitigate the impacts that such developments have on the demand for affordable housing in the City.

     (g)   “First approval” means the first discretionary approval to occur with respect to commercial development projects, or, for commercial development projects not requiring a discretionary approval, the issuance of a building permit.

     (h)   “Planning permit” means any discretionary approval of a commercial project, including, but not limited to, a comprehensive or specific plan adoption or amendment, rezoning, tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, variances, or architectural review. (Ord. 1943 § 1, (2017))

 

25.81.030 Commercial linkage fees.
     Initial fees shall be imposed on new commercial development projects as follows: seven dollars ($7.00) per square foot for retail development (includes restaurant and service uses), twelve dollars ($12.00) per square foot for hotel, eighteen dollars ($18.00) per square feet for office of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or less, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per square feet for office greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. Fees shall be based on the calculation of gross square feet of floor area, excluding enclosed parking areas, and shall include a credit for existing uses. The Council may amend these fees through the public hearing process for the City’s Master Fee Schedule. Commercial linkage fees shall not exceed the cost of mitigating the impact of the commercial development projects on the need for affordable housing in the City. (Ord. 1943 § 1, (2017))

 

25.81.040 Fee payment.
     Any commercial linkage fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the first building permit for the commercial development project subject to the fee or at a time otherwise specified by Council resolution. If no building permit is required, the fee shall be paid before a conversion of use may take place. The fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule in effect at the time the building permit is issued. (Ord. 1943 § 1, (2017))

 

25.81.050 Exemptions.
     (a)   The following commercial development projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

     (1)   Projects adding less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of net new square footage.

     (2)   City buildings and facilities and those public facilities entitled to an exemption under law.

     (3)   Projects that have established a vested right not to be subject to this chapter.

     (4)   Applications under review by the Planning Commission that had been deemed complete at the time of adoption of the commercial linkage fees provided for in this chapter.

     (b)   The City Council may elect to waive payment of the commercial linkage fee if it finds that: (1) the commercial development project is dedicated to a public use owned and operated by other public agencies or a nonprofit public benefit corporation; and (2) the benefits to the community provided by such public use exceed those that would be provided by the payment of the commercial linkage fee. If the City Council elects to waive commercial linkage fees pursuant to this provision, the public use of the site shall be guaranteed by a recorded document in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.

     (c)   The City Council by resolution may adopt additional exemptions from time to time. (Ord. 1943 § 1, (2017))

 

25.81.060 Below market rate fund.
     (a)   Special Revenue Fund. A fund for the deposit of fees established under this chapter shall be established and may also receive moneys for housing from other sources.

     (b)   Purpose and Limitations. Moneys deposited in the fund shall be used to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to moderate-, low-, very low-, and extremely low-income households. Such purpose includes the purchase of affordability covenants or similar initiatives whose purpose is to preserve existing affordable housing that may otherwise be lost due to market conditions. Moneys may also be used to cover reasonable administrative or related expenses associated with the administration of this chapter.

     (c)   Administration. The fund shall be administered by the Administrator, who may develop procedures to implement the purposes of the fund consistent with the requirements of this chapter and subject to any adopted budget of the City and generally applicable accounting and procurement processes.

     (d)   Expenditures. Fund moneys shall be used in accordance with the City’s Housing Element, or subsequent plans adopted by the City Council to maintain or increase the quantity, quality, and variety of affordable housing units or assist other governmental entities, private organizations or individuals to do so. Permissible uses include, but are not limited to, land acquisition, debt service, parcel assemblage, gap financing, housing rehabilitation, grants, unit acquisition, new construction, and other pursuits associated with providing affordable housing. The fund may be used for the benefit of both rental and owner-occupied housing. (Ord. 1943 § 1, (2017))

 

25.81.070 Administrative relief/appeal.
     (a)   The builder of a project subject to this chapter may request that the requirements of this chapter be waived or modified by the City Council, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed.

     (b)   The application shall be made in writing and filed with the Community Development Director not later than:

     (1)   Twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing before the Planning Commission on the development project application under this title, or

     (2)   If no hearing before the Planning Commission is required by this title, at the time of the filing of the application for a development permit.

     The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment.

     (c)   The City Council shall consider the application at a public hearing held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the development project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. The decision of the City Council is final. (Ord. 1943 § 1, (2017))

 

25.81.080 Enforcement.
     (a)   Payment of the commercial linkage fee is the obligation of the builder of a commercial development project. The City may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance herewith, including, but not limited to, actions to revoke, deny, or suspend any permit or development approval.

     (b)   The City Attorney shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all below market rate housing agreements, regulatory agreements, and all other covenants or restrictions placed on affordable units, by civil action and any other proceeding or method permitted by law.

     (c)   Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any builder or owner from the requirements of this chapter. No permit, license, map, or other approval or entitlement for a commercial development project shall be issued, including, without limitation, a final inspection or certificate of occupancy, until all applicable requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

     (d)   The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not preclude the City from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. (Ord. 1943 § 1, (2017))

Chapter 25.82 RESIDENTIAL IMPACT FEES
25.82.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to:

     (a)   Encourage the development and availability of housing affordable to a broad range of households with varying income levels within the City as mandated by State law, including California Government Code Section 65580 and related provisions.

     (b)   Offset the demand for affordable housing that is created by new development and mitigate environmental and other impacts that accompany new residential development by protecting the economic diversity of the City’s housing stock; reducing traffic, transit and related air quality impacts; promoting jobs/housing balance; and reducing the demands placed on transportation infrastructure in the region.

     (c)   Promote the City’s policy to provide an adequate number of affordable housing units to the City’s housing stock in proportion to the existing or projected need in the community, as identified by the Housing Element.

     (d)   Support the Housing Element goal of providing housing opportunities for those who work in Burlingame.

     (e)   Support the Housing Element goal of achieving increased affordability of housing.

     (f)    Support the Housing Element policy of developing of a variety of housing types that are affordable to very low and extremely low income households.

     (g)   Support the Housing Element goal of preserving residential character by encouraging maintenance, improvement and rehabilitation of the City’s neighborhoods and housing stock. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

     (a)   “Administrator” means the Community Development Director of the City or other person designated by the City Manager.

     (b)   “Affordable housing fund” means a separate fund or account designated by the City to maintain and account for all monies received pursuant to this chapter.

     (c)   “Affordable ownership cost” means the sales price of a for-sale affordable unit resulting in projected average monthly housing payments, during the first calendar year of a household’s occupancy, including interest, principal, mortgage insurance, property taxes, homeowners insurance, homeowners’ association dues, if any, and a reasonable allowance for utilities, property maintenance, and repairs, not exceeding the sales prices specified by Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations Title 25, Sections 6910-6924, as they may be amended from time to time.

     (d)   “Affordable rent” means the total monthly housing expenses for an affordable rental unit not exceeding the rents specified by Section 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations Title 25, Sections 6910-6924, as they may be amended from time to time. As used in this Chapter, “affordable rent” shall include the total of monthly payments by the tenant for all of the following: (1) use and occupancy of the rental unit and land and all facilities associated with the rental unit, including, but not limited to, parking, bicycle storage, storage lockers, and use of all common areas; (2) any additional separately charged fees or service charges assessed by the owner, other than security deposits; (3) an allowance for utilities paid by the tenant as established by the San Mateo County Housing Authority, including garbage collection, sewer, water, electricity, gas, and other heating, cooking. and refrigeration fuel, but not telephone service or cable N; and (4) any other interest, taxes, fees or charges for use of the land or affordable unit or associated facilities and assessed by a public or private entity other than the owner, and paid by the tenant.

     (e)   “Affordable unit” means a dwelling unit which a builder proposes as an alternative to payment of the residential impact fee, as defined in this chapter and which is required to be rented at a rate affordable to very low, low or moderate income households, or sold at an affordable ownership cost to very low, low or moderate income households.

     (f)    “Builder” (may also be referred to as developer) means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks City approvals for all or part of a residential development project.

     (g)   “Building permit” includes full structural building permits as well as partial permits such as foundation-only permits.

     (h)   “Decision-making body” means the City staff person or body authorized to approve or deny an application for a planning or building permit for a residential development project.

     (i)    “First approval” means the first discretionary approval to occur with respect to a residential development project, or, for residential development projects not requiring a discretionary approval, the issuance of a building permit.

     (j)    “For-sale unit” means a residential dwelling unit that may be sold individually in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act. For-sale units also include units that are converted from rental units to for-sale units.

     (k)   “Low income households” means households with incomes no greater than the maximum income for low income households, as published annually by the County of San Mateo for each household size, based on United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) income limits for San Mateo County, unless stated otherwise in this chapter.

     (l)    “Market rate unit” means a new dwelling unit in a residential development project that is not an affordable unit.

     (m)  “Median income” means the median income applicable to San Mateo County, as published annually by the County of San Mateo for each household size, based on median income data for San Mateo County published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), unless stated otherwise in this chapter.

     (n)   “Moderate income households” means households with incomes no greater than the maximum income for moderate income households, as published annually by the County of San Mateo for each household size, based on United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) income limits for San Mateo County, unless stated otherwise in this chapter.

     (o)   “Planning permit” means any discretionary approval of a development project, including but not limited to a comprehensive or specific plan adoption or amendment, rezoning, tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, variances, or architectural review.

     (p)   “Rental unit” means a dwelling unit that is intended to be offered for rent or lease and that cannot be sold individually in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act.

     (q)   “Residential development project” means an application for a planning permit or building permit at one location to create one or more additional dwelling units, convert nonresidential uses to dwelling units, subdivide a parcel to create one or more separately transferable parcels intended for residential development, or implement a condominium conversion, including development constructed at one time as well as in phases. “One location” includes all adjacent parcels of land under common ownership or control, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated only by a public or private street, road, or other public or private right-of-way, or separated only by the lands owned or controlled by the builder.

     (r)    “Residential floor area” means all horizontal areas of the several floors of such buildings measured from the exterior faces or exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating two (2) buildings, minus the horizontal areas of such buildings used exclusively for covered porches, patios, or other outdoor space, amenities and common space, parking, elevators, stairwells or stairs between floors, hallways, and between-unit circulation.

     (s)    “Very low income households” means households with incomes no greater than the maximum income for very low income households, as published annually by the County of San Mateo for each household size, based on United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) income limits for San Mateo County, unless stated otherwise in this chapter. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.030 Residential impact fees.
     (a)   Initial fees shall be imposed on new residential development projects as follows:

 

Impact Fee – Per Square Foot

Base

With Prevailing/ Area Wage

Rental Multifamily – 11 units and above

Up to 50 du/ac

$17.00 / sq ft

$14.00 / sq ft

51-70 du/ac

$20.00 / sq ft

$17.00 / sq ft

71 du/ac and above

$30.00 / sq ft

$25.00 / sq ft

For Sale Multifamily (Condominiums) – 7 units and above

 

$35.00 / sq ft

$30.00 / sq ft

 

     (b)   Fees shall be based on the calculation of the residential floor area as defined in this chapter, and shall include a credit for existing uses. The Council may amend these fees through the public hearing process for the City’s Master Fee Schedule. Residential impact fees shall not exceed the cost of mitigating the impact of the residential development projects on the need for affordable housing in the City.

     (c)   Rental projects that convert to condominiums within ten (10) years of completion of construction would be subject to the fee differential between rental and for sale units as a condition of conversion. The fee differential shall be based on the fee structure in place at the time of conversion to condominiums, minus the fees originally submitted at the time of construction. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.040 Fee payment.
     Any residential impact fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the first building permit for the residential development project subject to the fee or at a time otherwise specified by Council resolution. The fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule in effect at the time the building permit is issued. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.050 State density bonus.
     For residential development projects that are granted a density bonus pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915 et seq. (the “State Density Bonus Law”), the residential impact fee shall apply to all market-rate units, including any additional market-rate units provided under the State Density Bonus Law. The residential impact fee shall not apply to affordable units provided under the State Density Bonus Law. The required residential impact fee shall be reduced to the extent that any affordable units mitigate the market rate units’ impact on the need for affordable housing in the City. The Community Development Director may issue guidelines from time to time regarding the calculation of any fee reduction. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.060 Exemptions.
     (a)   The following residential development projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

     (1)   Rental multifamily projects with a total of ten (10) units or fewer.

     (2)   For sale multifamily (condominiums) with a total of six (6) units or fewer.

     (3)   Projects that have established a vested right not to be subject to this chapter.

     (4)   Applications under review by the Planning Commission or Community Development Department that had been deemed complete at the time of adoption of the residential impact fees provided for in this chapter.

     (b)   The City Council may elect to waive payment of the residential impact fee if it finds that: (1) the residential development project is dedicated to a public use owned and operated by other public agencies or a nonprofit public benefit corporation; and (2) the benefits to the community provided by such public use exceed those that would be provided by the payment of the residential impact fee. If the City Council elects to waive residential impact fees pursuant to this provision, the public use of the site shall be guaranteed by a recorded document in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.

     (c)   The City Council by resolution may adopt additional exemptions from time to time. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.070 Alternatives.
     (a)   Alternatives Available to Projects Requiring an Impact Fee. As an alternative to compliance with the impact fee requirements included in this chapter, developers of residential projects may propose to mitigate the affordable housing impacts of such development through the construction of affordable units on site or through an alternative mitigation program proposed by the developer, such as the provision of off-site affordable units, donation of land for the construction of affordable units, or purchase of existing units for conversion to affordable units. Any such alternative must include a guarantee of affordability for a period of fifty-five (55) years. The Planning Commission may approve the provision of affordable units on site, consistent with the requirements set forth in subsection (b), as part of its review of the project. For all other alternatives, the Community Development Director shall analyze the proposal and provide advice to the City Council which, in its sole discretion, shall determine whether the proposed alternative is sufficient to meet the objectives of this chapter.

     (b)   The provision of on site affordable units in lieu of payment of residential impact fees shall be allowed as of right, provided the project meets the following criteria:

     (1)   If a rental multifamily project provides ten percent (10%) of the units on site to be affordable to moderate income households (in this instance 80% - 120% AMI) for a period of fifty-five (55) years, the impacts of residential development on the need for affordable housing shall be deemed mitigated.

     (2)   If a for sale multifamily (townhome/condomi-nium) project provides ten percent (10%) of the units on site to be affordable to above-moderate income households (in this instance 120% - 150% AMI, with the price set at the 135% AMI level) for a period of fifty-five (55) years, the impacts of residential development on the need for affordable housing shall be deemed mitigated.

     (3)   Any affordable rental or for-sale units proposed as an alternative to the payment of the residential impact fee shall be subject to the requirements described in Section 25.82.070.

     (c)   Approval of Off-Site Affordable Units. If a developer proposes off-site affordable units or any other alternative in the affordable housing plan required under Section 25.82.080 (Affordable housing plan and agreement), the City Council may, in its sole discretion, approve such a proposal if it finds the proposal meets all of the following conditions:

     (1)   Financing or a viable financing plan, which may include public funding sources, is in place for the proposed affordable housing units; and

     (2)   The proposed location is suitable for the proposed affordable housing, is consistent with the Housing Element, general plan, and zoning, and will not cause residential segregation; and

     (3)   The proposed units will be maintained as affordable for a period of fifty-five (55) years.

     (d)   Other Alternatives. The City Council may consider an alternative mitigation program proposed by the developer, such as donation of land for the construction of affordable units, purchase of existing units for conversion to affordable units or alternatives to Section 25.82.090 (Standards for development).

     (e)   Agreement with City for Financing. If the City enters into a financing agreement with the applicant, the parties may agree to alter the requirements of Section 25.82.090 (Standards for development). (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.080 Affordable housing plan and agreement.
     (a)   If the builder seeks an alternative to the payment of the residential impact fee pursuant to Section 25.82.070 (Alternatives), the application for the first approval of a residential development project for which the alternative is sought shall include an “affordable housing plan” that describes how the alternative will comply with the provisions of this chapter. No affordable housing plan is required if the builder proposes only to pay the residential impact fee.

     (1)   Residential development projects requesting an alternative to payment of the residential impact fee require that an affordable housing plan be submitted in conformance with this chapter prior to the application being deemed complete.

     (2)   The affordable housing plan shall be processed concurrently with all other permits required for the residential development project. Before approving the affordable housing plan, the decision- making body shall find that the affordable housing plan conforms to this chapter. A condition shall be attached to the first approval of any residential development project to require recordation of an affordable housing agreement, as described in this subsection, prior to the approval of any final or parcel map or building permit for the residential development project.

     (3)   The approved affordable housing plan may be amended prior to issuance of any building permit for the residential development project. A request for a minor modification of an approved affordable housing plan may be granted by the Community Development Director if the modification is substantially in compliance with the original affordable housing plan and conditions of approval. Other modifications to the affordable housing plan shall be processed in the same manner as the original plan.

     (4)   If required to ensure compliance with the approved affordable housing plan, affordable housing agreements acceptable to the Community Development Director or designee shall be recorded against the residential development project prior to or concurrently with and as a condition of approval of any final or parcel map, or issuance of any building permit, whichever occurs first. The affordable housing agreement shall specify the number, type, location, size, and phasing of all affordable units, provisions for income certification and screening of potential purchasers or renters of units, and resale control mechanisms, including the financing of ongoing administrative and monitoring costs, consistent with the approved affordable housing plan, as determined by the Community Development Director or designee.

     (b)   After approval of the application, applicant shall enter into a regulatory agreement with the City. The terms of this agreement shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney’s office, and reviewed and revised as appropriate by the reviewing City official. This agreement shall be on a form provided by the City, and shall include the following terms:

     (1)   The affordability of very low, lower, and moderate income housing shall be assured in a manner consistent with this chapter.

     (2)   An equity sharing agreement pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(c)(2).

     (3)   The location, dwelling unit sizes, rental cost, and number of bedrooms of the affordable units.

     (4)   A description of any bonuses and incentives, if any, provided by the City.

     (5)   Any other terms as required to ensure implementation and compliance with this section, and as applicable sections of State Density Bonus Law. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.090 Standards for development.
     (a)   All affordable units provided pursuant to Section 25.82.070 shall meet the following standards:

     (1)   The required affordable dwelling units shall be constructed concurrently with market-rate units unless both the final decision-making authority of the City and developer agree within the affordable housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development.

     (2)   The exterior design and construction of the affordable dwelling units shall be consistent with the exterior design and construction of the total project development, and be consistent with any affordable residential development standards that may be prepared by the City.

     (3)   The affordable units shall have the same amenities as the market rate units, including the same access to and enjoyment of common open space, parking, storage, and other facilities in the residential development, provided at an affordable rent as defined in Section 25.82.020 or at affordable ownership cost as defined in Section 25.82.020. Developers are strictly prohibited from discriminating against tenants or owners of affordable units in granting access to and full enjoyment of any community amenities available to other tenants or owners outside of their individual units.

     (4)   A regulatory agreement, as described in Section 25.82.080 (Affordable housing plan and agreement), shall be made a condition of the discretionary permits for all developments pursuant to this chapter. The regulatory agreement shall be recorded as a restriction on the development. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.100 Affordable housing fund.
     (a)   Special Revenue Fund. A fund for the deposit of fees established under this chapter shall be established and may also receive monies for housing from other sources.

     (b)   Purpose and Limitations. Monies deposited in the fund shall be used to increase, improve, and/or protect the supply of housing affordable to moderate-, low-, very low-, and extremely low-income households. Such purpose may include but not be limited to the construction of new affordable units, the purchase of affordability covenants or similar initiatives whose purpose is to preserve existing affordable housing that may otherwise be lost due to market conditions, and support to workforce households experiencing unanticipated short-term income disruptions. Monies may also be used to cover reasonable administrative or related expenses associated with the administration of this chapter.

     (c)   Administration. The fund shall be administered by the Administrator, who may develop procedures to implement the purposes of the fund consistent with the requirements of this chapter and subject to any adopted budget of the City and generally applicable accounting and procurement processes.

     (d)   Expenditures. Fund monies shall be used in accordance with the City’s Housing Element, or subsequent plans adopted by the City Council to maintain or increase the quantity, quality, and variety of affordable housing units or assist other governmental entities, private organizations or individuals to do so. Permissible uses include, but are not limited to, land acquisition, debt service, parcel assemblage, gap financing, housing rehabilitation, grants, unit acquisition, new construction, and other pursuits associated with providing affordable housing. The fund may be used for the benefit of both rental and owner-occupied housing. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.110 Administrative relief/appeal.
     (a)   The builder of a project subject to this chapter may request that the requirements of this chapter be waived or modified by the City Council, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed.

     (b)   The application shall be made in writing and filed with the Community Development Director not later than:

     (1)   Twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing before the Planning Commission on the development project application under this title; or

     (2)   If no hearing before the Planning Commission is required by this title, at the time of the filing of the application for a development permit;

     (3)   The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment.

     (c)   The City Council shall consider the application at a public hearing held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the development project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. The decision of the City Council is final. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))

 

25.82.120 Enforcement.
     (a)   Payment of the residential linkage fee is the obligation of the builder of a residential development project. The City may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance herewith, including, but not limited to, actions to revoke, deny, or suspend any permit or development approval.

     (b)   The City Attorney shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all below market rate housing agreements, regulatory agreements, and all other covenants or restrictions placed on affordable units, by civil action and any other proceeding or method permitted by law.

     (c)   Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any builder or owner from the requirements of this chapter. No permit, license, map, or other approval or entitlement for a commercial development project shall be issued, including without limitation a final inspection or certificate of occupancy, until all applicable requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

     (d)   The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not preclude the City from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. (Ord. 1961 § 1, (2019))


Title 26 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 26.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 26.08 TENTATIVE AND FINAL MAPS
Chapter 26.12 PUBLIC WORKS REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 26.16 PHYSICAL DESIGN OF IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 26.20 SALE OF LOTS
Chapter 26.24 SUBDIVISION OF LESS THAN FIVE LOTS
Chapter 26.30 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 26.32 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION PERMITS
Chapter 26.33 DESIGNATED UNITS, PURCHASE AND SALE RESTRICTIONS AND TENANT PROTECTIONS

Chapter 26.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
26.04.010 Scope.
     The procedure for filing subdivision maps and regulating public improvements on lands designated on such maps shall be as provided in this title. (Ord. 541 § 1, (1953); Ord. 1032 § 1, (1975))

 

26.04.020 “Map act” defined.
     “Map act,” as used in the following sections, applies and refers to that certain act of the legislature of the state of California entitled the “Subdivision Map Act” as the same is in effect as of March 1, 1975, and thereafter amended, and which appears in the Government Code of the state of California. (1941 Code § 1986, Ord. 541, (1953); Ord. 1032 § 2, (1975))

 

26.04.021 Advisory agency.
     The planning commission shall constitute the “advisory agency” whenever said term is used in the Map Act. (Ord. 1032 § 3, (1975))

 

26.04.030 Application of title.
     When any parcel of land within the city of Burlingame is to be divided or subdivided into two (2) or more separate lots or parcels and where such subdivision requires the enlarging or changing the boundaries of, or necessitating the performance of work by the city in, or on, any public streets, highways, alleys, lanes, parks, squares, courts, sidewalks, places or parking lots, all the provisions of the following sections of this title shall apply. (1941 Code § 1987, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.04.040 Recording of map and establishing of regulations.
     Every person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to subdivide a parcel of land in the city under the conditions set forth in Section 26.04.030, shall first cause a map to be made thereof and have the same recorded in the office of the county recorder of San Mateo County in accord with the requirements of the said “Map Act” and of this title.

     Subdivision regulations governing the preparation and filing of maps, both tentative and final, are hereby established and are set forth in the following sections. (1941 Code § 1988, Ord. 541, (1953))

Chapter 26.08 TENTATIVE AND FINAL MAPS
26.08.010 Filing tentative maps.
     The subdivider shall file three (3) copies and one reproducible tracing thereof of every tentative map with the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1989, Ord. 541, (1953); Ord. 1032 § 4, (1975))

 

26.08.020 Hearings on tentative map by commission.
     Within fifty (50) days after the tentative map has been filed, the commission shall report on the proposed subdivision and shall recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval and shall submit a report of its findings to the council.

     A report as to conformity to the general plan, required pursuant to Section 65402 of the Government Code, may be included as part of and at the same time as the action taken by the commission on such division of land. Such report is not required for a proposed subdivision which involves:

     (a)   The disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes;

     (b)   Acquisitions, dispositions or abandonments for street widening; or

     (c)   Alignment projects; provided that the advisory agency expressly finds that any such disposition for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening, or alignment projects is of a minor nature. (1941 Code § 1990, Ord. 541, (1953); Ord. 1032 § 5, (1975))

 

26.08.021 Hearings on tentative map by council.
     At its next regular meeting following the filing of the commission’s report, the council shall fix the hearing date at which the tentative map will be considered by it, which date shall be within thirty (30) days thereafter. Notice shall be given to the subdivider at least five (5) days before the hearing.

     At the hearing the council shall hear testimony of the subdivider and witnesses in his or her behalf, and the testimony of representatives of the commission and any witnesses in its behalf. The council may also hear the testimony of any other competent persons. Testimony shall include matters respecting the character of the neighborhood in which the subdivision is to be located, the kinds, nature and extent of the improvements, the quality and kinds of development to which the area is best adapted, and any other phase of the matter into which it may wish to inquire.

     Upon conclusion of hearing and within the thirty (30) days after the hearing is fixed, the council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map, and make such findings as are appropriate and not inconsistent with the provisions of the Map Act or this title.

     Each or all of the time limits may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the commission or council, as the case may be. If no action is taken within the time limits, or the time so extended, the tentative map shall be deemed approved and the clerk of the council shall certify such approval. (Ord. 1032 § 6, (1975))

 

26.08.030 Action upon final map.
     After the approval, or conditional approval, of the tentative map, the subdivider may survey the subdivision or any part thereof, and prepare a final map in accordance with the approved tentative map. He or she shall file the final map with the council within ninety (90) days after the approval of the tentative map. An extension of ninety (90) days may be granted by the council upon application by the subdivider.

     The council shall within ten (10) days after the filing of the final map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, whichever is later, consider the final map. If the final map then meets all of the requirements of the Map Act and of this code, and the rulings of the commission and the council, the council shall then approve the final map.

     The council shall at that time also accept or reject any or all offers of dedication, and shall, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets or easements, require that the subdivider, at its option, either improve or agree to improve the streets and easements, install sanitary sewers, storm drainage systems, lighting systems and water supply systems, all in accordance with standards established under this code. (1941 Code § 1911, Ord. 541, (1953); Ord. 1032 § 7, (1975))

 

26.08.040 Regulations regarding nature, accuracy and completeness of maps.
     Regulations covering the nature, accuracy and completeness of survey are established and the city engineer is designated as the official to whom maps shall be submitted for checking before submission to the commission and council. The regulations are as follows:

     (a)   The tentative map shall indicate the width and approximate grades of all streets, highways or ways shown thereon, radius of all curves, approximate dimensions of all lots, relation of proposed streets and ways to existing streets, approximate location and cross-sections of all watercourses, approximate location of all easements for sewers, drainage and public utilities, proposed name of tract or title of maps, and proposed street names and system of numbering lots and blocks.

     The tentative map shall show thereon, or be accompanied by reports and written statements from the subdivider giving essential information regarding the following matters: (1) source of water supply; (2) type of street improvement and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install; (3) proposed method of sewage disposal; (4) proposed stormwater sewer or other means of drainage; (5) protective covenants to be recorded; (6) proposed tree planting; (7) detailed grading plan of area to be subdivided where cuts and fills are to be made.

     (b)   The final map when submitted shall be accompanied by at least three (3) blueline prints thereof and shall be accompanied by: (1) a title guarantee or letter from a reputable title company showing clear evidence of ownership; (2) tax receipts and special assessment receipts or clear evidence that all taxes and special assessments have been paid; (3) traverse sheet showing the mathematical closure of outside boundaries of the tract and of each lot and block thereof.

     (c)   Title sheet shall contain the title, name of the tract, name of the city and of the county, a “subtitle” or description of all the property being subdivided, by reference to maps which have previously been recorded or by reference to a plat of the U.S. survey. References to tracts and subdivisions in the description must be spelled out and worded identically with the original records and reference to book and page of record must be complete.

     The name of licensed surveyor or engineer, date of survey, scale and basis of bearings must be shown. Every sheet must show the title, scale, north point and sheet number and the relation between the different sheets shall be shown. Sheets shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six (26) inches, drawn in black waterproof ink on good tracing cloth. There shall be a border of two (2) inches on the left and one inch on the other three (3) sides. The number of each sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each sheet, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. Scale shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch.

     (d)   Lots shall be numbered in numerical order commencing with the numeral “1″ with no omissions. There must be no duplication of numbers in any block. No prefix or suffix as “1-A,” “8-2,” etc. is allowed. Blocks shall be either numbered or lettered in numerical or alphabetical order commencing with either the numeral “1” or letter “A.” Such letters or numbers shall be shown clearly and must not be so drawn as to obliterate any dimensions or courses. Blocks must be shown entirely on one sheet. Streets shall be named and each name shall be submitted for approval by the city engineer and chief of the fire department.

     The bearing and length of every lot line, block line and boundary line and the length, radius, tangent, arc, length and central angle of all curves, and the bearing of radial lines to each lot corner on a curve must be shown.

     (e)   The map shall show the total width of all streets; the width of existing dedications and of the portions being dedicated; the width of each side of a centerline where one is shown; the widths of railroad right-of-way, easements for flood control, and drainage channels and any other easement.

     Easements for storm drains, sewers, and for light and air (setback lines) shall be denoted by fine dotted lines. Distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by any such easement must be arrowed or so shown that the map will indicate clearly the actual length of the lot lines. The width of the easement or the length and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties thereto to locate definitely the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. The easement must be clearly labeled and identified and, if already of record, its recorded reference given.

     If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly set out in the owner’s certificate and dedication. Before recording, the map shall be certified by the chairperson and secretary of the planning commission, the city engineer, and the city clerk on behalf of the council.

     Affidavits, certificates and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink or lettered legibly with black India ink. All legal forms and notes used in certificates, etc., are subject to approval by the city attorney.

     (f)    Permanent monuments shall be set at all boundary corners and angle points and, in case of long tangents, at intervals of approximately one thousand (1,000) feet. Within the subdivision, monuments shall be set on long tangents at intervals no greater than one thousand feet (1,000), and at the beginning and end of all curves. Monuments are subject to approval by the city engineer before approval of the map and must be so designed that they will be readily available for inspection after the completion of the subdivision. Monuments shall be placed at the intersection of center lines of streets and at the beginning and end of curves of streets.

     All such monuments together with stakes, monuments and evidences found on the subdivided area, shall be clearly shown on the map.

     The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by a colored border. The corners of adjoining subdivisions or portions thereof shall be so shown as to identify the tract in relation to adjoining subdivisions and streets.

     (g)   The survey procedure and practice shall conform with the standards of the city engineer. If any shortage or excess is found on the ground between monuments, compared with the original record, any division of the total must bear its proportion of the excess or shortage.

     (h)   Upon adoption and recording of final map, five (5) blue-line print copies, one of which shall be upon cloth, shall be filed in the office of the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1992, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.08.050 Agreement for public improvements.
     If at the time of filing the final map, the streets depicted upon the final map, or some thereof, shall already be improved by street surfacing, curbs, culverts, bridges, drains or other structures necessary to use of such streets, or to the proper drainage thereof, and such other improvements as are hereinafter described, in accordance with city requirements, then and in that event the subdivider shall, prior to the approval of the final map, enter into an agreement with the city whereby, in consideration of the acceptance by the city of the streets offered for dedication, such subdivider shall agree to furnish the labor, material and equipment necessary therefor, and to complete the work within a certain time specified in the agreement.

     In order to insure the city that this work will be duly completed, the subdivider shall furnish a good and satisfactory bond guaranteeing the faithful performance of the work and any repairs and replacements, or the cost of such repairs and replacements, together with a deposit for utilities hereinafter mentioned in a sum equal to the estimated cost of such improvements and shall also file a good and sufficient bond for the security of material and labor in a sum equal to one-half of the estimated cost thereof. The bonds and guarantees shall remain in effect for a period of one year following the completion of the work in order to insure against errors or inadequacies in the work. Such bonds must be furnished by a surety company and be approved by the city attorney or in lieu thereof, each bond must be signed by two (2) good and sufficient sureties who must meet the requirements for sureties of the statutes of the state of California satisfactory to the city attorney. Such sureties may be required to justify before him or her. The agreement must show the names of all streets to be improved, and the bonds themselves shall be signed by the record owners of the subdivision, as principals on such bonds.

     The subdivider may, in lieu of the aforesaid contract, furnish the city with a good and satisfactory agreement, by which he or she shall agree within such time as may be required by the council, to initiate, and so far as may be within his or her power, to consummate proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act or ordinance for the formation of a special assessment district covering such subdivision, or part thereof, for the financing and construction of the designated improvements upon the streets, highways, and ways dedicated upon such map together with the necessary improvements for water supply, drainage, sewerage and lighting required by the council.

     Either of these contracts shall include, as a part thereof, an agreement to replace, repair, or to pay to the owner the entire cost of replacement or repairs, any and all property damaged or destroyed by reason of such work done, whether the property be owned by the United States, the state of California, the city of Burlingame, a public or private corporation, any person whomsoever, or any combination of such owners.

     The subdivider shall further therein agree to file with the city clerk, prior to the commencement of such work, a written statement signed by the subdivider and each public utility corporation involved to the effect that the subdivider has made the deposit legally required by such public utility for the connection of any and all public utilities to be supplied by such corporation within such subdivision. (1941 Code 1993, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.08.060 Layout of streets.
     The street layout of any subdivision shall conform as far as is practicable with other streets and highways in the immediate vicinity, and the streets and highways shown upon each subdivision map shall be in alignment with existing adjacent streets and in general conformity with the plan made for the most advantageous development of the area. Where a new subdivision adjoins acreage likely to be subdivided later, all new streets may be required to be dedicated through to the boundary lines of the tract. Whenever a dead-end street or cul-de-sac is shown on a subdivision map, an adequate turning circle will be required. (1941 Code § 1944 (a), Ord. 541, 1953))

 

26.08.070 Flood hazard protection.
     The city council may disapprove a tentative or final map or maps of a subdivision where flood hazard or inundation may be expected to occur and require protective improvements to avoid such hazards as a condition precedent to approval of such map or maps. Such protective improvements as may be recommended by the city engineer and required by the city council shall become a part of the agreement for subdivision improvement. (1941 Code § 1994 (b), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.08.075 Creek lots.
     No parcel containing a creek or any area within the 100-year-flood or flow depth lines of a creek shall be subdivided unless each resulting lot has frontage on a public street and unless at least sixty (60) percent or more of each resulting lot is contiguous land beyond the one hundred (100)-year-flood or flow depth line of said creek.

     For the purposes of this section: (a) a creek is defined as one of those watercourses so designated and detailed in the large scale map in the city engineer’s office titled “1989 Creek Map,” based upon the Storm Drainage Study, Project, No. 910, and dated January 16, 1989; (b) the one hundred (100)-year-flood or flow depth line shall be determined by the city engineer, based upon said Storm Drainage Study and such other information as he or she may require from the subdivider. (Ord. 1407 § 1, (1990))

 

26.08.080 Dedications.
     Dedication of all streets, highways, public ways, easements for utilities and storm drains, and public planting strips, where such dedications are necessary for public use, shall be required as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map or maps. (1941 Code § 1944 (c), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.08.090 Alignment, grades and widths of streets, easements and rights-of-way—Lot width and area.
     Street alignment, grades and widths of easements and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers shall be shown on the map and must comply with the requirements of this code. Minimum lot width and area shall comply with the requirements of this code. (1941 Code § 1944 (d), Ord. 541, (1953))

Chapter 26.12 PUBLIC WORKS REQUIREMENTS
26.12.010 Public works defined.
     Public works for the purpose of this title are defined as structures, utilities and appurtenances on, above or below the ground, which have been, or are to be, installed, constructed or reconstructed for the use and convenience of the general public or the residents of the area served by such works, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, surface and subsurface storm drainage facilities, street lighting, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas, water, electric and telephone services, street signs, easements and drainage grades on private properties abutting, or having any effect upon, such public works. (1941 Code § 1966, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.12.020 Standard specifications.
     Structural design details, methods and materials are not specified in this code. Such details shall conform with “standard specifications” for the construction of public works as are compiled by the city engineer. Such specifications may be changed from time to time at the option of the city engineer, but such changes shall in no way affect the validity of regulations or requirements contained herein. (1941 Code § 1966, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.12.030 Submission of plans and specifications.
     Prior to commencing construction of public works, complete plans and specifications shall be submitted to the city engineer on standard size sheets for his or her examination and determination of conformity with the regulations and requirements of this code and the “standard specifications.” A minimum period of thirty (30) days shall be allowed for such examination and determination. Failure of plans or specifications to conform with the requirements and regulations may prohibit the construction of such proposed public works. Construction shall not be contracted for or commenced until the city engineer shall have signified his or her approval thereof, in writing, either on such plans and specifications, or otherwise. (1941 Code § 1966, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.12.040 Application for variance.
     In the event that the city engineer rejects, or orders a modification of, such plans, the developer or subdivider may file an application for a variance with the city clerk. The application shall be set for hearing before the city council in not less than ten (10), nor more than thirty (30) days following such filing. Notice in writing shall be given to the applicant, and to such other persons as may be interested at least ten (10) days prior to such a hearing. (1941 Code § 1966, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.12.050 Hearing and order on application for variance.
     At such hearing the council shall hear applicant and such other persons as may be interested in such application and may require such testimony and evidence as it may deem pertinent to the matter. On conclusion, the council may grant or deny such variance, or make such order for modification as it may deem advisable. (1941 Code § 1966, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.12.060 Conditions for granting variance.
     No such variance shall be granted unless the council has found all of the following to be true:

     (a)   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the proposed plan or works, which do not apply generally to plans or works of a similar character, so that a denial would result in undue property loss;

     (b)   That such variance would be necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a property right of the applicant;

     (c)   That the granting of such variance would not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements of other property owners or the quiet enjoyment of such property or improvement. (1941 Code § 1966, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.12.070 Finality of decision on variance.
     The decision of the council shall be final and binding on the applicant. (1941 Code § 1966, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.12.080 Waiting period before filing new application for variance.
     In the event that such variance is denied, or that an order for modification thereof has been made and applicant is unwilling or unable to comply with such an order, applicant shall be barred for a period of one year from the date of such decision from filing a new application for the same or similar variance. (1941 Code § 1966, Ord. 541, (1953))

Chapter 26.16 PHYSICAL DESIGN OF IMPROVEMENTS
26.16.010 Minimum design requirements established.
     There are established minimum design requirements for streets, ways, alleys, water mains, storm drainage systems and other public improvements. The minimum standards so established shall apply to all lands within the city or to be annexed to the city and to all subdivisions or resubdivisions of such lands. The minimums so established may be lowered or revised for topographical reason or when hardship to the developer may exist only upon the recommendation of the planning commission and action by the council in the same manner as provided for variances in Chapter 26.12 of this code. (1941 Code § 1997, Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.020 Water mains and fire hydrants.
     Water mains shall be not less than six (6) inches in diameter, except that in exceptional circumstances, smaller sizes may be approved by the city engineer; provided, however, that the installation of larger pipes may be required upon recommendation of the city engineer and the chief of the fire department to meet circumstances of extra hazard. The fire chief and city engineer must approve the location of fire hydrants and a map of water lines, fire hydrants and feeders shall be prepared and filed in the offices of the fire chief and city engineer. (1941 Code § 1997 (1), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.030 Fire alarm systems and connections.
     Necessary fire alarm systems or extensions of the existing fire alarm system, including their connection to the central control panel and the enlargement of the central control panel caused by any such connections, shall be installed as ordered by the chief of the fire department.

     The developer or subdivider may file an application for a variance from the order of the chief of the fire department and notices thereof shall be given, hearing held and testimony and evidence taken by the city council in the same manner as is provided for in Chapter 26.12 of this code in cases of an application for a variance from an order of rejection or modification by the city engineer, and a variance may be granted by the city council upon findings of all of the things to be true which are required for the granting of a variance from an order of the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1997 (1-a), Ord. 588, (1955))

 

26.16.040 Width of streets.
     The minimum width of the pavement of major streets shall be sixty-four (64) feet; of secondary streets, forty (40) feet; and of minor streets, thirty-four (34) feet; all measured between the faces of curbs. The minimum width of alleys, private ways and divided streets, shall be twenty (20) feet, measured between the curbs, separating strip, or other limitations to the traveled way. The minimum width of islands or dividing strips in divided street shall be three (3) feet when no electroliers are located therein and six (6) feet when such obstructions exist. (1941 Code § 1997 (2), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.050 Width of sidewalks.
     Sidewalks shall be located adjacent to curbs and shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet, measured from the inside of the monolithic curb and gutter. Sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four (4) inches of “Class A” concrete. In all residential districts, a strip contiguous to the sidewalk for planting or other municipal purposes shall he or she provided with a minimum width of four and one-half (4-1/2) feet. (1941 Code § 1997 (3), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.060 Grades for drainage.
     Streets shall have a minimum crown of three (3) inches in fifteen (15) feet of pavement width. Alleys shall have a straight slope to a low center of two (2) inches in ten (10) feet of pavement width. Sidewalks shall have a straight slope of one-quarter inch per foot of width with the low side toward the gutter. Grade of streets shall be not less than three-tenths per cent nor greater than fifteen (15) percent. (1941 Code § 1997 (4), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.070 Curb design.
     All curbs shall have a straight face at an approximate right angle to the top surface of the gutter and shall be ordinarily six (6) inches in height from the flow line of the gutter. The city engineer may vary this height to meet unusual conditions. All curbs shall be cast monolithic with gutters. Wherever possible, expansion joints shall be placed to become an extension of the lot lines. At no time shall true expansion joints be spaced at more than sixty (60) foot intervals and the distance between dummy and true expansion joints shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet. The minimum width of the gutter shall be eighteen (18) inches.

     Curbs shall have a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet at the face of the curb in all residential districts. All circles in courts or cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum radius of thirty-two (32) feet at the face of the curb. (1941 Code § 1997 (5), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.080 Maximum length of cul-de-sacs.
     The maximum length of cul-de-sacs shall be restricted to two hundred fifty (250) feet as measured from the right-of-way line of the street from which the cul-de-sac enters to the center of the turning circle at the cul-de-sac end. (1941 Code 1997 (6), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.090 Storm drain system.
     All storm drainage systems shall be so designed as adequately to remove storm water from the area served at the maximum rainfall rate of one inch per hour. Runoff factor, subject to variations because of the nature and use of the terrain, shall be clearly stated and shall meet with the approval of the city engineer. Where the drainage of the upstream waters is a contributing factor to the flooding of lower areas, the drainage system shall be of such size as to accommodate such conditions. Structures, water retention basins, drainage canals or other improvement of storm water drainage may be required, and the city council may deny approval of the final map in the event that such requirements are not met.

     Storm water shall, under no circumstances, be introduced into the sanitary sewage systems but shall be confined to the surface and subsurface storm drainage systems and facilities provided.

     Lots shall be so graded as to assure storm water runoff to the facilities provided for the area. Building permits will not be issued for any lot having a finish grade such as to cause runoff of storm water in any direction other than one that will so properly dispose of it. On hillside development, where the contour of the terrain makes it impossible or impractical to drain water to the frontage street, special requirements for such drainage will be imposed by the city engineer. (1941 Code § 1997 (7), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.100 Utilities.
     In all residential areas, telephone and power poles and lines shall be located in the rear of lots or along lot lines and shall not be permitted in the street right of way or in the front of lots abutting the street right of way.

     Water mains and fire hydrants for domestic supply and fire fighting purposes shall be installed. The water mains shall be laid under the street, parallel to the curb, and in an area between four (4) and six (6) feet from the curb line, and with a minimum cover of thirty (30) inches. A map showing the size and location of such pipes and hydrants, and stating the material of which such pipes are made and the date of their installation and approval, shall be filed in the office of the city engineer.

     Sewer mains shall be laid in the center line of all streets. The size of sewers, the grade and depth at which they shall be laid, and the installation of sewerage pumps, where such are necessary, shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. All sewer laterals shall be indicated on plans giving location of lot corner and the depth of the lateral. Laterals and mains shall be accurately located in accordance with the plans and their location indicated on the permanent sewer records of the city. (1941 Code § 1997 (8), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.110 Street lighting.
     Adequate lighting of all streets, highways and alleys shall be provided in all new subdivisions. No subdivision map shall be finally approved until an agreement to provide such lighting has been signed by the subdivider or assessment proceedings for such purpose shall have been instituted.

     Street lighting shall be accomplished by the installation of metal standards carrying pendant luminaires and the electricity shall be supplied from underground conduit. Sizes and types of standards, luminaires, wires and conduits shall meet with the approval of the city engineer. Spacing of electroliers and the size and type of luminaires shall be sufficient to furnish not less than a minimum light intensity over the entire street right-of-way.

     Wherever existing trees or other plants are to be preserved in the street right-of-way, electroliers shall be located in such manner as to receive minimum interference from such trees or plants. (1941 Code § 1997 (9), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.120 Street trees.
     Provision shall be made for the planting of trees in residential areas, and such portions of the subdivision as may be required by the planning commission for “green belts” or highway buffers and the location and variety of such trees shall be indicated. The superintendent of parks shall inform the city engineer regarding the suitability of species and spacing. Trees shall be selected for size, growth and ultimate age characteristics, root type, adaptability to climatic and soil conditions, and conformity to existing trees within the area. (1941 Code § 1997 (10), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.130 Street signs.
     All intersections shall be equipped with street signs which shall be mounted in such manner, height and location as to conform with the standards for street signs for the city of Burlingame. (1941 Code § 1997 (11), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.140 Grading, excavating and earth moving.
     Wherever quantities of earth, either within street right-of-way or on abutting property, are to be graded, relocated, added to the natural ground line or removed, the source and disposition of such material shall be clearly indicated in the plans and the effect upon drainage flow shall be shown.

     Whenever cuts or fills are made, the final slope shall be such as to permanently resist the action of erosion, slip or other natural forces tending to alter the established grade or location. Greater slopes may be permitted when structural means such as rip rap fences, retaining walls or other approved methods are employed. Complete plans and specifications of the proposed grades and the retaining method must be submitted to the city engineer for his or her approval. (1941 Code § 1997 (12), Ord. 541, (1953))

 

26.16.150 Checking and endorsement of city engineer.
     After receiving copies of the final map, the city engineer shall examine the map as to correctness of surveying data, mathematical data and computations, and all other matters as require checking to insure compliance with the provisions of the “Map Act” and this code. If the final map is found to be in compliance, the city engineer shall endorse his or her approval thereon. (1941 Code § 1997 (13), Ord. 541, (1953); Ord. 1032 § 8, (1975))

 

26.16.151 Fees and charges.
     For each subdivision including those described in Section 26.24.010 of this code, an amount established by resolution of the council shall be deposited with the city engineer when the tentative map is filed. A charge for checking shall also be made by the city engineer. The charge shall be sufficient to reimburse the city for all costs connected with such project. Such charges shall be included with the cost of engineering incidental to the subdivision improvements, if any. Any surety bonds required for faithful performance shall not be released until all city engineering charges are paid. (Ord. 1032 § 9, (1975))

Chapter 26.20 SALE OF LOTS
26.20.010 Unlawful to sell lots except from recorded map—Remedies.
     No person shall sell, or offer for sale, any subdivision or part thereof, until a map thereof has been made, certified, endorsed, acknowledged and recorded in all respects as provided in the “Map Act” and this code. No person shall sell, or offer for sale, any subdivision or part thereof, by reference to any map other than such recorded map, or a true and accurate copy thereof. No person shall contract for the sale, sell or offer to sell any subdivision or part thereof, by metes and bounds description.

     Nothing contained in this code shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city may be entitled because of a sale, or offer to sell, contrary to the provision of the “Map Act,” or of this code. (1941 Code § 1995, Ord. 541, (1953))

Chapter 26.24 SUBDIVISION OF LESS THAN FIVE LOTS
26.24.010 Subdivision of land where no additional lot is created.
     When land which is a part of a previously recorded subdivision is combined with other land of a recorded subdivision for the purpose of creating a larger or smaller parcel or to create a single parcel of adjoining lots and where the addition or deletion does not require the installation of any public improvements or public works other than the installation of sewer and water laterals, a map shall be prepared showing the existing and proposed boundaries of the property. Four (4) copies of the map shall be filed with the city engineer together with a filing fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966))

 

26.24.020 Examination of map—Recommendation by city engineer.
     On receipt of the map, the city engineer shall forthwith examine the same to ascertain whether or not the lots are of the width and area prescribed by this code, have been provided with any necessary easements of adequate width and proper location and design for sanitary sewerage, drainage and other public utility purposes, and whether or not the streets and highways adjacent to the land proposed to be subdivided are properly located and of sufficient width to meet neighborhood traffic needs.

     In the event that the city engineer finds that the map has met the requirements referred to in this section and that all other requirements have been adequately fulfilled, he or she shall recommend the approval of the planning commission. (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966))

 

26.24.030 Subdivision of land creating two to four lots.
     When land, either within previously subdivided property or unsubdivided acreage, is divided for the purpose of creating two (2), three (3) or four (4) lots, a tentative map shall be prepared. Four (4) copies of the map shall be filed with the city engineer. (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966))

 

26.24.040 Dedication of easements—Offer to do work.
     In the event that easements for sanitary sewers, drainage purposes or other public utilities are required, the city engineer shall so notify the person filing the map and the person shall offer to the city to dedicate the required easements before the map may be approved. The easements shall be properly drawn on the map. Where improvements are necessary and required and where additions to water or sewer lines must be constructed, the subdivider shall offer to do the work in accordance with the standard specifications of the city. The requirements may include widening or extension of public streets and installation of utilities on public or private property.

     Where frontage on a public street is impossible or impractical, the planning commission may recommend an easement or easements providing ingress from and egress to a public street in lieu of street frontage. In any case, the city shall be made an owner of the easement.

     The map shall show the following:

     (a)   Location and size of water and sewer mains;

     (b)   Width and location of any existing easements;

     (c)   Location and dimension of streets;

     (d)   Location of any proposed street widening or extension if required;

     (e)   Building setback lines;

     (f)    Location of any proposed public utilities and any easements necessary for such utilities;

     (g)   Dimensioned showing of any existing structures and notations regarding removal or remodeling of same;

     (h)   Existing and proposed contours of land and proposed elevation at lot corners.

     The city engineer shall examine the map and submit it to the planning commission together with his or her recommendations. (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966); Ord. 895 § 1, (1969))

 

26.24.050 Action of planning commission and council on tentative map.
     At its next regular meeting following the submission of the map and the recommendations of the city engineer, the planning commission shall consider the map. The commission shall make its decision upon such consideration as, but not limited to, the following:

 

     (a)   Recommendations of the city engineer;

     (b)   Compatibility of proposed lots to pattern of existing lots in the neighborhood; reverse corner lots or key lots shall not be introduced into a neighborhood where such lots do not now exist;

     (c)   Accessibility to safety services. The commission may consider grade of access roads or easements and require that such grade is not excessive or beyond the capacity to traverse by safety equipment;

     (d)   Proposed grading and contours of the finished sites. The commission may require as a condition that the finished contour of the building site or sites reasonably conform with the neighborhood pattern where such pattern exists;

     (e)   Compliance with creek lot requirements set forth in Section 26.08.075.

     If the map meets all the requirements of the code and does not require the dedication of easements or the construction of any public work, a final map may be prepared without reference to the city council.

     Notification of the hearing shall be mailed to the person filing the map and to all owners of contiguous property.

     If the map requires the dedication of easements or the construction of any public work, the tentative map shall be filed with the city clerk, together with the recommendations of the planning commission, for the consideration of the city council at its next regular meeting following the action of the commission. The council may accept or disapprove the action of the commission, but no substantive changes shall be made on the map without reference to the commission for its recommendation. (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966); Ord. 895 § 2, (1969); Ord. 1407 § 2, (1990))

 

26.24.060 Submission of final map.
     Within a period of eighteen (18) months after approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the subdivider shall prepare and submit a final map. The planning commission shall examine the map and, after a public hearing, recommend approval or conditional approval. The final map shall be substantially in accord with the tentative map. Following the public hearing, the map and the recommendations of the planning commission shall be submitted to the city council.

     The city council, at its next regular meeting following the submittal, shall approve the map if it conforms to all of the rulings made at the time of the approval of the tentative map and to such changes as may have been required by conditional approval.

     The city council at that time shall also accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any or all offers of dedication and, unless the streets and easements have been improved and accepted, shall, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets or easements, provide for the improvement of streets or easements in accordance with the standards of the city or the rulings of the city engineer applicable at the time of the approval of the tentative map.

     The city council may require the subdivider to:

     (1)   Enter into an agreement with the city upon mutually agreeable terms to thereafter improve the streets and easements at the subdivider’s expense; or

     (2)   Enter into a contract with the city upon mutually agreeable terms to thereafter initiate and consummate proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act for the financing and installation of all of the required improvements. (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966))

 

26.24.070 Preparation and certification of final map.
     The final map shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 66445 of the Government Code of the state of California or as the code is subsequently amended. Certificates shall appear on the final map of the surveyor or civil engineer, of the city engineer and of all parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, as well as a form for the filing of the map by the county recorder, all as provided in the Code. Failure to file the final map with the county recorder within one hundred eighty (180) days from the approval of such map shall terminate all proceedings. Any subdivision of the same land shall require the filing of a new map. Said filing date may be extended by mutual agreement of the subdivider and the council. (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966); Ord. 1032 § 10, (1975))

 

26.24.080 Setting markers.
     Upon approval of the final map, the surveyor shall set property corner markers in accordance with the final approved map. In the event that previously set markers do not coincide with the map as filed, markers shall be replaced or map amended so that physical location of marks and filed map agree. (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966))

 

26.24.090 Fees for checking and inspections.
     An amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be deposited with the city engineer when the tentative map is filed. A charge for checking the maps and for all costs, including inspections, connected with the project shall be made by the city engineer in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city. (Ord. 859 § 1, (1966))

Chapter 26.30 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
26.30.010 Purpose.
     This chapter is adopted to ensure each condominium project supports sound community planning; supports the economic, ecological, social and aesthetic qualities of the community; and supports the public health, safety and general welfare. Review criteria are needed to adequately evaluate residential, commercial and industrial condominium subdivisions and insure that they are consistent with the purposes of this chapter, the city’s general plan, its implementing zoning, and this code. (Ord. 1706 § 2, (2003))

 

26.30.020 New construction permit required.
     Before final approval and issuance of any building permit for any condominium or condominium project, a developer, builder or other person seeking to construct such a project shall first apply for and obtain from the planning commission a condominium permit. A condominium permit shall be issued only:

     (a)   Upon approval of the planning commission, or city council upon appeal or review, finding that the project conforms to the provisions of Chapter 26.30 and to all applicable zoning regulations of Title 25 of this code; and

     (b)   Upon payment of fees in the amount required by this code and resolution of the city council.

     Applications for condominium new construction permits shall be evaluated and processed pursuant to the procedural requirements set forth for conditional use permits in Title 25 of this code. (Ord. 1015 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1706 § 2, (2003))

 

26.30.025 Conversion permit.
     Any developer, builder or other person seeking to convert an existing structure to a condominium shall first apply for and obtain from the planning commission a condominium conversion permit pursuant to Chapter 26.32. Condominium conversions shall be limited to a parcel containing structures with a total of more than twenty (20) residential units or with commercial, office, or industrial structures with a total of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Applications for condominium conversion permits shall be evaluated and processed pursuant to the procedural requirements set forth for conditional use permits in Title 25 of this code. (Ord. 1015 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1206 § 1, (1981); Ord. 1706 § 2, (2003))

 

26.30.028 Conversion from stock cooperative to condominium.
     (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, including any provision of Chapter 26.32, a stock cooperative as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code may be converted to a condominium as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code if all of the following are met:

     (1)   The stock cooperative was legally organized and created pursuant to state and local law in effect at the time of the organization and creation, and the stock cooperative has continued in uninterrupted existence until the date of the conversion; and

     (2)   A tentative map and final map for a condominium are filed and approved by the council as provided in Chapter 26.08 in the forms provided for other condominium maps under this title; and

     (3)   All persons renting units in a cooperative are provided all tenant rights under state and local law, including, but not limited to, rights respecting first refusal, notice, and displacement and relocation benefits as described in Section 26.33.060.

     (b)   If the stock cooperative conversion is exempt from the Subdivision Map Act pursuant to Government Code Section 66412, then subsection (a)(2) shall not apply to the conversion application. Instead, the application shall be reviewed by the planning commission for conformance with Section 66412 and subsections (a)(1) and (a)(3) of this section, and upon approval by the commission, the city will certify conformance with Section 66412 and this section in a form to be recorded with the county recorder.

     (c)   Procedures for filing and approval of applications under this section, as well as appeals from decisions made, shall follow Sections 26.08.020, 26.08.021 and 26.08.030, as applicable, and Section 25.16.060. (Ord. 1829 § 2, (2008))

 

26.30.030 Community apartments.
     Community and cooperatively owned apartments or commercial, office, or industrial units shall be subject to the same restrictions, conditions, requirements and application fees as new condominiums and condominium conversions under Chapter 26.32. (Ord. 1015 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1706 § 2, (2003))

 

26.30.040 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the following definitions:

     (a)   “Common areas” means the entire project, excepting all units therein granted or reserved.

     (b)   “Community or cooperatively owned” means a development in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment or space within a commercial building located thereon. For all purposes of this code, community or cooperatively owned structures shall be subject to the same restrictions, conditions and regulations as condominiums.

     (c)   “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of real property. Such separate interest may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be either (1) an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate, (2) an estate for life, (3) an estate for years, such as a leasehold or sublease hold, or (4) a right of use. For the purposes of this chapter, a townhouse is a condominium.

     (d)   “Condominium project” means the entire parcel, or portion thereof, or real property, including all structures thereon, subdivided or to be subdivided, for the purpose of constructing or converting existing structures to condominium units.

     (e)   “Conversion” means a proposed change in the ownership interest of a parcel or parcels of land, together with the existing or added structures, some of which were previously occupied, from that established to the type of ownership interest defined as community apartments, stock cooperative, or condominiums.

     (f)    Open space” means that area of a lot which is:

     (1)   Open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky; or

     (2)   Open and unobstructed from the ground to roof eaves or balconies above the ground floor; or

     (3)   Area covered by swimming pools and swimming pool equipment enclosures, or other recreation-oriented construction and equipment or decks, including such areas as designated and equipped exercise facilities, meeting rooms, or other improved areas approved by the planning commission.

     (g)   “Units” means the elements of a condominium which are not owned in common with the owners of other condominiums in the project. (Ord. 1015 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1706 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1810 § 2, (2007))

 

26.30.050 Initiated projects.
     No condominium project, regardless of when initiated, for which a building permit has been issued shall be exempt from the requirements of obtaining a condominium permit or condominium conversion permit unless actual construction has commenced. (Ord. 1015 § 1, (1974))

 

26.30.060 Basic standards.
     The following condominium standards shall apply to all land and structures proposed as a part of a condominium project and shall be evaluated and processed pursuant to the procedural requirements set forth for conditional use permits in Title 25 of this code. No condominium project or portion thereof shall be approved or conditionally approved in whole or in part unless the planning commission, or city council upon appeal or review, has reviewed and found the project conforms to the following on the basis of its effect on: sound community planning; the economic, ecological, social and aesthetic qualities of the community; and on public health, safety and general welfare:

     (a)   The overall impact on schools, parks, utilities, neighborhoods, streets, traffic, parking and other community facilities and resources;

     (b)   Conformity with the general plan, including the housing element, and zoning density and design regulations;

     (c)   A detailed development and site plan of the project including: the location, treatment and sizes of structures; separation between living units and along property lines; parking layout, access areas and exterior elevations; location and use of common areas and other designated open space and security provisions; and location of loading zone and trash enclosure, including recycling area, and mechanical equipment;

     (d)   A detailed landscaping plan indicating sun and shade patterns on the site, the types and sizes of landscaping materials retained and to be installed, and their suitability to the sun and shade conditions on the site;

     (e)   A detailed lighting plan indicating location and nature of lighting and lighting fixtures on all structures and in the common areas;

     (f)    A copy of conditions, covenants and restrictions and any condominium agreements for the project setting forth the occupancy and management policies for the project;

     (g)   For each condominium unit, floor plans indicating the total floor area, the number, type and size of rooms, the type of separation walls; provisions for achieving sound control and privacy; provisions for insulating exterior walls and roof from heat and cold; and location of hot water heaters, furnaces and storage areas within each unit and in the common areas; and

     (h)   Provisions for the dedication of land or easements for street widening, public access or other public purposes, where necessary, and in accordance with established planned improvements. (Ord. 1015 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1706 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1810 § 3, (2007))

 

26.30.070 Minimum project requirements.
     Except as otherwise provided by law, in approving or conditionally approving any condominium project, the following shall be required:

     (a)   Parking.

     (1)   For multiple-family residential condominiums, there shall be off-street parking as required by Chapter 25.70 of this code and at least one parking space shall be in the ownership of each residential unit. No on-site parking spaces shall be rented or leased to any on- or off-site person. Compact parking spaces shall be allowed in residential condominium development in the following ratio, but only if no unistall parking for required parking spaces is used:

 

Required Parking Spaces

Allowable Compact Spaces

1—10

1

10—20

2

Over 20

3

 

     (2)   On-site guest parking spaces shall be provided for all residential condominium and cooperative developments. Guest parking spaces shall be held in common ownership, shall not be rented or assigned to residents or non-residents, and shall not be sold or transferred except with the sale of all units as a single entity. Guest parking spaces may be designed to compact standards as defined in Chapter 25.70. Guest parking spaces shall be provided in residential condominium and cooperative development in the following ratio:

 

Number of Dwelling Units

Required Guest Parking Spaces

2—4 units

1

5—15 units

2

15 or more

3

 

     (3)   Except for residential condominium developments in the El Camino North (ECN district with a lot front on El Camino Real and with no frontage on any other street, all residential condominium developments shall provide an area for on-site deliveries.

     (4)   For commercial condominiums and commercial uses in mixed use residential condominiums, there shall be off-street parking as required by this code, which may include compact parking as allowed in Chapter 25.70. However, if any unistall parking is used for any required parking, no compact parking is allowed.

     (5)   Parking requirements compliant with the American Disabilities Act shall be provided on site as required by the California Building Code as adopted by this code.

     (b)   Access, Vehicular Driveways, and Parking Areas.

     (1)   All private streets, driveways, and parking areas shall be improved and constructed with a structural section in accordance with city standards. They shall be designed and maintained to insure access for municipal services to any dwelling unit therein.

     (2)   Only temporary parking for service vehicles shall be allowed in the driveway between the front property line and the face of the building. Calculation of private open space and common open space at ground level shall not include any vehicular driveways or parking areas.

     (c)   Setback Requirements. Front, side, and rear setbacks shall be as required by the zoning district regulations applicable to the real property being developed.

     (d)   Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions Agreements. Conditions, covenants and restrictions agreements shall contain, but not be limited to, adequate provisions for maintenance, repair and upkeep of all structures, site landscaping and other on-site improvements; provisions that in the event of destruction or abolishment, reconstruction shall be in accordance with codes in effect at the time of such reconstruction; and provisions for dedication of land or establishment of easements for street widening or other public purpose. Covenants, conditions and restrictions shall describe: powers, duties, rights and obligations set forth in Civil Code Section 1355; the proposed form of owners’ association; and suggested by-laws, maintenance agreements, use restrictions, and special funds to cover emergency repairs; and require and enforce that on-site parking spaces be owned or assigned to condominium owners or held in common ownership by the condominium association shall be used only by bicycles or currently registered and operable motor vehicles as defined by the Vehicle Code.

     (e)   Landscaping and Open Space Standards.

     (1)   Front setback landscaping for residential condominium or cooperative development. Landscaping is required between the front property line and face of the building equal to and not less than fifty (50) percent of the lot area within the required front setback. Emphasis should be placed on minimizing turf and ground cover areas and on planting larger scale and more vertical plant material which will frame and screen the view of the structure from the street. If a circular drive is provided a special permit may be requested to reduce the required front setback landscaping to forty-five (45) percent of the lot area within the required front setback.

     (2)   Site landscaping shall be suitable for the specific sun/shade environment of the lot.

     (3)   Private open space for residential condominium or cooperative development. Private open space shall be provided for each unit and shall be contiguous and directly accessible to each unit, except in the ECN district where private open space shall not be required for dwelling units on the ground floor. Private open space may be paved or landscaped and shall be screened or fenced for the privacy of the residential unit when located within four (4) feet of established grade. Decks and balconies when designated for outdoor use may be used to satisfy this requirement. The following minimum standards for private open space shall apply:

     (A)  Seventy-five (75) square feet for each ground floor unit with no dimension of the designated area less than ten (10) feet;

     (B)   Seventy-five (75) square feet for each unit above the ground floor with no dimension of a designated area less than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet.

     (4)   Common open space for residential condominium and cooperative development. In addition to private open space, open space accessible to or enjoyed by all project residents shall be provided at not less than one hundred (100) square feet per dwelling unit, with no dimension of any designated common open space area to be less than fifteen (15) feet. Such common areas may be designed for passive or active use, and include landscaping or paving, provided such paving does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total required area. Common open space areas may be provided within the required rear setback area, or when the rear setback is inadequate, the open space may be provided on appropriately designed, rooftop areas.

     (5)   Common open space for commercial and industrial condominium developments. Common open space may be provided above the first floor, but is not required.

     (f)    Project Plans and Submittals. Project plans shall indicate accessibility for owners, guests, employees and customers to parking, storage, recreation and service areas; separation between living units and along property lines; provisions for security; orientation with respect to surrounding buildings and land uses; the location and type of utilities, building services and separate facilities for individual units and access easements to make repairs including:

     (1)   Separate gas and electric meters and separate water shutoff valves; individual residential unit climate controls and any proposed climate zones (based on types of unit uses) for non-residential condominium projects;

     (2)   Shock mounting of mechanical equipment to reduce sound transfer;

     (3)   Flexible connectors for electrical and plumbing connections;

     (4)   Sound levels shall satisfy adopted noise element criteria and all state standards;

     (5)   Other reports may be required by the city as a condition for approving a condominium permit including an economic report, social impact of relocation procedures; report of structural condition; report on building compliance with all building, fire and zoning codes for proposed uses; certificate of occupancy; and sufficient additional information prepared by licensed professionals to evaluate the soundness of the conversion proposed project. (Ord. 1015 § 1, (1974); Ord. 1706 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1810 § 4, (2007))

 

26.30.080 Time limits.
     A condominium permit granted or issued pursuant to this title shall become null and void when the tentative map for the condominium project expires because no final map has been filed in accordance with state law and this code, rather than the expiration time limit for planning approvals specified in Chapter 25.16. (Ord. 1810 § 5, (2007))

Chapter 26.32 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION PERMITS
26.32.010 Purpose.
     The city finds and determines that condominiums differ from buildings in which all units are in a single ownership in numerous respects and for the benefit of public health, safety and welfare, condominium projects should be treated differently. The city therefore states its express intent to adopt regulations for the conversion of existing buildings to condominium or cooperative ownership. Condominium conversion regulations are for the protection of displaced tenants and the purchasers of condominiums and cooperatively owned buildings. The purposes of this chapter are therefore:

     (a)   To establish criteria for conversion of the existing multiple family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, cooperatively owned property, and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing, commercial, office or industrial buildings;

     (b)   To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing and tenants in commercial, office and industrial buildings who may be required to relocate due to the conversion to condominium ownership by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation;

     (c)   To assure that adequate information as to about the physical conditions of the structure which is offered for purchase is made available to purchasers of converted housing, commercial, office or industrial spaces;

     (d)   To insure that converted properties achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety and is consistent with the general plan and zoning goals of the city;

     (e)   To provide a reasonable balance of ownership and rental housing in the city and a variety of choices of tenure, type, price, and location of housing; and

     (f)    To maintain a supply of rental housing for elderly, handicapped, and low and moderate income persons. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003))

 

26.32.020 Condominium conversion permit required.
     Before final approval and issuance of any building permit for any condominium conversion project, a developer, builder or other person seeking to construct such a project shall first apply for and obtain from the planning commission a condominium conversion permit. Such condominium conversion permit shall be issued only:

     (a)   Upon approval of the planning commission, or city council upon appeal or review, after it determines that the project has adequately met all the disclosure and upgrade requirements for conversion as required in this chapter or the planning commission has waive the requirement based on findings related to the property; and

     (b)   Upon approval of the planning commission, or city council upon appeal or review, after it determines that such the project conforms to all applicable zoning regulations of Title 25 of this code; and

     (c)   Upon the payment of fees in the amount required by Section 26.24.090 and council resolution.

     Applications for condominium new construction permits shall be evaluated and processed pursuant to the procedural requirements set forth for conditional use permits in Title 25 of this code. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003))

 

26.32.025 Conversion prohibited for twenty or fewer units or less than 20,000 square feet if commercial office, or industrial.
     No application shall be accepted, and no conversion shall be allowed, for any residential project which will produce twenty (20) or fewer condominium units or if in a commercial, office or industrial structure, containing less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of building area. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003))

 

26.32.030 Application requirements.
     No application for a condominium conversion project shall be accepted for any purpose unless the application includes the following:

     (a)   A site plan based on a site survey with at least the following details shown to scale:

     (1)   The location, height, gross floor area and proposed uses for each existing structure to remain and for each proposed new structure;

     (2)   The location, use and type of surfacing for all open storage areas;

     (3)   The location and type of surfacing for all driveways, pedestrian ways, vehicle parking areas and curb cuts;

     (4)   The location, height and type of materials for walls or fences;

     (5)   The location of all landscaped areas, the type of landscaping and method of irrigation;

     (6)   The location and description of all recreational facilities;

     (7)   The location, size and number of parking spaces to be used in conjunction with each condominium unit;

     (8)   The location, type and size of all drainage pipes and structures;

     (9)   The location and type of all on-site and nearest off-site fire hydrants;

     (10) A detailed lighting plan indicating location and nature of lighting and lighting fixtures on the site and structure and in the common areas;

     (11) The location, type and size of all on-site and adjacent overhead utility lines; and

     (12) A grading plan showing existing contours, building pad elevations and percent slope for all driveways and parking areas.

     (b)   Fully dimensioned elevation plans for all structures on the site, showing the architectural features and type of material of construction. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003))

 

26.32.040 Physical elements report.
     A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall also be submitted with the application. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     (a)   A report detailing the structural condition of all elements including structures, paving and fences of the property including, but not limited to, foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, fire protection sprinklers, alarms, mechanical equipment, roof, parking facilities and appliances, including all appliances installed in each unit. Such report shall be prepared by a registered civil or structural engineer.

     Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the professional preparing the report, when such element was built, the condition of each element, when the element was replaced, the approximate date upon which the element will require replacement, the remaining useful life of the element, the cost of replacing the element, and any variation to the physical condition of the element from the current zoning and from the California Building Code as adopted by this code and in effect on the date of the report. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed, including making all structures compliant with the California Building and Fire Codes as adopted by this code and in effect at the time the report is submitted to the city.

     (b)   A report containing acoustical test data which indicates the noise attenuation characteristics of existing party walls and ceilings. The data for such report shall include a representative sampling of units involved in the project, but in no case fewer than two (2) dwelling units, and shall be compiled by a qualified licensed acoustical engineer experienced in the field of acoustical testing and engineering. The consultant shall be selected by the community development department and shall perform the sampling in areas or units as approved or directed by the community development department.

     (c)   A report prepared by a licensed civil engineer evaluating the prospects for providing separate utilities for the individual units.

     (d)   A study of off-street parking, on-site maneuvering and parking stall access provided on site prepared by a licensed civil engineer.

     (e)   A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the community development department, on each structure and each unit within the structure.

     (f)    A report prepared by a licensed soils engineer on any known soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, groundwater and landslides in the vicinity of the project, and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy submitted with the report.

     (g)   A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance and to achieve full compliance with the current, applicable requirements of the California Building and Fire Codes and requirements of the zoning code.

     (h)   Provisions for the dedication of land or easements for street widening, public access or other public purpose, where necessary, and in accordance with established planned improvements. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1810 § 6, (2007))

 

26.32.050 Additional submittals.
     The following shall also be submitted with the application:

     (a)   A draft declaration of the covenants, conditions and restrictions, conforming to Department of Real Estate requirements, which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the project. The draft declaration shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the conveyance of units, the assignment of parking, an agreement for common area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping (together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance), description of a provision for maintenance of all vehicular access areas within the project; and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit, provide for on-going maintenance of landscaping and physical facilities on the site including all structures and fencing, and designation of the responsibility to the condominium association to require and enforce that all onsite parking spaces shall be used only by operating vehicles and not for storage of boats, camper shells or other personal possessions. The declaration shall include all provisions required pursuant to tenant retention and relocation requirements of Chapter 26.33 of this code.

     (b)   Specific information concerning the demographic characteristics of the project, including but not limited to the following:

     (1)   Square footage and number of rooms in each unit;

     (2)   Rental rate history for each type of unit for previous two (2) years;

     (3)   Monthly vacancy rate for each month during the preceding two (2) years;

     (4)   Composition of existing tenant households, including household size, length of residence, age of tenants, and whether receiving federal or state rent subsidies or number of employees by tenant and rents charged for commercial, industrial, and office uses;

     (5)   Proposed sales price of units;

     (6)   Proposed homeowners association fee;

     (7)   Proposed financing; and

     (8)   Names and addresses of all tenants.

     When the developer can conclusively demonstrate that some of this information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the director of community development.

     (c)   Signed copies from each tenant of a notice of intent to convert as required by this code, or for tenants from whom a notice of intent to convert is not submitted by applicant, proof of notice by certified mail to such tenants. At the election of the applicant, the copies of the notice of intent to convert and the proof of notice shall be submitted after the filing of the application, provided that such copies and proof shall be submitted prior to any public hearing on the proposed conversion.

     (d)   Signed consent to the conversion by the tenants of at least a majority of the units.

     (e)   Any other information which, in the opinion of the director of community development, will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this code. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1806 § 38, 39, (2007))

 

26.32.060 Acceptance of reports.
     The final form of the site plan, physical elements report and other submitted documents shall be as approved by the city. The reports in their accepted form shall remain on file with the community development department for review by any interested persons. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1806 § 40, (2007))

 

26.32.070 Copy to buyers.
     A summary of all reports required by this code, in a form approved by the community development department, shall be provided to each person executing any purchase, rental or other agreement to purchase or occupy a unit in the project. Copies of the full reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as may be required by the city, at the project site. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1810 § 7, (2007))

 

26.32.080 Physical standards for condominium conversions.
     (a)   Adequate Physical Conditions. To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the planning commission shall require, except as may otherwise be provided in this code, that all units to be converted to condominium conform to the Burlingame Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval, including all building and fire codes.

     All violations of the city code and all required modifications of units of the project must be corrected prior to the approval of the final map, or, upon approval of the planning commission, funds shall be adequately escrowed, prior to the closing of escrow of a unit, to assure completion thereafter of such corrective work.

     (b)   Specific Physical Standards. In addition to any other requirements, the following specific standards and requirements shall be met:

     (1)   Fire Prevention—Smoke Detectors and Sprinklers. Each condominium unit whether residential, commercial, industrial or office, shall be provided with a fire sprinkler system and approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat conforming to the California Building and Fire Code standards as adopted by this code.

     (2)   Sound Transmission.

     (A)  Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which are determined by the chief building official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the chief building official.

     (B)   Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all exterior and interior sound transmission standards of the California Building Code and the city’s general plan. In those cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the planning commission may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units.

     (3)   Utility Metering.

     (A)  The consumption of gas and electricity within each unit shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for each utility. A water shut-off valve shall be provided for each unit or for each plumbing fixture. The planning commission may find at the time of approval that individual metering of gas and electricity is impractical and excessively expensive and waive those requirements. Each unit having individual meter(s) or heater(s) shall have access to its own meter(s) and heater(s) which shall not require entry through another unit.

     (B)   Each unit shall have its own panel, or access thereto, for all electrical circuits which serve the unit.

     (4)   Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least two hundred (200) cubic feet of enclosed, weather-proofed, and lockable private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the planning commission, but shall not be divided into two (2) or more locations. In cases where the developer can demonstrate that this standard cannot reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission.

     (5)   Laundry Facilities in Residential Projects. For residential projects, either a laundry area in each unit or common laundry areas shall be provided; provided such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each common five (5) units or fraction thereof. In such cases where the developer can demonstrate that this standard cannot reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission.

     (6)   Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored or replanted as necessary taking into consideration shade and sun patterns on the site and shall be irrigated and maintained to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality; front setback landscaping may be fifty (50) percent to provide for an on-site delivery area and, with a special permit, landscaping may be reduced to forty-five (45) percent of the front setback if a circular driveway is provided; if the front setback is altered to provide on-site parking for delivery vehicles or to provide a circular driveway, the front setback shall be relandscaped with the emphasis on planting large scale and more vertical plant material which will frame and screen the view of the structure from the street and turf and ground cover areas in the front setback shall be minimized.

     (7)   Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The developer shall provide written certification to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks, air conditioners and any other major appliances that are provided are in operable working condition as of the close of escrow. At such time as the homeowners association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide written certification to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association is in operable working condition.

     (8)   Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas and additional elements as required by the community development department shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1806 § 41, (2007); Ord. 1810 § 8, (2007))

 

26.32.085 Minimum project requirements.
     Except as otherwise provided by law, in approving or conditionally approving any condominium project, the same minimum requirements shall be met for parking, access, vehicular driveways, parking areas, setbacks, landscaping and open space, and project plans and submittals as required by Section 26.30.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003); Ord. 1810 § 9, (2007))

 

26.32.090 Hearing.
     At the time of the hearing on the tentative map, the planning commission shall also hold a hearing on the conversion permit. Notice of the hearing shall be given to all tenants of the proposed conversion and posted on the property. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003))

 

26.32.100 Hearing considerations.
     At the hearing on the application for conversion to condominiums, the planning commission shall consider the following:

     (a)   The opinions of the tenants of the project as to whether the proposed conversion protects their interests;

     (b)   Whether or not the amount and impact of the displacement of tenants, if the conversion is approved, would be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community;

     (c)   The role that the commercial, industrial, office or apartment structure plays in the existing rental market for that use and whether this role is substantially altered by the proposed conversion in the light of the tenant protection provisions in this code. Particular emphasis should be placed on the evaluation of rental structures to determine if the existing building is serving low and moderate income tenants, or special groups of tenants such as elderly or handicapped;

     (d)   If applicable, whether or not lower cost home ownership opportunities will be increased by the conversion of apartments to condominiums, stock cooperatives or community apartments; and

     (e)   Whether tenants will have substantial difficulty in obtaining comparably priced facilities. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003))

 

26.32.110 Findings.
     The planning commission shall not issue a permit for condominium conversion unless the planning commission finds that:

     (a)   All provisions of this chapter are met;

     (b)   The proposed conversion is consistent with the city’s general plan;

     (c)   The proposed conversion will conform to this code and other applicable code provisions, if any, in effect at the time of tentative map approval, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or specifically excepted by the planning commission; and

     (d)   The overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety. (Ord. 1206 § 2, (1981); Ord. 1707 § 2, (2003))

Chapter 26.33 DESIGNATED UNITS, PURCHASE AND SALE RESTRICTIONS AND TENANT PROTECTIONS
26.33.010 Inclusion of provisions in covenants, conditions and restrictions.
     The provisions of Sections 26.33.020 to 26.33.050 shall apply to all condominium conversions and shall be contained in the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions. (Ord. 1206 § 3, (1981))

 

26.33.020 Designated units.
     (a)   The party proposing the conversion shall designate a quantity of units totaling not less than ten (10) percent of the units in the project to be converted. The designated units shall include those units occupied by senior or handicapped tenants, as defined below, at the time the notice to convert is given. If the number of units occupied by senior or handicapped tenants at the time the notice to convert is given is larger than ten (10) percent, the initial number of designated units shall be the number of units occupied by senior or handicapped tenants at the time the notice to convert is given; provided, that when the initial number of designated units is more than ten (10) percent of the units in the project due to their occupancy by seniors or handicapped, as designated units cease to be occupied by senior or handicapped tenants, such units shall cease to be classified as designated units until their number is reduced to the required ten (10) percent.

     (b)   For purposes of this section, seniors shall be defined as persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older and handicapped shall be defined as persons who have a physical or mental handicap which substantially limits one or more major life activities, including caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.

     (c)   The designated units are subject to the following restrictions:

     (1)   Occupancy by Seniors or Handicapped. The designated units shall be occupied by persons who are seniors or handicapped. However, if a designated unit is occupied by husband and wife, only one spouse need be senior or handicapped. Also, a surviving spouse of a senior who was married to the senior and occupied a designated unit at the date of death of his or her spouse shall be allowed to occupy the designated unit regardless of the age of the surviving spouse.

     (2)   Lease of Designated Units. Upon conversion, any senior or handicapped tenant as of the date notice to convert was given shall have the right to enter into a lifetime lease for the unit which the senior or handicapped tenant occupies. The lease shall provide that rental increases shall not occur more frequently more than once per year and each rental increase shall be limited to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the increase in the Consumer Price Index for the San Francisco-Oakland Metropolitan Area. (Ord. 1206 § 3, (1981))

 

26.33.030 Resale of units purchased at original sale.
     No unit purchased from the developer shall be sold within one year from the date of such purchase except for good cause amounting to a substantial change in the circumstances of the original buyer occurring after the date of the purchase. Upon any such resale or proposed resale, the developer shall have the right to repurchase the unit at a price equal to the price the unit was acquired by the original buyer plus interest and costs of purchase paid by said original buyer; the intent here being to make the original buyer whole if the developer elects such a repurchase. (Ord. 1206 § 3, (1981))

 

26.33.040 Limit of quantity of units purchased.
     No buyer shall be permitted from the developer more than five (5) percent of the total units available for sale other than units designated for seniors and handicapped persons. (Ord. 1206 § 3, (1981))

 

26.33.050 Candidate qualifications for association membership.
     If permitted by the California Department of Real Estate, the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions for the project shall provide that only owners who occupy a unit shall qualify as candidates for election to the board of directors of the condominium association for the project. (Ord. 1206 § 3, (1981))

 

26.33.060 Tenant provisions.
     The following shall apply to all conversions of residential units to condominiums:

     (a)   Notice of Intent. A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each tenant. The form of notice shall be on a form prepared by the community development department and shall inform tenants of all rights provided under this section. It shall be mailed or otherwise delivered within five (5) days of filing the application.

     (b)   Leases for Continuing Tenants. Any tenant who does not wish to purchase a unit but who wishes to continue renting and gives notice of such intention within the time set forth herein shall be offered a lease of not less than two (2) years, to take effect upon approval of the final map for the project. The lease shall provide for rent increases which shall not exceed five (5) percent per year. Base rent for such leases shall be the rent in effect at the time the conversion application is filed with the city.

     (c)   Tenants’ Right of First Refusal. In conformity with the applicable California Government Code sections, existing tenants of any unit shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit which they occupy at a price no greater than the price offered to the general public. Notice of exercise of such right must be given as provided herein.

     (d)   Notice of Tenant’s Election. Each tenant shall have ninety (90) days from the date of issuance by the California Department of Real Estate of the Subdivision Public Report or from the commencement of sale of the units, whichever date is later, to declare the tenant’s election:

     (1)   Lease. To lease a unit;

     (2)   Purchase. To purchase a unit; or

     (3)   Vacate. To neither lease nor purchase a unit, but instead to vacate the project.

     Failure of a tenant to declare an intent within the time designated shall be deemed an election by the tenant to neither purchase nor lease any unit but instead to vacate the project.

     (e)   Vacating Units by Nonpurchasing or Nonleasing Tenants and Payment of Moving Expenses. Each tenant of the project at the time the application for conversion has been filed who (a) has not previously given notice of his or her intent to move, (b) elects not to purchase or lease a unit or who is silent on the notice of right to buy or lease as provided herein, and (c) is not in default of the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he or she occupies his or her unit, shall have not less than one year from the approval date of the conversion permit or final subdivision map, whichever is later, to find substitute housing and relocate. The developer shall notify each such tenant immediately prior to the time of final map approval of the anticipated date required to vacate the unit and when the one-year period shall commence. Evidence of delivery of such a notice to each such tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. The developer shall pay each such tenant his or her actual moving expenses, provided that developer’s obligation for a tenant’s moving expenses shall not exceed four (4) times the monthly rent paid by such tenant for his or her unit prior to tentative map approval as provided herein. A tenant commencing occupancy of a unit after the application for conversion is filed shall not be entitled to moving expenses. Tenants eligible to receive the moving expenses shall receive such expenses at the time they relocate.

     (f)    Increase in Rents. The rent of any tenant in the project for which an application for a conversion permit has been filed shall not be increased for one year from the time of filing of the application and thereafter no more than once each year until the unit is sold or until the subdivision application is denied or withdrawn. Any rental increase during such period shall not exceed one-half of the increase in the Consumer Price Index for the San Francisco-Oakland Metropolitan Area.

     (g)   Termination by Tenant. Any tenant shall have the right to terminate any lease or rental agreement for a unit within the project to be converted without any penalty whatsoever after notice has been given of the intention to convert if such tenant notifies the developer in writing thirty (30) days in advance of such termination.

     (h)   Alternative Accommodations. The developer shall provide alternate comparable accommodations, including moving expenses, for such period the tenant is displaced or his or her unit is rendered uninhabitable by remodeling or other conversion procedures.

     (i)    Notice to New Tenants. After submittal of the tentative map, any prospective tenants shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit. (Ord. 1206 § 3, (1981); Ord. 1806 § 42, (2007))



