CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BEAUMONT, CA 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BEAUMONT, CA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Nancy Carroll 
Mayor 
____________ 
Julio Martinez, Mayor Pro-Tem 
Lloyd White 
Michael Lara 
Rey S. J. Santos 
City Council 
____________ 
Todd Parton 
City Manager 
____________ 
Slovak, Baron, Empey, Murphy & Pinkney-SBEMP Attorneys at Law 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Andreanna Pfeiffer 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a Republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Beaumont, CA. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were materials provided by the City, as supplemented through Ordinance No. 1060, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate subsequent ordinances included herein. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the chapter, section, and subsection. Thus, Section 1.04.050 is Subsection .050, located in Chapter 1.04 of Title 1. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and sections are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    The sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the title. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE TITLE 1 BMC T1:1 CODE APPENDIX BMC A:1 ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE BMC OL:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES BMC CCT:1 STATUTORY REFERENCES BMC SR:1 CODE INDEX BMC IX:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing. With this system, the Code will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the Code. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Vice-President of Supplementation, Kelly Heaton, Editor, and Janet Cramer, Proofreader, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to all city officials and employees for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Beaumont, CA. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Beaumont, CA. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Beaumont, CA. 2018. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 1025  9-18-2012 Include 1 1093 10- 3-2017 Include 1 1094 11- 7-2017 Include 1 1095 11-21-2017 Omit 1 1096 11-21-2017 Include 1 1097 11-21-2017 Include 1 1098  1-16-2018 Omit 1 1100  5-15-2018 Include 1 1101  6-19-2018 Include 1 Supp. No. 2 1102  8-21-2018 Include 2, Update 1 1106  5- 7-2019 Include 2, Update 2 1107  5-21-2019 Include 2, Update 2 1109  6-18-2019 Include 2, Update 2  
TITLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 

1.01.010 - Adopted. 
    The Beaumont Municipal Code, as compiled from the ordinances of the City, and edited and published by Book Publishing Company of Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference, as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of this Code, is adopted as the Code of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 587, § 1, 1984) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    This Code shall be known as the "Beaumont Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the "Beaumont Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the "Beaumont Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Beaumont Municipal Code" and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in this Code. 
(Ord. 587, § 2, 1984) 
1.01.030 - Reference applies to amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Beaumont Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 587, § 3, 1984) 
1.01.040 - Codification authority. 
    This Code consists of all of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City, codified pursuant to Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the state. 
(Ord. 587, § 4, 1984) 
1.01.050 - Definitions and construction. 
A.  Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases where used in this Code shall have the meanings and construction given in this section: 
    "City" means the City of Beaumont. 
    "City Council" means the City Council of Beaumont. 
    "Code" means the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
    "County" means the County of Riverside. 
    "Oath" includes affirmation. 
    "Person" means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust, or their manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them. 
    "State" means the State of California. 
    "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive. 
B.  Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
C.  Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
D.  Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present tense. 
E.  Title of Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City. 
(Ord. 87, § 5, 1984) 
1.01.060 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise, and which are included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. 587 § 6, 1984) 
1.01.070 - Effect on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to February 9, 1984, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at February 9, 1984, due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations there under appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 587 § 7, 1984) 
1.01.080 - Effective date. 
    This Code shall become effective on February 9, 1984. 
(Ord. 587 § 8, 1984) 
1.01.090 - Penalty for violation-Continuing violations. 
A.  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the City, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the City shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the City continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 587 § 9, 1984) 
1.01.100 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, respective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 587 § 10, 1984) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the City of Beaumont, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City" or "town" each mean the City of Beaumont, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Beaumont, and such territory outside the City of Beaumont over which the City of Beaumont has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Council" means the City Council of the City. "All its members" or "all Councilmen" means the total number of Councilmen holding office. 
C.  "County" means the County of Riverside. 
D.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of California, the ordinances of the City, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated there under. 
E.  "May" is permissive. 
F.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
G.  "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
H.  "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
I.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
J.  "Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, Joint Stock Company, partnership, association, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
K.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
L.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
M.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
N.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
O.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
P.  "State" means the State of California. 
Q.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
R.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
S.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
T.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 566 § 1, 1983) 
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City. 
(Ord. 566 § 2, 1983) 
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 566 § 3, 1983) 
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the City, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 566 § 4, 1983) 
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
    When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 566 § 5, 1983) 
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
    Whenever in the ordinances of the City, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 566 § 6, 1983) 
1.04.070 - Computation of time. 
    Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 566 § 7, 1983) 
1.04.080 - Construction. 
    The provisions of the ordinances of the City, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 566 § 8, 1983) 
1.04.090 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of any ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 566 § 9, 1983) 
Chapter 1.08 - CITY SEAL 

1.08.010 - Designated. 
    The City Seal of the City of Beaumont shall bear the inscription at the top "City of Beaumont, Ca.", and underneath it the word "Seal", and shall be inscribed around the bottom with the words "Incorporated Nov. 18, 1912", and shall have a cluster of cherries in the center. 
(Ord. 705 § 2, 1992) 
Chapter 1.12 - DATUM PLANE 

1.12.010 - Requirement. 
    All grades for municipal purposes within the City shall be referred to an established from the common reference or datum plane, whose grade shall be defined as zero, and above which all elevations shall be given in feet and decimals of a foot. 
(Ord. 41 § 1, 1913) 
1.12.020 - Designated. 
    The datum plane provided for in Section 1.12.010 shall be defined as a plane lying 2575.909 feet below a cross-cut in the center of a certain bronze tablet, stamped 2575 S-8-, which is a bench mark of the United States Geological Survey, set in the southwest corner of a brick building on the easterly side of Egan Avenue 140 feet southerly from the southerly side of "D" street, in the City. 
(Ord. 41 § 2, 1913) 
1.12.030 - Grades. 
    Grades shall be established at all street intersections, and at such points between as may be desirable. The term grade shall be defined as meaning the grade of the curbline. The grade line of the curb shall be an unbroken line between adjacent points on the curb, where the grade thereof has been established. 
(Ord. 41 § 3, 1913) 
1.12.040 - Sidewalk slope. 
    Sidewalks shall slope upwards and away from the curb, at the rate of one-quarter of an inch for every foot of width. 
(Ord. 41 § 4, 1913) 
Chapter 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 

1.16.010 - Violation-Misdemeanor-When. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the City, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the violation is made an infraction by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 828, § I, 4-2-02) 
1.16.020 - Violation-Misdemeanor-Penalty. 
    Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the City any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the City is punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 4-2-02) 
1.16.030 - Violation-Infraction-Administrative fine-Penalty. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B below and in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the City, any person subject to code enforcement by administrative citation or convicted of an infraction for violating an ordinance of the City, is punishable by: 
i.  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
ii.  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
iii.  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year of the first violation. 
The fourth violation and every violation of the same ordinance within one year may thereafter be charged as a misdemeanor. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a violation of a City building and safety code provision is punishable by: 
i.  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
ii.  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation of the same provision within one year; 
iii.  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation of the same provision within one year of the first violation. 
The fourth violation and every violation of the same ordinance within one year may thereafter be charged as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 995, 4-19-11) 
1.16.040 - Separate offense. 
    Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the City is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 4-2-02) 
Chapter 1.17 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT 

1.17.005 - Statement of purpose and intent. 
A.  Administrative Code Enforcement. The City Council has determined that the enforcement of the Beaumont Municipal Code throughout the City is an important public service and is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. The City Council has determined a need for alternative methods of code enforcement and that a comprehensive code enforcement system uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies to gain compliance with Code regulations. The City Council finds a need to draft precise regulations that can be effectively applied in judicial and administrative proceedings and further finds that is a need to establish uniform procedures for the proper application of administrative code enforcement and administrative hearings to resolve administrative code enforcement cases and appeals. 
B.  Administrative Code Enforcement Appeal Hearings. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to afford due process of law to any person who is directly affected by an administrative code enforcement action. Due process of law includes adequate notice of the violation and enforcement remedy chosen by the City, an adequate explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative code enforcement action taken by the City, and an opportunity to appeal. These procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently, expeditiously and fairly resolve issues raised by any administrative enforcement action. 
C.  Policies and Procedures. The City Manager, or the designated representative thereof, is authorized to develop and implement policies and procedures relating to the qualifications, appointment and compensation of administrative hearing officers; the powers of administrative hearing officers; and all other matters relating to conducting administrative hearings as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.010 - General provisions. 
    Sections 1.17.015 through 1.17.040 shall be deemed the general provisions of this Chapter. These sections shall apply to the administrative citation process (see Section 1.17.100 et seq.). 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.015 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter: 
A.  "Administrative Hearing Officer" shall mean any person appointed by the City Manager to preside at administrative hearings. 
B.  "Enforcement Officer" shall mean any City employee or agent of the City authorized by the City Manager or Chief of Police to enforce any provision of this Code. 
C.  "Person" shall mean any individual or legal entity, including but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, or trust. 
D.  "Responsible party" means each person committing the violation or causing a condition on a parcel of real property located within the City of Beaumont to violate the Beaumont Municipal Code; each person who has an ownership interest in that property; and each person who although not an owner, nevertheless has a legal right or a legal obligation to exercise possession and control over that property. In the event the person who commits the violation or causes the violating condition is a minor, then the minor's parents or legal guardian shall be deemed the responsible party. In the event the violation or violating condition is most reasonably attributable to a business and not to an employee, then that business, to the extent it is a legal entity such that it can sue and be sued in its own name, and each person who is an owner of that business shall each be deemed responsible parties. 
(Ord.  985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.020 - General enforcement authority. 
A.  Authority of Enforcement Officer. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Beaumont Municipal Code, an Enforcement Officer shall have the power to use the provisions of this Chapter to enforce any and all provisions of this Code and to use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under this Code. 
B.  Administrative Citation Remedy Not Exclusive. The procedures established in this Chapter for the use of administrative citation process, and the procedures established in other Chapters of this Code for nuisance abatement and summary abatement as means for addressing violations of this Code, shall be in addition to criminal, civil or other legal or equitable remedies established by law that may be pursued to address violations of this Code and the use of this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.025 - Authority to inspect. 
    Enforcement Officers are authorized to enter upon any property or premises within the City to ascertain whether the property or premises is in compliance with the Beaumont Municipal Code, and to make any inspection as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. These inspections may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical evidence, and the making of video and/or audio recordings. All such entries and inspections shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, lawful occupant, or the respective agent thereof refuses permission to enter and/or inspect, the Enforcement Officer shall seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time, or the successor provisions thereto. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.030 - Service of any type of notice or ruling. 
A.  Methods of Serving Notice. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any notice required to be given pursuant to this Chapter shall be served by any of the following methods: 
1.  Personal service; or 
2.  Certified mail, return receipt requested and first class mail to each responsible party at his or her last known address as it appears on the public records showing title to or ownership of the property that is the subject of an administrative enforcement action; and 
3.  Only as to those responsible parties who reside at or occupy the property that is the subject of an administrative enforcement action, as determined through diligent investigation: by posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the subject property and mailing a copy of the notice to them by first class mail. 
B.  When Notice is Deemed Served. Service by mail in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing. A completed and signed "Proof of Service" form shall be maintained in the City's file. 
C.  Effect of Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any responsible party or other person with a legal or equitable interest in the property to receive any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this Code. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.035 - Recording a notice of pending administrative code enforcement action. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter: 
A.  The Enforcement Officer may record, in the County Recorder's Office, a notice against a property that is the subject of a pending administrative code enforcement action. 
B.  The notice of pendency or other notice of pending administrative action shall be in a form approved by the City Manager and shall describe the nature of the administrative action and refer to the applicable provisions of the Beaumont Municipal Code governing the pending administrative action. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.040 - Continuing violations. 
    Each day a violation of this Code continues to exist shall constitute a new, separate, and distinct violation. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.100 - Code enforcement by administrative citation. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter: 
A.  Any person violating any provision of this Code may be issued an administrative citation by an Enforcement Officer as provided for in this Chapter. 
B.  A citation fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the Enforcement Officer and shall be payable directly to the City of Beaumont. 
C.  Fines assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.105 - Administrative citation procedures. 
A.  Upon discovering a violation of this Code, an Enforcement Officer may issue an administrative citation to a responsible party in the manner prescribed in this Chapter. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form approved by the City Manager. 
B.  If the Responsible Party is a business, the Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate the owner and issue the owner an administrative citation. If the Enforcement Officer can only locate the manager or on-site supervisor or employee, the administrative citation may be issued in the name of the business and given to the manager or on-site supervisor or employee. A copy of the administrative citation shall also be mailed to the owner in the manner prescribed in Section 1.17.030 of this Chapter. 
C.  If the Responsible Party is an individual, the Enforcement Officer shall attempt to obtain the signature of that person on the administrative citation. If the Responsible Party refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the Citation and subsequent proceedings. If the responsible party refuses to sign the administrative citation, then the Enforcement Officer shall write "refused" on the signature line for the responsible party. 
D.  If the Enforcement Officer is unable to locate the responsible party for the violation at the property where the violation exists, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party in the manner prescribed in Section 1.17.030 of this Chapter, and a copy posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property. 
E.  The administrative citation shall also contain the printed name, identification number and phone number of the Enforcement Officer. 
F.  The failure of any person with an ownership interest in the property to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.110 - Contents of an administrative citation. 
A.  The administrative citation shall specify the date and location of the violations and the approximate time, if applicable, that the violations were observed. 
B.  The administrative citation shall identify each violation by the applicable Section number of this Code and by either the Section's title or a brief descriptive caption. 
C.  The administrative citation may describe the action required to correct the violations. 
D.  The administrative citation shall require the Responsible Party to correct the violation within the time stated in the citation and shall state the consequences of failure to correct the violation. 
E.  The administrative citation shall state the amount of the fine imposed for the violations. 
F.  The administrative citation shall explain how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the fine. 
G.  The administrative citation shall disclose the responsible party's appeal right. 
H.  The administrative citation shall contain the printed name, identification number, and phone number of the Enforcement Officer and a signature line for the responsible party. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.115 - Administrative citation fines; assessment and amounts. 
A.  The amounts of fines to be imposed for a violation of this Code and assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be the amounts set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. 
B.  All fines assessed shall be payable to the City within 30 calendar days from the date of the administrative citation. 
C.  Any person who fails to pay to the City any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter on or before the date that the fine is due shall also be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth in the schedule of fines. 
D.  The City may collect any past due administrative citation fine or late payment charge by use of any available legal means. The City may also recover its collection costs. 
E.  Any previously-paid administrative citation fine shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.17.145 E if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. 
F.  Payment of the fine shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City. 
G.  If the Responsible Party fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violations. The amount of the fine shall increase at a rate specified by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.120 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  Preliminary Supervisor Review. Before submitting a written request for hearing pursuant to paragraph B below, the responsible party may contact the Enforcement Officer's Supervisor to informally contest the propriety of the issuance of an administrative citation. The preliminary review is not intended to supersede the appeal; rather, it is a process by which a Citation may be summarily resolved prior to any appeal. 
B.  Request for Hearing. Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest the Citation by submitting a written request for hearing and returning it to the City before the deadline for correction specified in the Citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine or notice that a request for advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to subsection (C) of this Section. 
C.  Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver. 
1.  Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest a violation of the Code and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required may submit a written request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. 
2.  The written request shall be submitted to the department specified on the administrative citation at the same time as the request to appeal. 
3.  The requirement to deposit the full amount of the fine shall be stayed unless or until the department determines to deny the waiver. 
4.  The department may waive the requirement of an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited party submits, to the department, a written declaration under penalty of perjury, together with any and all supporting documents, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the department that the person's actual financial condition precludes the deposit of the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. 
5.  The department shall issue a written determination within five business days listing the reasons for the determination to deny the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the department specified in the administrative citation shall be final. 
6.  The written determination of the department shall be served personally or by mail upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship waiver as provided in Section 1.17.030. 
7.  If the department determines to deny an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the City within ten days of the date of the denial. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.125 - Procedure for notification of administrative appeal hearings. 
A.  When the responsible party requests an appeal hearing, the Enforcement Officer shall schedule the date, time and place for the hearing before an Administrative Hearing Officer. 
B.  A written notice of hearing setting forth the date, time, and place of that hearing shall be served on the responsible party at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for that hearing. The hearing shall be set on a date that is not less than ten calendar days nor more than 60 calendar days from the date the written notice is served. 
C.  The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in Section 1.17.030 of this Chapter. 
D.  The notice of hearing shall include an itemized statement of the amount of administrative citation fines the City seeks to be assessed by the Administrative Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.130 - Administrative Hearing Officer. 
A.  Qualifications. The City Manager or the designated representative thereof shall promulgate rules and procedures as may be necessary to contract with qualified persons capable of acting as Administrative Hearing Officers. 
B.  Independent Authority. The employment and compensation of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of the administrative fines assessed by the Administrative Hearing Officer. 
C.  Disqualification. Any person designated to serve as an Administrative Hearing Officer shall be neutral and shall be disqualified for bias, prejudice, interest, or for any other reason a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. 
D.  Powers. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall have the power to: 
1.  Conduct administrative appeal hearings as provided under the authority of this Code; 
2.  Continue a hearing based on good cause shown by one of the parties to the hearing or upon his independent determination that due process has not been adequately afforded to a responsible party; 
3.  Exercise continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance, or ensuring compliance with an administrative citation; 
4.  Rule upon the merits of an administrative appeal hearing upon consideration of the evidence submitted, and issue a written decision resolving the appeal; 
5.  Uphold or deny a fine authorized under this Code; and 
6.  Where appropriate, and as a condition of compliance in correcting the violations at issue, order the responsible party to cease violating this Code and to make all necessary corrections as specified by the City by a specified deadline. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.135 - Administrative citation appeal hearing procedures. 
A.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before an Administrative Hearing Officer shall be held unless the total amount of the fine(s) has been deposited in advance or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued. 
B.  Administrative appeal hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Other than copies of citations, notices, notice and orders, and inspection reports served on the responsible parties as part of the enforcement action giving rise to the hearing, no pre-hearing discovery of the City's evidence shall be permitted. 
C.  The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
D.  The City bears the burden of proof at an administrative appeal hearing to establish the existence of a violation of this Code. 
E.  The party contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to present testimony and documentary evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
F.  Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of his or her case. 
G.  The only evidence that shall be permitted at the hearing and considered by the Administrative Hearing Officer in reaching a decision is that evidence that is relevant to the proof or disproof of: 
1.  Ownership of the subject property, when applicable; 
2.  Whether a person noticed by the City as a responsible party is, in fact, a responsible party; 
3.  Whether a violation of this Code occurred and/or continues to occur on the date or dates specified in the citation, notice, or notice and order; 
4.  Whether the responsible party has caused, maintained or permitted a violation of this Code on the date or dates specified in the Citation. 
H.  A preponderance of the evidence shall be the standard of proof used by the Administrative Appeal Hearing Officer in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing. 
I.  The Administrative Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the Enforcement Officer or the responsible party before issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.140 - Failure to attend administrative hearing. 
    Any Responsible Party who fails to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the Citation fine and shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing, the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, any and all rights afforded under this Code, and shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust their administrative remedies, provided that notice of the hearing had been served as required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.145 - Administrative citation appeal ruling. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision ("administrative citation appeal ruling") to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and shall state in the decision the reasons for the decision. 
B.  If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation(s) should be upheld, then the amount of the fine(s) set forth in the citation(s) shall not be reduced or waived for any reason, and the amount of the fine on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. 
C.  If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation(s) should be upheld and some or all of the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the fine. 
D.  If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the City, then the City shall refund the amount of the deposited fine by mail. 
E.  The administrative citation appeal ruling shall be served on all parties means of the methods listed in Section 1.17.030 of this Chapter. 
F.  The Administrative Hearing Officer's written decision shall become final on the date of mailing of the administrative citation appeal ruling. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.150 - Liability of responsible parties. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, each responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable for any and all administrative fines assessed under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.155 - Judicial review of administrative citation appeal ruling. 
    Once the Administrative Hearing Officer's written decision becomes final as provided in this Chapter, the time in which judicial review of the order must be sought shall be governed by California Government Code Section 53069.4, as that section may be amended from time-to-time, or the successor provision thereto. 
(Ord. 985, 01/01/2011) 
1.17.160 - Collection of unpaid fines, penalties and related costs. 
A.  Unpaid fines arising from administrative citations or other administrative enforcement actions as provided by this Code (e.g. nuisance abatement) shall be a debt to the City and subject to all remedies for debt collection as allowed by law. The City shall be entitled to interest from the date the order becomes final or 30 days after the first billing whichever date is later. 
B.  The failure of any person to pay the fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the City filing a claim with the Superior Court of California, County of Riverside, Small Claims Division or other appropriate Division. Alternatively, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the citation fines. 
C.  When a violation involves real property and the fines, penalties, and related costs are not paid within the prescribed time, the amount of those fines, penalties, and their related costs may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property without further hearing, subject to notice of the lien as required by law. 
D.  The notice of lien shall be in this form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
Claim of the City of Beaumont, California. 
Pursuant to the authority vested by Chapter 1.17 of the Beaumont Municipal Code, the amount of uncollected fines, penalties, and related costs may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property where the violation of law occurred and which is the subject of the administrative enforcement action(s) resulting in the award, imposition, or assessment of a fine, penalty and all costs associated therewith. 
On   (date)   an Administrative Hearing Officer conducted (as an evidentiary proceeding) an administrative hearing, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Beaumont Municipal Code. Following the presentation of evidence and the issuance of a ruling in the matter, the Administrative Hearing Officer upheld a fine or awarded, imposed, or assessed a monetary penalty in the amount of _______ and assessed administrative costs in the amount of _______ as set forth in the   (type of administrative hearing order)   issued on   (date)   . Whereby the City of Beaumont does hereby claim a lien for these sums as yet unpaid in the amount of _______ and this sum shall be a lien upon the parcel of real property identified herein until that principal sum, and the sum of any interest upon that principal as may be allowed by law and calculated at the then existing legal rate, has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
The real property upon which this lien is claimed is that certain parcel of land, the structures thereon and any appurtenances connected thereto and located within the City of Beaumont, County of Riverside, State of California, and particularly described as follows: 
(Legal Description) 
(Street address, if any) 
(Assessor's Parcel Number) 
Further, the City of Beaumont gives NOTICE that this Notice of Lien shall not be deemed or construed to prohibit the City of Beaumont from making additional claims and giving and recording one or more Notices of Lien thereon as may be required in those cases where the principal sum claimed, as a fine or penalty awarded, imposed, or assessed, is subject to a cumulative accrual at a fixed daily rate until the date the violations are corrected in full to the satisfaction of the City, or the legal maximum limit (cap) of that penalty has been reached, or the total amount of the lien has been paid in full. 
DATED this _______ day of _______,   (year)   . 
City Clerk of the City of Beaumont, California. 
E.  Alternatively, unpaid fines or penalties and their related costs, arising from administrative citations, administrative civil penalties actions or other administrative enforcement actions as provided by this Code, involving real property may also constitute assessment liens and be collected as special assessments by the Riverside County Treasurer-Tax Collector. 
Chapter 1.20 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 

1.20.010 - Authority. 
    This Chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 1, 4-1-03) 
1.20.020 - Claims required. 
    All claims against the City for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this Chapter, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 1, 4-1-03) 
1.20.030 - Form of claim. 
    All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 1, 4-1-03) 
1.20.040 - Claim prerequisite to suit. 
    In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this Chapter and acted upon by the City Council prior to the filing of any action on such claims, and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 1, 4-1-03) 
1.20.050 - Suit. 
    Any action brought against the City of Beaumont upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940-949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City of Beaumont shall conform with the requirements of Section 950-951 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 1, 4-1-03) 
TITLE 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS 

2.04.010 - Time and place-Generally. 
    Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at such times and places as may be fixed by resolution duly adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1059, July 21, 2015) 
2.04.020 - Time and place-Holiday. 
    If a regular meeting of the City Council falls on a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held on the next Wednesday not a legal holiday. 
(Ord. 1059, July 21, 2015) 
2.04.030 - Notice not required. 
    No notice shall be required for any regular meeting of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1059, July 21, 2015) 
2.04.040 - Rules of procedure. 
    The rules of order set forth in this section, supplemented by Rosenberg's Rules of Order, shall constitute the rules of order for all meetings of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1059, July 21, 2015) 
2.04.041 - Presiding Officer. 
    The Mayor shall be the Presiding Officer at all City Council meetings. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Temp shall be the Presiding Officer. In the absence of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Temp, the City Council shall elect a temporary Presiding Officer to serve until the arrival of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Temp, or until adjournment. 
(Ord. 1059, July 21, 2015) 
2.04.042 - Maintenance of order. 
    The Mayor or Presiding Officer is responsible for the maintenance of order and decorum at all times. No person should be allowed to speak without first being recognized by the Mayor or Presiding Officer. All questions and remarks should be addressed to the Mayor or Presiding Officer. 
(Ord. 1059, July 21, 2015) 
2.04.043 - Decorum. 
    No City Council member shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject until every other City Council member wishing to speak thereon shall have had the opportunity to speak. 
(Ord. 1059, July 21, 2015) 
2.04.044 - Time limitation. 
A.  The staff or other report and recommendations on an agenda item shall not exceed minutes (suggestion: 10 minutes). If the staff member or other person making the report and recommendations on an agenda item believes that his/her report and recommendations will exceed [10] minutes, he/she shall request permission from the Mayor or Presiding Officer for extended presentation time. A majority of the quorum present may over-ride permission granted by the Mayor or Presiding Officer to extend the presentation time. 
B.  The City Council discussion and debate on an agenda item shall not collectively exceed minutes (suggestion: 30 minutes). If a City Council member believes that Council discussion and debate will exceed [30] minutes, he/she may request that the Mayor or Presiding Officer extend the time for Council discussion/debate on an agenda item. A majority or the quorum may over-ride the Mayor's or Presiding Officer's decision to extend discussion/debate time on an agenda item. 
C.  Public comments shall be limited to three minutes per person per agenda item. 
(Ord. 1059, July 21, 2015) 
Chapter 2.08 - OFFICERS 

2.08.010 - Composition. 
    The officers of the City shall consist of a City Council composed of five members, a City Clerk, a City Treasurer, a Chief of Police, a recorder, a City Attorney, a street superintendent, a health officer, a pound master, and such other officers as the City Council may from time to time deem necessary or expedient. 
(Ord. 3 §1, 1913) 
2.08.020 - Election or appointment. 
    The City Council, the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, * shall be elected in accordance with the laws of the state. The other officers provided for in Section 2.08.010 shall be appointed by the City Council. All appointments of officers shall be made before the second regular meeting of the City Council in each fiscal year, and as often as any vacancy may occur. 
(Ord. 3 §2, 1913) 
Note- *Repealed by operation of law by Government Code Section 34856 (adopted in 1965) and Beaumont Municipal Code Section 2.12.060.C (adopted in 1965). 
2.08.030 - Term of appointed officers. 
    All officers appointed shall hold their offices during the fiscal year in which they are appointed, and until their successors are appointed and qualified, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance covering the office. 
(Ord. 3 §3, 1913) 
2.08.040 - Bond required for certain officers. 
    The following named officers shall be required to give bonds payable to the City in the amounts named below: 
A.  Treasurer, $10,000.00; 
B.  City Manager, $10,000.00; 
C.  Finance Director, $10,000.00. 
(Ord. 570 §4, 1983; Ord. 3 §4, 1913) 
2.08.050 - Commission by warrant. 
    All officers elected or appointed shall be commissioned by warrant under the corporate seal, signed by the chairman of the City Council and the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 3 §5, 1913) 
2.08.060 - Transfer of property and effects of office. 
    Any person having been an officer of the City shall within five days after notification and request, deliver to his successor in office all property and effects of any description in his possession belonging to the City and pertaining to his office. 
(Ord. 3 §6, 1913) 
2.08.070 - Suspension. 
    Any appointed officer, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance covering his office, may be suspended from his office with or without cause by the City Council. 
(Ord. 3 §7, 1913) 
2.08.080 - Salaries-Generally. 
    The officers of the City shall receive such salaries and compensations as the City Council shall, by ordinance, from time to time determine; provided, however, that after the same has been fixed, such salary or compensation shall not be increased or diminished, to take effect during the term for which any such officer was elected or appointed. The salaries of all officers shall be paid monthly to each person entitled thereto. 
(Ord. 3 §8, 1913) 
2.08.090 - Performance of duties. 
    All officers of the City shall perform such duties as the laws of the state provide, and the City Council of the City shall from time to time prescribe. 
(Ord. 3 §9, 1913) 
2.08.100 - City Council-Salaries. 
    Each member of the City Council shall receive a salary of $400.00 per month, to be paid at the same time and in the same manner as salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the City. The salary may be increased by ordinance or by an amendment thereto, in an amount of up to five percent for each calendar year from the operative date of the last salary adjustment in effect when the ordinance or amendment is enacted. 
(Ord. 999, 8-16-2011) 
2.08.110 - City Council-Reimbursement. 
    The salaries prescribed in Section 2.08.110 are and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the Council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by each Council Member in the performance of official duties for the City. 
(Ord. 678 §3, 1989; Ord. 453 §2, 1974) 
2.08.120 - City Treasurer duties. 
A.  The City Treasurer shall perform those duties established by the general laws of the State of California relating to the management and investment of City money set forth in Sections 41001 et seq. of the Government Code. Such duties include but are not limited to: 
1.  Receiving and safely keeping all money coming into his or her hands as City Treasurer; 
2.  Complying with all laws governing the deposit and securing of public funds and the handling of trust funds in his possession; 
3.  Paying out money only on warrants signed by legally designated persons; 
4.  Submitting to the City Clerk, at least once each month, a written report and accounting of all receipts, disbursements, and fund balances and filing a copy of the written report and accounting with the legislative body; 
5.  The City Treasurer may appoint deputies for whose acts the City Treasurer and his or her bondsmen are responsible. The deputies shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Treasurer and receive such compensation as is provided by the City Council. 
B.  The City Treasurer shall also perform the following duties: 
1.  Reviewing the monthly warrants on a biweekly basis with the City Manager, or his/her designee, to determine the integrity of the warrants and to ensure the warrants are properly issued; 
2.  Delivering monthly summary accounting of all receipts, expenses and fund balances to the City Council and working with the City Manager, or his/her designee, to ensure accuracy of said reports; 
3.  Providing a monthly City Treasurer's report to the City Council, raising issues of concern and or requests for City Council action; 
4.  Representing the City as needed and/or requested by the City Council at City, County, State or Commission meetings; 
5.  Working with the City Manager, or his/her designee, to prepare and deliver additional reports as requested by the City Council. Reports may be added to a monthly, quarterly or annual schedule if deemed to be beneficial to the City Council and decision making; 
6.  Completing special projects as requested by the City Council; 
7.  Serving on all City Financial committees including budget formation, audit decisions and process, risk assessment, financial strategy, revenue development and transparency policies for the security and integrity of City assets, funds, information and security. 
C.  The authority of the City Council to invest or reinvest City funds may be delegated to the City Treasurer, subject to annual review and renewal by the City Council, pursuant to Section 53607 of the California Government Code. In the event the City Council delegates the City's investment and reinvestment authority to the City Treasurer, the City Treasurer shall assume full responsibility for investment activities until said delegation of authority is revoked or expires, and shall make a monthly report of investment activities to the City Council. The City Treasurer shall have the duty to enforce the investment policy of the City as may be adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1064, § 3, 10-6-2015 ) 
2.08.130 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Repealed, Ord. 678 §1, 1989. 
2.08.140 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Repealed, Ord. 678 §1, 1989. 
2.08.150 - City Treasurer and City Clerk-Salaries. 
    The office holders of City Treasurer and City Clerk shall each receive a salary of $140.00 per month, to be paid at the same time and in the same manner as salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the City. The salary may be increased by ordinance or by amendment thereto, in an amount approved by City Council pursuant to Government Code Section § 36517. 
( Ord. No. 1102, § 3, 8-21-2018 ) 
2.08.160 - City Clerk duties. 
A.  The City Clerk shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities granted to and imposed upon the office of the City Clerk by the Sections 40801 et seq. of the Government Code, other general laws of the State, the provisions of this Code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the City Council. 
B.  The principal functions of the City Clerk shall be to: 
1.  Attend all regular, special emergency meetings of the City Council except when excused by the Mayor, and be responsible for the timely recording and maintaining of a record of all the actions of the City Council; 
2.  Keep all ordinances and resolutions of the City Council in such a manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public. The City Clerk shall attest to each resolution and ordinance adopted by the City Council and, as to ordinances requiring publication, that the ordinance has been published or posted in accordance with law; 
3.  Prepare the records retention schedule for City departments in such manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public pursuant to the California Public Records Act, Government Code Section 6250 et seq., until such time as any of the records may be destroyed or reproduced and the original destroyed, in accordance with State law; 
4.  Serve as the official custodian of all City records; 
5.  Receive, organize, prepare and reply to requests regulated by the California Public Records Act; 
6.  Serve as custodian of the seal of the City; 
7.  Perform the duties prescribed by the Elections Code in conducting municipal elections; 
8.  Perform the duties imposed upon City Clerks by the California Political Reform Act; 
9.  Be responsible for the maintenance and distribution of the City's Municipal Code; 
10.  Receive and forward to appropriate departments all claims filed against the City and its officers, agents or employees, pursuant to the provisions of the Tort Claims Act, Government Code Section 900 et seq., and 26 of this code; 
11.  Administer all official oaths of office; 
12.  Certify all official records of the City; and 
13.  Perform such other duties as assigned by the City Council. 
14.  The City Clerk may appoint deputies for whose acts the City Clerk and his or her bondsmen are responsible. The deputies shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Clerk and receive such compensation as is provided by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1061, § 3, 9-1-2015 ) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY MANAGER 

2.12.010 - Office created. 
    The Office of City Manager for the City is created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and ability, and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the City Council. 
(Ord. 363 §1, 1965) 
2.12.020 - Eligibility. 
    Residence in the City, at the time of appointment, shall not be required as a condition of appointment. 
(Ord. 363 §2, 1965) 
2.12.030 - Bond. 
    The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by the City Council and shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the City Manager as described in this chapter. The bond fee is to be paid to the City. 
(Ord. 363 §3, 1965) 
2.12.040 - Absence. 
    The City Manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the City Council, one of the other officers or department heads of the City to serve as assistant City Manager. The assistant City Manager will serve only as Manager Pro Tem during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In the case of absence or disability of the City Manager and his failure to so appoint a Manager Pro Tem, the City Council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the City Manager. The City Manager Pro Tem shall be subject to the same qualifications, terms, and conditions and shall have the same powers and duties during the period of such absence or disability of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 363 §4, 1965) 
2.12.050 - Compensation. 
    The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution, and the compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City that the City Council shall designate. 
(Ord. 363 §5, 1965) 
2.12.060 - Powers and duties. 
    The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government under the direction and control of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the power: 
A.  To see that all laws and ordinances of the City are enforced, and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed; 
B.  To control, order and give directions to all head of departments, subordinate officers and employees of the City, except the City Clerk, City employees from one department to another; and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his direction; 
C.  To appoint, promote, demote and remove any officers and employees of the City except the City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney, and members of the planning commission; 
D.  To exercise control over all departments of the City government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof, except the City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney, and members of the planning commission; 
E.  To attend all meetings of the City Council and planning commission unless excused there from by the Council, except when his removal is under consideration by the Council; 
F.  To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient; 
G.  To keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City: 
H.  To prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget; Council approval of the annual budget or schedule of anticipated expenditures constitutes approval to the purchasing agent to procure any items therein listed; provided, however, no purchase shall be made of an item exceeding in cost the sum of $1,000.00, or as amended from time to time by resolution, without first obtaining approval of the City Council; any items not so listed must first have approval from the City Council before purchase can be authorized by the City Manager; no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the City Council, except on report or approval of the City Manager; 
I.  To make investigations into the affairs of the City, and any department or division thereof, and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligations running to the City; 
J.  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration' of the City government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully performed and observed; 
K.  To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council and not specifically delegated to a particular board or officer; 
L.  He shall devote his time diligently to the duties of his office and the interest of the City; 
M.  The services and facilities of the City Clerk, City Treasurer, and the City Attorney shall be made available to the City Manager to the same extent, in the same manner, and to the same effect they are available to the City Council; 
N.  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 484 §1, 1977; Ord. 363 §6, 1965) 
2.12.070 - Removal. 
    Subject to Section 2.12.080, the City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and "at will". The City Council may remove or terminate the City Manager by a majority vote of the whole City Council as then constituted, convened in a regular or special council meeting. The City Council shall use its sole discretion in removing the City Manager, and its action shall be final. 
(Ord. 714 §2, 1993; Ord. No. 1070, § 4, 5-3-2016 ) 
2.12.080 - Removal after municipal election. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter enumerated in Section 2.12.010 through 2.12.070, the City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the City at which election a member of the City Council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow for any newly elected members to the City Council to observe the action and ability of the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of the 90-day period mentioned in this section, the provisions of Section 2.12.070 as to the removal of the Manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 363 §8, 1965) 
2.12.090 - Orders and directions. 
    The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the City Council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 363 §9, 1965) 
Chapter 2.14 - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

2.14.010 - Office created. 
    The Office of Code Enforcement Officer is created and established. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager, pursuant to Section 2.12.060 of this Code, and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 592 §1(part), 984) 
2.14.020 - Purpose. 
    The intent of this chapter is to permit the City Manager to more fully perform his duties as outlined in Section 2.12.060(A). 
(Ord. 592 §1(part), 1984). 
2.14.030 - Reporting. 
    Duplicates of all reports prepared and of all notices to appear issued by the code enforcement officer shall be forwarded in a timely manner to the City Manager. Disposition of all, notices to appear shall be as prescribed by Chapter 5C of the California Penal Code, commencing with Section 853.6. 
(Ord. 592 §1(part), 1984). 
2.14.040 - Duties. 
A.  The code enforcement officer shall enforce the municipal code. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code, the code enforcement officer may arrest a person without a warrant whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his presence which is a violation of the Municipal Code. 
C.  In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section, and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the code enforcement officer making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to appear, as prescribed by Chapter 5C of the California Penal Code, commencing with Section 853.6. The provisions of that chapter shall thereafter apply with written notice to appear pursuant to this chapter of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 592 §1(part), 1984) 
Chapter 2.16 - FINANCE DIRECTOR 

2.16.010 - Duties. 
A.  The financial and accounting duties heretofore the responsibility of the City Clerk as prescribed by Sections 40802 to 40805.5, both inclusive, of the Government Code of the state are transferred to the Director of Finance. 
B.  The Director of Finance shall perform the following duties: 
1.  Maintenance of Financial Records. Maintain all records reflecting the financial condition of the City and all its departments; 
2.  Report for Fiscal Year. At the end of each fiscal year, prepare and present to the City Council a summary statement of receipts and disbursements by departments and funds including opening and closing fund balances in the City Treasury; 
3.  Publication of Financial Statement. Cause the financial statement of the City to be published in accordance with the provision of Section 40804 and 40805 of the Government Code of the state; 
4.  Compilation of Financial Information for Budget. Compile all financial information necessary for the preparation of the City's budget and make such information available to the offices whose responsibility it is to prepare the budget; 
5.  Monthly Financial Report. Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the City and each of its departments; 
6.  Issuance of Licenses. Handle the issuance of all licenses for the City and keep in proper books a full and accurate account of all license fees charged and collected on behalf of the City and shall report to the City Manager all delinquencies in the payment of license fees; 
7.  Payroll Records. Supervise and be in charge of all payroll records; 
8.  Insurance Policies. Maintain a record of all insurance policies and keep the City Manager informed of their expiration dates; 
9.  Collection of Taxes, Assessments, Etc. See that all taxes, assessments, license fees and other revenues of the City or for whose collection the City is responsible and all other money receivable by the City from the county, state or federal government or from any court office, department or agency of the City are collected; 
10.  Duties Assigned by City Manager. Perform such other duties that are from time to time assigned to the Office of the Director of Finance by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 459 §1, 1974) 
2.16.020 - Under jurisdiction of City Manager. 
    The Director of Finance shall be under the jurisdiction of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 459 §2, 1974) 
2.16.030 - Bond. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36518 of the Government Code and as the same may hereafter be amended, the Director of Finance before entering the duties of that office shall execute a bond in the penal sum of $10,000.00. 
(Ord. 459 §3, 1974) 
Chapter 2.20 - POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT DUTIES 

2.20.010 - Designated. 
    In addition to their regular and ordinary duties it shall be the duty of all policemen and firemen, at all times and under all circumstances, to go to the aid of all persons or animals in distress or danger and render them such help and assistance as lies within their power. 
(Ord. 120 §1, 1930) 
2.20.020 - Injury and compensation. 
    In case any policeman or fireman should be injured while rendering such additional services as mentioned in Section 2.20.010, he shall be deemed to be injured in the course of his employment and shall be entitled to workmen's compensation therefore, as provided by law. 
(Ord. 120 §2, 1930) 
Chapter 2.24 - PLANNING COMMISSION AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 

2.24.010 - Creation. 
    The City Planning Commission is created pursuant to the authority granted by the Planning and Zoning Law of the State; Government Code, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 1. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1987) 
2.24.020 - Statutory applicability. 
    The provisions of the Planning and Zoning Law of the State, as they may be applicable, and as may be amended from time to time by the Legislature of the State, shall apply to and govern the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1987) 
2.24.030 - Members-Number. 
    The City Planning Commission shall consist of no less than five, nor more than seven, members, including the chairman thereof. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1987; Ord. 907, § 1, 1-16-07) 
2.24.040 - Members-Appointment-Term. 
    The members of the City Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council. The terms of three members shall expire on December 31, 2010, and the terms of four members shall expire on December 31, 2008. The terms of their successors shall be four years. Any member may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council, without cause. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1987; Ord. 907, § 2, 1-16-07) 
2.24.050 - Members-Compensation. 
    Members of the Beaumont Planning Commission shall receive such compensation, travel expense and other authorized expenses for attending meetings of their respective bodies as may be fixed by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1987) 
2.24.060 - Duties. 
    The Commission shall perform planning and zoning duties specified by law or ordinance not expressly delegated or reserved to another body or officer; including proceedings for adopting or amending general and specific plans; changes of zone; amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance; appeals and review of land division maps; review of major plot plans; conditional and public use permits and variances; or to revoke or modify the same; appeals of minor plot plans; and shall advise the City Council in related matters. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1987) 
2.24.070 - Procedures. 
    The Commission shall elect one member as chairman and one as vice chairman, to hold office at the pleasure of the members. Election of new officers shall be held at the first regular Planning Commission meeting each year. Three members shall be a quorum and a majority shall be required to carry a motion. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting per month. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1987) 
2.24.080 - Community Development Department. 
    The Community Development Department shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by the City Manager to hold office at his pleasure, and shall include a staff or employees under his direction as necessary to carry out the duties of the Department. The Director shall provide technical and clerical assistance to the Planning Commission and with the staff of his department shall perform functions relating to planning, zoning and land divisions and such other aspects of community development as may be required by law, ordinance or order of the City Manager. Any references in the Beaumont Municipal Code to the Planning Department are deemed to refer to the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1987) 
Chapter 2.28 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 

2.28.010 - Intent of chapter. 
    It is the intent of this chapter that informal mutual aid shall be available and furnished in all cases of local peril or emergency, when requested by appropriate agency designates in Sections 2.28.020, 2.28.030 and 2.28.070. 
(Ord. 516 §6, 1980) 
2.28.020 - Officials who may proclaim local emergency. 
    Pursuant to Section 8630 of the Government Code of the State, the City Manager of the City, or in his absence, the City Police Chief, or his designated agent, or the Emergency Services Director or his successor, and/or the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, or other Councilman designated by seniority in office, or in case of a tie therein, the Councilman receiving the most electoral votes, are designated as the City officials who may proclaim a local emergency in the City, and to act pursuant to the provision of the California Emergency Services Act. 
(Ord. 516 §1, 1980) 
2.28.030 - Authorization of provision of formal mutual aid. 
    During the period of any declared local emergency the parties set forth in Section 2.28.020 in the same order of sequence may authorize the providing of formal mutual aid to other political subdivisions of the State declaring a local emergency or request mutual aid from such political subdivisions when a local emergency exists. 
(Ord. 516 §2, 1980) 
2.28.040 - Limitation on term of emergency. 
    Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the individuals mentioned in Section 2.28.020, the emergency shall not remain in effect for a period in excess of seven days unless it has been ratified by the City Council pursuant to the requirements of the Government Code of the State. 
(Ord. 516 §3, 1980) 
2.28.050 - Implementation by plans or agreements. 
    Provisions of this chapter providing for formal, mutual aid in local emergencies may be implemented by appropriate emergency plans and agreements in compliance with Federal, State and Local Charter. 
(Ord. 516 §4, 1980) 
2.28.060 - Chapter provisions not to supplant existing agreements of Police Department. 
    It is expressly understood that this chapter shall not supplant existing agreements, either oral or written, between representations of the City Police Department, and parties thereto providing for the exchange or furnishing of informal mutual aid. 
(Ord. 516 §5, 1980) 
2.28.070 - Request for informal mutual aid-Provision for assistance. 
    It is expressly understood that in cases arising from a need for informal mutual aid, the City Police Chief, or his designated representatives, shall render the necessary assistance immediately. 
(Ord. 516 §7, 1980) 
2.28.080 - Request for informal mutual aid-Period in effect. 
    Whenever a request for informal mutual aid is honored by the City Police Chief, or his designated representatives, it shall remain in effect no longer than 48 hours, unless it has been approved by the City Manager or the City Council. 
(Ord. 516 §8, 1980) 
CHAPTER 2.30 - BOARD OF ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 

2.30.010 - Creation of Board. 
    There is hereby created a Board of Administrative Appeals, sometimes referred to in this Chapter as the "Board." The Board shall consist of at least one panel of three members, but not more than three panels of three members each. 
(Ord. 988, 3/1/11) 
2.30.020 - Appointment and qualifications of Board Members. 
    The City Council shall appoint the members of the Board. Board members shall be at least 18 years of age, and may be residents, or owners or employees of businesses, of the City. 
(Ord. 988, 3/1/11) 
2.30.030 - Term and tenure of members. 
    All members of the Board shall be appointed for a term of two years and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and City Council. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. 988, 3/1/11) 
2.30.040 - Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the Board of Administrative Appeals to conduct administrative hearings on written appeals made pursuant to the Beaumont Municipal Code, including appeals pertaining to administrative Code Enforcement (BMC Chapter 1.17), Animal Control Hearings (BMC Chapter 6.22), Nuisances (BMC Chapter 8.32), and Mobilehome Park Rent Stabilization (BMC Chapter 13.21). 
(Ord. 988, 3/1/11) 
2.30.050 - Rules and regulations. 
    The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as are needed to govern its own procedures; provided, however, that the Board shall comply with the Hearing Procedures that may be specified by the applicable appeal provisions of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 988, 3/1/11) 
Chapter 2.35 - FINANCIAL AND AUDIT COMMITTEE 

2.35.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this Chapter to establish a Financial and Audit Committee. The Financial and Audit Committee shall act in advisory capacity to the City Council and work to promote enhanced fiscal responsibility, accountability, integrity, transparency, and to recommend fiscal and investment policies for City Council consideration. 
( Ord. No. 1062, § 3, 9-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-5-2016 ) 
2.35.020 - Definitions. 
(A)  "City" shall mean the City of Beaumont; 
(B)  "Code" shall mean the City of Beaumont Municipal Code; 
(C)  "Committee" shall mean the Financial and Audit Committee as established herein. 
( Ord. No. 1062, § 3, 9-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-5-2016 ) 
2.35.030 - Creation of Committee. 
    There is hereby created a Financial and Audit Committee. The Committee shall consist of nine members. 
( Ord. No. 1062, § 3, 9-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-5-2016 ) 
2.35.040 - Appointment and qualification of Committee members. 
    The City Council shall appoint the members of the Committee. Committee members shall be at least 18 years of age and shall consist of at least two members of the City Council, the City Treasurer, the City Manager or his or her designee as the highest ranking financial staff member of the City, and five residents of the City of Beaumont. The ninth committee member shall either be a City resident and/or he or she must own a business operating within the City. The City Manager and his or her designee as the highest ranking financial staff position shall be on the Committee as non-voting members. There will be nine voting members. Any Committee member may be removed from the Committee after three consecutive unexcused absences from meetings and a majority vote of the Committee. 
( Ord. No. 1062, § 3, 9-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-5-2016 ) 
2.35.050. - Term and tenure of members. 
    All members of the Committee shall be appointed for a term of two years and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. Members shall serve without compensation. 
( Ord. No. 1062, § 3, 9-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-5-2016 ) 
2.35.060. - Powers and duties. 
    The Committee shall be advisory to the City Council. The Committee shall hold public meetings at least once every 60 days. The Committee shall make recommendations to the City Council regarding: 
(A)  City investment policies and practices; 
(B)  Long term financial planning; 
(C)  Such other matters as the City Council may request from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1062, § 3, 9-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-5-2016 ) 
2.35.070 - Rules and regulations. 
    The Committee shall appoint a chair, who shall conduct Committee meetings and report quarterly to the City Council on Committee activities and recommendations. The Committee shall adopt such rules and regulations as are needed to conduct its meetings and shall comply with the Brown Act and other applicable laws. 
( Ord. No. 1062, § 3, 9-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-5-2016 ) 
Chapter 2.36 - EMPLOYEE CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

2.36.010 - Introduction. 
    In compliance with the Political Reform Act of 1974, California Government Code Section 81000, et seq., and specifically with Section 87300 et seq., the City Council adopts this Conflict of Interest Code which shall be applicable to all designated employees of the agency. The requirements of this code are in addition to other requirements of the Act such as the general prohibition against conflicts of interest contained in Government Code Section 87100, and to any other state or local laws pertaining to conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. 561 §1, 1982) 
2.36.020 - Definition of terms. 
    The definitions contained in the Political Reform Act of 1974, the regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission (2 Cal. Adm. Code Sections 18100, et seq.), and any amendments to the Act or regulations, are incorporated by reference into this conflict of interest code. 
(Ord. 561 §2, 1982) 
2.36.030 - Designated employees. 
    The persons holding positions listed in Appendix A, set out in Section 2.36.110, are designated employees. It has been determined that these officers and employees make or participate in the making of decisions which may foreseeably have a material effect on financial interest 
(Ord. 561 §3, 1982) 
2.36.040 - Disclosure statements. 
    A designated employee shall be assigned one or more of the disclosure categories set forth in Appendix a, set out in Section 2.36.120. It has been determined that the financial interests set forth in a designated employee's disclosure category are the types of financial interests which he or she foresee ably can affect materially through the conduct of his or her office. Each designated employee shall file statements of economic interests disclosing his or her financial interests as required by the applicable disclosure category. 
(Ord. 561 §4, 1982). 
2.36.050 - Place of filing. 
A.  All designated employees required to submit a statement of economic interests, shall file the original with the City Clerk, who shall be the filing officer for all designated employees. 
B.  Upon the receipt of the statement of economic interests from the designated employees, the City Clerk shall make and retain a copy and forward the originals of these statements to the City Council who shall be the filing officer, within five days of the filing deadline or five days of receipt in the case of statements filed late. 
(Ord. 561 §5, 1982) 
2.36.060 - Time of filing. 
A.  Initial Statements. All designated employees employed by the agency on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall file statements within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Assuming Office Statements. All persons assuming designated positions after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall file statements within ten days after assuming the designated positions. 
C.  Annual Statements. All designated employees shall file statements no later than April 1. 
D.  Leaving Office Statements. All persons who leave designated positions shall file statements within 30 days after leaving office. 
(Ord. 561 §6, 1982) 
2.36.070 - Contents of statements. 
A.  Contents of Initial Statements. Initial statements shall disclose any reportable investments and interests in real property held on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Assuming Office Statements. Assuming office statements shall disclose any reportable investments and interests in real property (and management positions) held on the date of assuming office, or on the date of nomination, whichever is the earlier. 
C.  Contents of Annual Statements. Annual statements shall disclose any reportable investments, interests in real property, and income held or received during the previous 'calendar year; provided, however, that the period covered by an employee's first annual statements shall begin on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or the date of assuming office, whichever is the later. 
D.  Contents of Leaving Office Statements. Leaving office statements shall disclose reportable investments, interests in real property, and income held or received during the period between the closing date of the last statement filed and the date of leaving office. 
(Ord. 561 §7, 1982) 
2.36.080 - Manner of reporting. 
    Disclosure statements shall be made on forms supplied by the Fair Political Practices Commission, and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Contents of Investment and Real Property Reports. An investment in or other interest in real property that otherwise is required to be reported only for the purposes of disclosure only, and not by way of disqualification, need not be reported for purposes of the Political Reform Act (hereafter called the "Act") if any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  If the real property is the principal residence of the filer; or 
2.  If the investment or interest has a fair market value of less than $1,000.00. 
However, investments or interest in real property of an individual include those held by the individual's spouse and/or dependent children as well as including any pro rata share of any investment or interest in real property of a business entity or trust in which the individual, his or her spouse or children own, in the aggregate, a direct, indirect or beneficial interest of ten percent or greater. 
1.  A statement of the nature of the investment or interest; 
2.  The name of the business entity in which each investment is held, and a general description of the business activity in which the business entity is engaged; 
3.  The address and other precise location of the real property; 
4.  A statement whether the fair market value of the investment or interest in real property exceeds $1,000.00, exceeds $10,000.00, or exceeds $100,000.00. 
B.  Contents of Personal Income Reports. When personal income is required to be reported, a designated employee's income includes his or her community property interest in the income of his or her spouse, the statement shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of each source of income aggregating $250.00, or more in value, or $25.00 or more in value if the income was a gift, and a general description of the business activity, if any, of each source; 
2.  A statement whether the aggregate value of income from each source was $1,000.00 or less, greater than $1,000.00, or greater than $10,000.00; 
3.  A description of the consideration, if any, for which the income was received; 
4.  In the case of a gift, the name and address of the donor, a description of the gift, the amount or value of the gift, and the date on which the gift was received. 
C.  Contents of Business Entity Income Reports. When income of a business entity, including income of a sole proprietorship, is required to be reported, income of a business entity is reportable if the direct, indirect or beneficial interest of the filer, spouse and dependent children in the business entity aggregates a ten percent or greater interest. In addition, the disclosure of persons who are clients or customers of a business entity is required only if the source is within one of the disclosure categories of the filer. The statement shall contain: 
1.  The name, address and a general description of the business activity of the business entity; 
2.  The name of every person from whom the business entity received payments if the filer's pro rata share of gross receipts from such person was equal to or greater than $10,000.00. 
D.  Contents of Consultant's Statements. 
1.  The City Manager may determine in writing that a particular consultant is hired to perform a range of duties that are limited in scope and thus is not required to comply with the disclosure requirements described in Appendix A, set out in Section 2.36.110. 
2.  Such determination shall include a description of the consultant's duties and, based on that description, a statement of the extent of disclosure requirements. 
3.  The City Manager shall forward a copy of this determination to the City Council. 
4.  Nothing herein excuses any such consultant from any other provision of this conflict of interest code. 
E.  Acquisition or Disposal During Reporting Period. In the case of an annual or leaving office statement, if an investment or interest in real property was partially or wholly acquired or disposed of during the period covered by the statement,-the statement shall contain the date of acquisition or disposal. 
(Ord. 561 §8, 1982) 
2.36.090 - Disqualification. 
A.  Designated employees must disqualify themselves from making, participating in the making or using their official positions to influence the making of any governmental decision which will foreseeably have a material financial effect, distinguishable from its effect on the public generally, on: 
1.  Any business entity in which the designated employee has a direct or indirect interest worth more than $1,000.00; 
2.  Any real property in which the designated employee has a direct or indirect interest worth more than $1,000.00; 
3.  Any source of income, other than loans by a commercial lending institution in the regular course of business, aggregating $250.00 or more in value received by or promised to the designated employee within 12 months prior to the time when the decision is made; or 
4.  Any business entity in which the designated employee is a director, officer, partner, trustee, employee, or holds any position of management. 
B.  No designated employee shall be prevented from making or participating in the making of any decision to the extent his or her participation is legally required for the decision to be made. 
(Ord. 561 §9, 1982) 
2.36.100 - Manner of disqualification. 
    A designated employee required to disqualify himself or herself shall notify his or her supervisor in writing. This notice shall be forwarded to the head of the designated employee's department, who shall record the employee's disqualification. 
    Upon receipt of such statement, the supervisor shall reassign the matter to another employee. 
(Ord. 561 §10, 1982) 
2.36.110 - Appendix A-Designated positions. 
    Appendix A is codified in this chapter reads as follows: 
Designated Positions Disclosure 
Categories  1. Members of the City Council, Redevelopment Agency and Finance Authority, Planning Commissioners 1, 2, 3, 4  2. The City Manager 1, 2, 3, 4  3. The Assistant City Manager 1, 2, 3, 4  5. The Chief of Police 1, 2, 3, 4  6. The City Clerk 1, 2, 3, 4  7. The Deputy City Clerk 1, 2, 3, 4  8. The City Treasurer 1, 2, 3, 4  9. The Community Services Director 1, 2, 3, 4 10. The Emergency Service Coordinator 1, 2, 3, 4 11. The Resources Director 1, 2, 3, 4 12. Police Department Division Commanders 1, 2, 3, 4 13. The Fire Chief 1, 2, 3, 4 14. The Director of Economic Development 1, 2, 3, 4 15. The Planning Director 1, 2, 3, 4 16. The Director of Public Works 1, 2, 3, 4 17. The City Attorney 1, 2, 3, 4 18. The Finance Director 1, 2, 3, 4  
(Amended by Resolution No. 2010-33, 12-7-2010) 
2.36.120 - Appendix B-Disclosure categories. 
    Appendix B codified in this chapter reads as follows: 
DISCLOSURE CATEGORIES 
    The disclosure categories listed below identify the types of investments, business entities, sources of income, including gifts, loans and travel payments, or real property which the Designated Employee must disclose for each disclosure category to which he or she is assigned. 
    Category 1: All investments, business positions and sources of income, including gifts, loans and travel payments, that are located in, do business in, or that own real property in the City. 
    Category 2: All interests in real property which is located in whole or in part within, or not more than two miles outside, the City. 
    Category 3: All investments, business positions and sources of income, including gifts, loans and travel payments, that are engaged in land development, construction, or the acquisition or sale of real property in the City. 
    Category 4: All investments and business positions and sources of income, including gifts, loans and travel payments, that provide services, supplies, materials, machinery, vehicles or equipment of a type purchased or leased by the City. 
    Category 5: All investments and business positions and sources of income, including gifts, loans and travel payments, that provide services, supplies, materials, machinery, vehicles or equipment of a type purchased or leased by the Designated Employee's department, unit or division. 
(Amended by Resolution No. 2010-33, 12-7-2010) 
Chapter 2.40 - RIGHT OF ENTRY 

2.40.010 - Designated. 
    Whenever any officer or employee of the City is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance, he may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same: provided, that he shall effect entry in the manner provided in Section 2.40.020, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or control of such building or premises has been otherwise obtained. 
(Ord. 564 §1, 1983) 
2.40.020 - Manner. 
    If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and demand entry: and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If consent to such entry is not given, the authorized officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, and may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for such remedy. 
(Ord. 564 §2, 1983) 
2.40.030 - Controlling over other laws-Exception. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be controlling over any other ordinance or part of an ordinance on the same subject, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, unless such ordinance or part of an ordinance provides differently by an express reference to the ordinance codified in this chapter. Notwithstanding any other ordinance of this City, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, it is not a violation of ordinance to refuse or fail to consent to an entry for inspection for which a warrant is required to be obtained. 
(Ord. 564 §3, 1983) 
Chapter 2.44 - EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

2.44.010 - Authorization of contract. 
    A contract between the City Council and the Board of Administration, California State Employees' Retirement System, is authorized, a copy of said contract being attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, marked "Exhibit A," and by such reference made a part of this chapter as though set out in this chapter in full. 
(Ord. 378 §1, 1967) 
2.44.020 - Execution of contract. 
    The Mayor of the City Council is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute the contract for and on behalf of the agency. 
(Ord. 378 §2, 1967) 
2.44.030 - Authorization of contract amendment. 
    An amendment to the contract between the City Council and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System is authorized, a copy of said amendment being attached to the ordinance codified in this section and Section 2.44.040, marked "Exhibit A," and by such reference made a part of this chapter as though set out in this chapter in full. 
(Ord. 581 §1, 1983) 
2.44.040 - Execution of contract amendment. 
    The Mayor is authorized, empowered and directed to execute said amendment for and on behalf of the agency. 
(Ord. 581 §2, 1983) 
Chapter 2.48 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 

2.48.010 - Declaration. 
    The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 356 §1, 1964) 
2.48.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
    Pursuant to Section 13522 of said Chapter 1, the City while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 356 §2, 1964) 
Chapter 2.54 - ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW 

2.54.010 - Hearing officer. 
    The planning director of the City is designated as the environmental hearing officer. 
(Ord. 597 §1(part), 1984) 
2.54.020 - Procedures generally. 
    The environmental hearing officer shall conduct hearings on projects pursuant to all City and state guidelines for the implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act; shall review and consider environmental documents submitted on a project; and shall recommend approval or disapproval of the environmental documents to the City Council for their adequacy. 
(Ord. 597 §1(part), 1984) 
TITLE 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapter 3.00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR BIDDING, CONTRACTING AND PURCHASES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 21, 2017 , amended Ch. 3.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.00, §§ 3.00.010-3.00.060, pertained to purchasing supplies and personal property, and derived from Ord. No. 815, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2001. 

3.00.010 - Purpose and policy. 
    In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.00.020 - Purchasing Officer. 
    There is created the position of Purchasing Officer. The duties of this Officer shall be administered by the City Manager or such person as he or she may designate. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.00.030 - Purchasing Officer's duties. 
    The duties of the Purchasing Officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. Subject to the policies of this chapter and the supervision of the City Manager, the Purchasing Officer shall have the authority to: 
A.  Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment required by the City; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend to the City Council execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment; 
C.  Prepare and implement policies and procedures governing the bidding, contracting, purchasing, storing, distribution and disposal of supplies, services and equipment for the City; 
D.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as may be reasonably necessary to the implementation of this chapter and any other policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter; 
E.  Review the working details, drawings, plans and specifications for any projects or purchases requiring such review in this chapter; 
F.  Inspect or supervise the inspection of purchased supplies, services and equipment to ensure conformity with any specifications established or required by the City; 
G.  Transfer among departments any supplies, services and equipment not needed by one such department, but which are necessary for the operation of one or more other departments; 
H.  Develop and maintain any bidder's list, contractor's list or vendor's catalog file necessary to the operation of this chapter and any other policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter, Chapter 3.01 and 3.02. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.00.040 - Adoption of purchasing system and Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases. Therefore, a centralized purchasing system is hereby adopted and vested with the authority for the purchase of all City supplies, services and equipment. In addition, this chapter, Chapter 3.01, Chapter 3.02 and the purchasing system they establish are designed to provide appropriate procedures to implement the City's participation in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act pursuant to California Public Contract Code, Section 22000 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
Chapter 3.01 - SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR BIDDING, CONTRACTING AND PURCHASES 
[2]
Footnotes: 

3.01.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, the following definitions shall apply to all provisions of this chapter: 
    "Alternative procedure" means purchasing supplies, services or equipment by negotiated contract, purchase order or any other procedure outlined in the City's purchasing and bidding policies and procedures manual approved by the City Manager and consistent with this chapter. A type of alternative procedure may include, but is not limited to, what will be referred to as a "simplified pricing procedure" wherein the Authorized Contracting Party, or his or her designee, obtains oral price quotes from one or more potential contractors or suppliers, and accepts the quote which is determined to be in the best interests of the City. 
    "Authorized Contracting Party" means the City official or body provided with authority under this chapter by the City Manager to approve a contract or to make a purchase. 
    "City Manager" means the City Manager or person designated by the City Manager to perform all or some of the duties prescribed in this chapter. 
    "Commission" means the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission created by Division 2, Part 3, Chapter 2, Article 2 of the California Public Contract Code (Section 22000 et seq.). 
    "Emergency" for purposes of public projects shall have that meaning provided in California Public Contract Code Sections 22035 and 22050. Emergency for all other purchasing or contracting purposes means a situation which makes competitive bidding, either formal or informal, impractical or not in the best interests of the City. 
    "Facility" means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system (subject to the limitation found in California Public Contract Code Section 22002, Subdivision (c)(3)), real property, streets and highways, or other public work improvement. 
    "General services" means all services performed by persons not in a professional occupation, including, but not limited to, contract services for park, electrical and computer repair, building, facility and vehicle maintenance, recreation programs and other similar services which are not professional services. 
    "Maintenance work" shall have that meaning provided in Section 22002(d) of the Public Contract Code, as that section may be amended from time to time. In addition and to the extent not inconsistent with Section 22002(d), maintenance work shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Routine, recurring and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes; 
B.  Minor repainting; 
C.  Street and highway maintenance, including utility patching, skin patching, crack filling, filling of pot holes, slurry sealing, edge grading, street striping, resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one-inch, sign replacement, sidewalk repair and replacement, curb and gutter repair and replacement, and street and traffic light repair and replacement. Maintenance work shall not include striping of a new street or highway; 
D.  Sewer maintenance, including foaming, videotaping, cleaning and manhole restoration; 
E.  Traffic signal maintenance. Maintenance work shall not include installation of new traffic signals; 
F.  Storm drain related maintenance; 
G.  Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, tree and plant replacement, irrigation and sprinkler system servicing, retrofit and repair and landscape rehabilitation; 
H.  Maintenance of facilities, including roof repairs or replacements, heating and air conditioning repairs and electric repairs; 
I.  Vehicle and equipment maintenance and repairs; 
J.  Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to dams, reservoirs and waste treatment systems. 
    "Professional services" means all services performed by persons in a professional occupation, including, but not limited to, consulting and performance services for legal services, accounting, auditing, computer hardware and software support, engineering, architectural, planning, environmental, redevelopment, financial, economic, personnel, social services, animal control, management, solid waste, cable television, communication and other similar professional functions which may be necessary for the operation of the City. Professional Services are governed by chapter 3.02. 
    "Public project" shall have that meaning provided in Section 22002(c) of the Public Contract Code, as that section may be amended from time to time. A public project shall not include maintenance work. In addition and to the extent not inconsistent with Section 22002(c), public project shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased or operated facility; 
2.  Street or sewer work except maintenance and repair; 
3.  Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased or operated facility; and 
4.  In the case of a publicly owned utility system, public project shall include only the construction, erection, improvement, or repair of dams, reservoirs and wastewater treatment plants. 
    "Public project formal bidding procedure" means the procedure provided for in Section 3.01.060 which meets the requirements of state and local law, including Public Contract Code Section 22037, this chapter and any policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
    "Public project informal bidding procedure" means a procedure provided for in Section 3.01.070 which meets the requirements of state and local law, including Public Contract Code Section 22034, this chapter and any policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
    "Purchasing Officer" means the City Manager or his or her designee(s) as provided in Section 3.00.020. Pursuant to Section 3.00.020, the City Manager may change his or her designation at any time. 
    "Non-public project formal bidding procedure" means the procedure provided for in Section 3.01.080 which meets the requirements of state and local law, including the Public Contract Code, this chapter and any policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
    "Non-public project informal bidding procedure" means the procedure provided for in Section 3.01.090 which meets the requirements of state and local law, including the Public Contract Code, this chapter and any policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.020 - General purchasing policies and procedures. 
A.  The City shall secure supplies, services and equipment at the lowest total cost commensurate with the quality and scope needed, and subject to any limitations imposed by state law. 
B.  The Purchasing Officer shall develop, for approval by the City Manager, such policies and procedures as are necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. The policies and procedures shall be written and implemented in such a way to encourage open and competitive bidding, where appropriate, provide equal opportunity based on merit, make each selection process free of invidious discrimination, provide for efficient and timely acquisition of needed supplies, services and equipment, and provide effective fiscal controls. 
C.  In purchasing, supplies, services and equipment, the City shall make use of competitive bidding, both formal and informal, whenever required by law, this chapter or any policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. 
D.  Formal and informal competitive bidding is not required, for instance, when an emergency is declared pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Except in cases of emergency or unless specifically authorized by resolution or minute order of the City Council, the Purchasing Officer shall not issue a purchase order for supplies, services or equipment involving any project or purchase unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. 
F.  The City shall comply with all federal and state bidder's security and bonding requirements and all prevailing wage laws applicable to each contract or purchase. 
G.  The Purchasing Officer, with approval of the City Manager, may provide written authorization to any department director to conduct a bidding process outside of the centralized purchasing system; provided, however, that such bidding process and the resulting contract or purchase shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this chapter. The Purchasing Officer, with approval of the City Manager, may rescind such authorization in writing at any time and for any or no reason. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.030 - Bidding requirements for public projects. 
A.  Alternative Procedure (up to $25,000.00) (Administrative Approval). Public projects with cost estimates of $25,000.00 or less may be awarded by the City Manager, upon recommendation of the director of the department responsible for the project, by any alternative procedure as defined in Section 3.01.010. 
B.  Alternative Procedure (more than $25,000.00-$45,000.00) (City Council Approval). Public projects with cost estimates of more than $25,000.00, but less than, or equal to $45,000.00 may be awarded by the City Council, upon recommendation of the City Manager, by any alternative procedure as defined in Section 3.01.010. 
C.  Informal Procedure (more than $45,000.00-less than $175,000.00). Public projects with cost estimates of more than $45,000.00, but less than, or equal to, $175,000.00 shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the Public Contract Code, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the public project informal bidding procedure in Section 3.01.070. If all bids received are over $175,000.00, the City Council may, with the approval of a four-fifths vote of those members present, award the contract in an amount not exceeding $187,500.00 to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, so long as the City Council also determines that the City's cost estimate for the project was reasonable. 
D.  Formal Procedure (more than $175,000.00). Public projects with cost estimates of more than $175,000.00 shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the Public Contract Code, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the public project formal bidding procedure in Section 3.01.060. 
E.  City Engineer Review. The City Engineer or his designee shall review the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every maintenance project and other general services project which may affect the design or operation of public improvements and which may bring into question the City's liability for dangerous condition of public property. 
F.  City Council Approval. The City Council shall review and approve the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every public project of more than $175,000.00. 
G.  Award. Contracts for public projects of $45,000.00 or less, may be awarded in the best interests of the City. Contracts for public projects of more than $45,000.00, if awarded, shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the Authorized Contracting Party may accept the one it chooses in his or her sole and absolute discretion. 
H.  Dollar Limits and Change Orders or Amendments. The dollar limits indicated herein shall apply to the original contract and to any amendments or change orders. To this end, therefore, unless an exception provided in Section 3.01.100 applies, any contract amendment or change order which would increase the contract amount above any threshold stated herein shall comply with the requirements applicable to the increased contract amount. 
I.  No Bid Splitting. The City shall not split a project, work, service or purchase into smaller projects, works, services or purchases for the purpose of avoiding any bidding or contracting requirements of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.040 - Bidding requirements for maintenance and general services. 
A.  Alternative Procedure (up to $25,000.00) (Administrative Approval). Maintenance work and other general services projects with cost estimates of $25,000.00 or less may be awarded by the City Manager, upon recommendation of the director of the department responsible for the project, by any alternative procedure as defined in Section 3.01.010. 
B.  Alternative Procedure (more than $25,000.00-$45,000.00) (City Council Approval). Maintenance work and other general services projects with cost estimates of more than $25,000.00, but less than, or equal to $45,000.00 may be awarded by the City Council, upon recommendation of the City Manager, by any alternative procedure as defined in Section 3.01.010. 
C.  Informal Bidding Procedure (more than $45,000.00-up to $175,000.00). Maintenance work and other general services projects with cost estimates of more than $45,000.00, but less than or equal to $175,000.00 shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the non-public project informal bidding procedure contained in in Section 3.01.090. 
D.  Formal Bidding Procedure (more than $175,000.00). Maintenance work and other general services projects with cost estimates of more than $175,000.00 shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the non-public project formal bidding procedure contained in Section 3.01.080. 
E.  City Engineer Review. The City Engineer or his designee shall review the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every maintenance project and other general services project which may affect the design or operation of public improvements and which may bring into question the City's liability for dangerous condition of public property. 
F.  Purchasing Officer Approval. The Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, shall review and approve the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every maintenance work and other general services project. 
G.  City Council Approval. The City Council shall review and approve the working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every maintenance work and other general services project of more than $45,000.00. 
H.  Award. Contracts for maintenance work and other general services projects of $45,000.00 or less, if awarded, may be awarded in the best interests of the City. Contracts for maintenance work and other general services projects of more than $45,000.00, if awarded, shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the Authorized Contracting Party may accept the one it chooses. 
I.  Subsequent Contract Awards, Amendments, Extensions or Renewals. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the City Manager shall not award a subsequent contract to the same individual or entity for the same or similar services on the same project, or amend, extend or renew such a contract, without City Council approval, when the award, amendment, extension or renewal will result in the City paying an aggregate amount of more than $45,000.00 to the individual or entity in any given fiscal year. For purposes of this section, the phrase "same project" shall include an on-call or as-needed contract. 
J.  Term Limitation. No maintenance work or other general services contract, except for contracts for solid waste services, may extend for longer than a three-year initial term with a maximum of two, one-year extensions each of which must be approved by the City Council. 
K.  No Bid Splitting. The City shall not split a project, work, service or purchase into smaller projects, works, services or purchases for the purpose of avoiding any bidding or contracting requirements of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.050 - Bidding requirements for materials, supplies and equipment. 
A.  Alternative Procedure (up to $25,000.00) (Administrative Approval). Purchases of materials, supplies and equipment of $25,000.00 or less may be awarded by the City Manager, upon recommendation of the director of the department responsible for the project, by any alternative procedure as defined in Section 3.01.010. 
B.  Alternative Procedure (more than $25,000.00-$45,000.00) (City Council Approval). Purchases of materials, supplies and equipment of more than $25,000.00, but less than, or equal to $45,000.00 may be awarded by the City Council, upon recommendation of the City Manager, by any alternative procedure as defined in Section 3.01.010. 
C.  Informal Bidding Procedure (more than $45,000.00-less than $175,000.00). Purchases of materials, supplies and equipment of more than $45,000.00, but less than or equal to $175,000.00 shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the non-public project informal bidding procedure provided for in Section 3.01.090. 
D.  Formal Bidding Procedure ($175,000.00 or more). Purchases of materials, supplies and equipment of more than $175,000.00 shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the non-public project formal bidding procedure provided for in Section 3.010.080. 
E.  Department Director Approval. The director of the appropriate department shall review and approve the specifications prepared for every purchase of materials, supplies and equipment. 
F.  Purchasing Officer Approval. The Purchasing Officer, or his or her designee, shall review and approve all contracts for the purchase of materials, supplies and equipment. 
G.  City Council Approval. The City Council shall review and approve the specifications prepared for every purchase of materials, supplies and equipment of more than $45,000.00. 
H.  Award. Contracts for the purchase of materials, supplies and equipment of $45,000.00 or less, if awarded, may be awarded in the best interests of the City pursuant to Section 3.01.040.G. Contracts for the purchase of materials, supplies and equipment of more than $45,000.00, if awarded, shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder pursuant to Section 3.01.040.G. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the Authorized Contracting Party may accept the one he or she chooses in his or her sole discretion. 
I.  Local Bidder Preference. In order to promote the economic health of the City and to encourage local participation in the procurement of materials, supplies and equipment, the City may take into consideration the sales tax to be returned to the City as a result of an award in determining the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. This section shall not be effective unless and until the City Manager adopts a written policy to implement its provisions. 
J.  No Bid Splitting. The City shall not split a project, work, service or purchase into smaller projects, works, services or purchases for the purpose of avoiding any bidding or contracting requirements of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.060 - Formal bidding procedure for public projects. 
A.  Uses of Formal Bidding Procedure. This formal bidding procedure shall be used whenever formal bidding is required for a public project. 
B.  Required Process. The formal competitive bidding procedure shall comply with all aspects of state and local law governing formal competitive bidding, including, but not limited to, the California Public Contract Code, California Government Code, California Labor Code, resolutions of the City Council as may be adopted from time to time, and policies and procedures as the City Manager may approve from time to time. 
C.  Notice Inviting Formal Bids. Notice inviting formal bids shall be provided. The notice inviting formal bids shall comply with Public Contract Code Section 22037, as such section may be amended from time to time. Notices shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. At a minimum, the notice inviting formal bids shall: 
1.  Describe the project; 
2.  State how to obtain more detailed information about the project; 
3.  State the date, time and place for the submission of sealed bids; and 
4.  Include any other information required by state or local law, as determined by the City Attorney. 
D.  Published Notice. The notice shall be published at least 14 calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the City, or, if there is no such newspaper, in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated in the City. 
E.  Distribution of Notice Inviting Formal Bids. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent to those construction trade journals specified in Public Contract Code Section 22036 at least 30 calendar days before the date of bid opening. 
F.  Additional Notice. The City shall also provide any additional notice as it deems proper. 
G.  Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the bid and contract documents shall be approved by the director of the appropriate department, as well as the City Attorney. 
H.  City's Authority. The City may reject any or all bids received, and may waive any minor irregularities in each bid received. 
I.  No Bids Received. If no bids are received, the Authorized Contracting Party may award the contract by any alternative procedure. 
J.  Award of Contract. The contract shall be awarded in accordance with Section 3.01.030. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the City may accept the one it chooses in its sole and absolute discretion. 
K.  Rejection of Bids. The City may, in its sole and absolute discretion, reject any bids presented. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates for the project, the City shall have the option of any of the following: 
1.  Abandon the project; or 
2.  Re-advertise for bids in the manner described in this chapter; or 
3.  By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the City Council, declare that the project can be performed more economically by the employees of the City and have the project done by force account. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.070 - Informal bidding procedure for certain public projects. 
A.  Uses of Public Project Informal Bidding Procedure. This informal bidding procedure shall be used when a public project is involved and informal bidding is permitted by this chapter. 
B.  Distribution of Notice Inviting Informal Bids to Contractor List. The Purchasing Officer shall provide a notice inviting informal bids not less than ten calendar days before the bids are due. The notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed or provided to all construction trade journals specified in Public Contract Code Sections 22034 and 22036. 
C.  Contents of Notice Inviting Informal Bids. At a minimum, the notice inviting informal bids shall: 
1.  Describe the project in general terms; 
2.  State how to obtain more detailed information about the project; 
3.  State the date, time and place for the submission of sealed bids; and 
4.  Include any other information required by state or local law, as determined by the City Attorney. 
D.  Proprietary Projects or Products. If the director of the appropriate department certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, the product or service is proprietary in nature and can be obtained only from a limited number of contractors, and that no equivalent products or services are available, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
E.  Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents shall be approved by the director of the appropriate department, as well as the City Attorney. 
F.  City's Authority. The City may reject any or all bids received, and may waive any minor irregularities in each bid received. 
G.  No Bids Received. If no bids are received, the Authorized Contracting Party may award the contract by any alternative procedure. 
H.  Award of Contract. The contract shall be awarded in accordance with Section 3.01.030.F. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the City may accept the one it chooses in its sole and absolute discretion. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.080 - Formal bidding procedure for non-public projects. 
A.  Uses of the Non-Public Project Formal Bidding Procedure. A formal bidding procedure shall be used whenever formal bidding is required by this chapter and the project does not involve a public project. 
B.  Distribution of Notice Inviting Formal Bids or Request for Proposals. A notice inviting formal bids or a request for proposals, as appropriate, shall be published at least 14 calendar days before the date of opening the bids or proposals in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the City, or, if there is no such newspaper, in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated in the City. The notice inviting formal bids or request for proposals may also be provided directly to vendors or contractors. The City shall endeavor to receive formal bids or proposals from at least three vendors or contractors. A notice inviting bids shall be used whenever the project or purchase must be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. A request for proposals may be used whenever the project or purchase is not required to be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. If the Purchasing Officer and the director of the appropriate department certify that, to the best of their knowledge, there is no local source or local provider available for the project, the notice inviting bids or the request for proposals, as appropriate, may be distributed to a list of qualified vendors maintained by the Purchasing Officer and/or published in a trade journal appropriate to the project, in lieu of publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
C.  Contents of Notice Inviting Formal Bids or Request for Proposals. At a minimum, the notice inviting formal bids or request for proposals shall: 
1.  Describe the project or purchase in general terms; 
2.  State how to obtain more detailed information about the project or purchase; 
3.  State the date, time and place for the submission of bids or proposals; and 
4.  Include any other information required by state or local law, as determined by the City Attorney. Bids for purchases of more than $175,000.00 shall be sealed bids. 
D.  Proprietary Projects or Sole Source Products. If the director of the appropriate department certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, the product or service is proprietary in nature and can be obtained only from a limited number of vendors or contractors, and that no equivalent products or services are available, the notice inviting formal bids or request for proposals may be sent exclusively to such vendor(s) or contractor(s). 
E.  Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents shall be approved by the director of the appropriate department, as well as the City Attorney. 
F.  City's Authority. The City may reject any or all bids or proposals received, and may waive any minor irregularities in each bid or proposal received. 
G.  No Bids Received. If no bids are received, the Authorized Contracting Party may award the contract by any alternative procedure. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.090 - Informal bidding procedure for non-public projects. 
A.  Uses of Non-Public Project Informal Bidding Procedure. This informal bidding procedure shall be used whenever informal bidding is allowed for a purchase which does not involve a public project. 
B.  Distribution of Notice Inviting Informal Bids or Request for Proposals. A Notice inviting informal bids or request for proposals, as appropriate, shall be provided. The notice inviting informal bids or requests for proposals shall be provided to at least three vendors or contractors, and the City shall endeavor to receive informal bids or proposals from at least three vendors or contractors. A notice inviting bids shall be used whenever the project or purchase must be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. A request for proposals may be used whenever the project or purchase is not required to be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. 
C.  Contents of Notice Inviting Informal Bids or Request for Proposals. At a minimum, the notice inviting informal bids or request for proposals shall: 
1.  Describe the project or purchase in general terms; 
2.  State how to obtain more detailed information about the project or purchase; 
3.  State the date, time and place for the submission of bids or proposals; and 
4.  Include any other information required by state or local law, as determined by the City Attorney. Bids for purchases of more than $45,000.00 shall be sealed bids. 
D.  Proprietary Projects or Products. If the director of the appropriate department certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, the product or service is proprietary in nature and can be obtained only from a limited number of vendors or contractors, and that no equivalent products or services are available, the notice inviting informal bids or request for proposals may be sent exclusively to such vendor(s) or contractor(s). 
E.  Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents shall be approved by the director of the appropriate department, as well as the City Attorney. 
F.  City's Authority. The City may reject any or all bids or proposals received, and may waive any Minor irregularities in each bid or proposal received. 
G.  No Bids or Proposals Received. If no bids or proposals are received, the Authorized Contracting Party may award the contract by any alternative purchasing procedure. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.100 - Exceptions to competitive bidding on public projects. 
    In addition to the situations described in Section 3.01.030, competitive bidding, either formal or informal, is not required for public projects in the situations provided for in this section. Under such conditions, the alternative procedure may be used. 
A.  Emergencies. In situations determined by the City Manager to constitute an emergency for repair or replacement of a public project pursuant to Public Contract Code Section 22035 and Public Contract Code Section 22050, the City Council hereby delegates to the City Manager the power to declare a public emergency and take any directly related and immediate action required by the emergency, up to a total of $100,000.00, pursuant to California Public Contract Code Section 22035 and California Public Contract Code Section 22050. Emergency expenditures of more than $100,000.00 shall first be approved by the City Council. Work may be performed without the benefit of competitive bidding, either formal or informal, only so long as necessary under those sections. 
For projects of more than $25,000.00, a report on the emergency and work performed shall be provided at the next regular meeting of the City Council, and then at every meeting thereafter required by California Public Contract Code Section 22050. At such meetings, the City Council shall determine, by a four-fifths vote, that there is a need to continue the action without the benefit of informal or formal competitive bidding in accordance with California Public Contract Code Section 22035 and California Public Contract Code Section 22050. The City Council shall terminate the emergency action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant, so that the remainder of the emergency action may be completed pursuant to a formal bidding procedure or other applicable procedure. 
For projects of $25,000.00 or less, the City Manager shall determine, on his or her own as the action continues, whether there is a need to continue the action without the benefit of the applicable bidding procedure. The City Manager shall terminate the emergency action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant, so that the remainder of the emergency action may be completed pursuant to the applicable bidding procedure. 
B.  No Competitive Market. When the City Council determines, in accordance with applicable law, that a competitive market does not exist and that no competitive advantage will be gained by the public bidding process. 
C.  No Bids Received. When no bids are received pursuant to either the public project informal bidding procedure or the public project formal bidding procedure the Purchasing Officer may proceed by the alternative procedure. 
D.  Otherwise Authorized. When otherwise authorized by this chapter or applicable law including, but not limited to Public Contract Code Section 22160 et seq. concerning design build. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.110 - Exceptions to competitive bidding on non-public projects. 
    In addition to the situations described in Sections 3.01.090 through 3.01.100, competitive bidding, either formal or informal, is not required for non-public projects in the situations provided for in this section. Under such conditions, any alternative procedure, including no bidding, may be used with the City Manager's approval. 
A.  Emergencies. In situations determined by the Authorized Contracting Party to constitute an emergency, as defined in Section 3.01.010. 
B.  No Competitive Market. When the City Council determines, in accordance with applicable law, that a competitive market does not exist and that no competitive advantage will be gained by the public bidding process. 
C.  Competitive Bidding Already Completed. When the Authorized Contracting Party determines that a competitive bid procedure has been conducted by another public agency (e.g. through CMAS or GSA) and the price to the City is equal to or better than the price to that public agency. 
D.  State Purchase. When the purchase is made on behalf of the City by the State Department of General Services. 
E.  Purpose of Bidding is Otherwise Accomplished. When the City Manager determines that it is in the best interest of the City and its administrative operations to dispense with public bidding for non-public projects under this chapter. Prior City Council concurrence with the City Manager's determination shall be required for non-public project purchases over $100,000.00. 
F.  No Bids Received. When no bids are received non-public project formal or informal bidding procedures. 
G.  Expenses. The reimbursement or payment of travel expenses and other employee expenses. 
H.  Insurance. The payment of any insurance premiums or claims, including employee medical payments. 
I.  Real Property. The purchase or lease of real property with City Council approval. 
J.  Banking. Banking services. 
K.  Otherwise Authorized. When otherwise authorized by this chapter or applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.01.120 - City Manager authorization to execute contracts. 
    Pursuant to the California Government Code, the Mayor must execute all contracts on behalf of the City, unless another City officer or employee is authorized to do so. The City Manager and his or her designees, as explicitly set forth in this chapter and the administrative policies implementing this chapter, are hereby authorized to execute contracts on behalf of the City. 
( Ord. No. 1097, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
Chapter 3.02 - PROCUREMENT OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 21, 2017 , amended Ch. 3.02 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.02, §§ 3.02.010-3.02.090, pertained to public works contracts, and derived from Ord. No. 815, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2001. 

3.02.010 - Purpose and policy. 
    It shall be the policy of the City that the procurement of professional services, including engineering, architectural, landscape architectural, environmental, land surveying, or construction project management services shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required, and on the fairness and reasonableness of the costs of services to the City, but shall not be awarded solely on the basis of cost. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.02.020 - Purchasing Officer-Office created. 
    There is created the position of Purchasing Officer. The duties of the Purchasing Officer shall be administered by the City Manager or such person as he or she may designate. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.02.030 - Purchasing Officer-Duties. 
    The duties of the Purchasing Officer shall be: 
A.  The promulgation of administrative regulations and the adoption of such other rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the City Manager and approved by the City Council. Such regulations shall specifically prohibit practices which might result in unlawful activity including, but not limited to, rebates, kickbacks, or other unlawful consideration, and shall specifically prohibit City employees from participating in the selection process when those employees have a relationship with a person or business entity seeking a contract under this section which would subject those employees to the prohibitions of the conflict of interest laws. 
B.  The negotiation and recommendation of execution of contracts for professional services. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.02.040 - Competitive procurement procedures. 
    The Purchasing Officer shall comply with the following procedure for the procurement of professional services: 
A.  Request for Proposal: Prepare a request for proposal outlining services desired. The request for proposal shall identify all significant evaluation factors, including price or costs when required, and their relative importance. 
B.  Solicitation of Proposal: The request for proposals shall be publicized and disclosed publically on the City website. Any properly qualified firm or professional shall be permitted to timely submit a responsive proposal for consideration. 
C.  Evaluation: The Purchasing Officer shall develop mechanisms for the technical evaluation of proposals received, and shall conduct discussions with the proposers regarding anticipated concepts and the relative utility of alternative methods of approach for furnishing the required services. 
D.  Compilation: The Purchasing Officer shall compile the proposals for consideration by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.02.050 - Exemptions to competitive procurement procedure. 
    Upon obtaining approval from the City Council, the Purchasing Officer may engage services of a professional firm or individual without complying with the competitive procurement procedures in the following circumstances: 
A.  The services are available only from a single source; or 
B.  Public exigency or emergency will not permit delay; or 
C.  State or federal grant or loan requirements authorize noncompetitive procurement of such services; or 
D.  After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is deemed inadequate. 
    In circumstances of public exigency or emergency where prior approval of the City Council cannot be reasonably obtained, the City Manager may engage services of a professional firm or individual. The professional services contract shall be submitted to the City Council at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.02.060 - Award of contract. 
    City Council approval is required for all contracts for professional services when the cost of the services is $25,000.00 or more. The contract shall clearly state the names of the professionals that will provide services under the contract, along with their hourly rate. The contract shall also state a "not to exceed" sum. The professional shall not exceed the "not to exceed" sum without the City Council's prior approval. Contracts awarded to any firm shall not exceed an aggregate amount of $25,000.00 in a fiscal year without approval by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.02.070 - Term of professional services. 
    The term of any professional services contract awarded shall be a maximum of five years. Contracts shall be submitted to the City Council annually for approval, renewal, termination, non-renewal or extension. Extension of a contract beyond the initial term shall be approved by four-fifth vote of the City Council. Professional services contracts shall not contain "evergreen" type clauses that allow for automatic renewal without City Council approval. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.02.080 - City Council discretion. 
    The award of a contract for professional services shall be within the City Council's discretion. The City Council may, in its discretion, modify or extend a request for proposal for professional services. The City Council reserves the right to reject any and all proposals. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
3.02.090 - Contracts under $25,000.00. 
    Professional services contracts under $25,000.00 may be awarded by the Purchasing Officer without a formal bidding procedure. Professional services contracts shall not be divided into smaller contracts or subcontracts to avoid the competitive procedures set forth in Section 3.01.040 and 3.01.060. 
( Ord. No. 1096, § 3(Exh. A), 11-21-2017 ) 
Chapter 3.03 - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PERSONAL AND REAL PROPERTY 

3.03.010 - Disposal of personal property. 
    The duties of the Purchasing Officer shall include the disposition of personal property in any lawful manner provided that the disposition is for the common benefit of the City's citizens. A formal declaration that the property is surplus shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 815, § 1, 11-20-01) 
3.03.020 - Disposal of real property. 
    The duties of the Purchasing Officer shall include the disposition of real property in any lawful manner provided that the sale is for the common benefit of the City's citizens. The City Planning Commission shall prepare a report that indicates that disposition of the property conforms with the General Plan. A formal declaration that the property is surplus shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 815, § 1, 11-20-01) 
3.03.030 - Surplus property and low and moderate-income housing. 
    Prior to the disposition of surplus real property, the Purchasing Officer shall comply with the following procedure: 
A.  Inventory: On or before December 31, of each year the Purchasing Officer shall prepare an inventory of property which is in excess of the City's foreseeable needs, and shall provide a copy of the inventory to any person who so requests, pursuant to Government Code, Section 50569. 
B.  Notice to Housing Providers: Before disposing of surplus real property, the Purchasing Officer shall send a written offer of surplus property for low-income housing to any city or county in which the property is located for the purpose of developing low or moderate-income housing, pursuant to California Government Code, Section 54222(a). The offer shall also be sent to any "housing sponsor", as defined by California Health and Safety Code, Section 50074, who requests it. 
C.  Sale and Reverter: The Purchasing Officer may sell the property to any housing corporation, limited dividend corporation, or non-profit corporation for development for housing for persons of low or moderate-income. The deed conveying title shall include a clause reverting the property to the City if the property is no longer owned by a majority of the non-profit or limited dividend sponsors, pursuant to California Government Code, Section 50570. 
(Ord. No. 815, § 1, 11-20-01) 
3.03.040 - Disposition of property for park, enterprise zone or school purposes. 
    Offers to sell or lease surplus property for park and recreation or open-space purposes shall be sent to the park or recreation department of any city or county in which the property is located, the regional park authority, or the California Resources Agency. Offers to sell for enterprise zone purposes shall be sent to non-profit Neighborhood Enterprise Association Corporations. Offers to sell for school purposes shall be sent to the public school districts within which the property is located. Failure to comply with these provisions shall not invalidate the transfer or conveyance of the real property. 
(Ord. No. 815, § 1, 11-20-01) 
3.03.050 - Optional procedure for disposition of real property. 
    Pursuant to California Government Code, Sections 37420-37430, the Purchasing Officer is authorized to utilize the following optional procedure for the disposition of real property: 
A.  Preparation of Resolution of Intent: The Purchasing Officer shall prepare a resolution of intention, which shall fix the time for a public hearing, provide for published notice, fix the time final action will be taken, and contain an accurate description of the property. 
B.  Publication: The Purchasing Officer shall publish the resolution at least once in a daily newspaper and post it at least ten days in three conspicuous places on the subject property. 
C.  Overriding Protests: A four-fifths vote of the City Council is needed to override any protests to the proposed disposition. 
(Ord. No. 815, § 1, 11-20-01) 
3.03.060 - Restrictions applicable to disposition of real property. 
    Property which is dedicated pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act shall be conveyed back to the original subdivider if not used for the purpose originally dedicated. 
(Ord. No. 815, § 1, 11-20-01) 
3.03.070 - Restrictions applicable to the disposal of both real and personal property. 
A.  Government Grant Funds: Property purchased with federal or state grant money shall be disposed of pursuant to the conditions of the grant. 
B.  Redevelopment Agency Property: Shall be disposed of through a public bidding process or after a public hearing therefore. Property may be sold for less than fair market value to fulfill the purposes of a redevelopment plan. If the property was acquired with tax increment funds, the lease or sale of such property shall be approved by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  Donations: The Contracting Officer is authorized to donate surplus property provided such donation satisfies a public purpose as may be reasonably determined by the purchasing officer. 
D.  Conflicts of Interest: City officers and employees who participate in any part of the process to dispose of surplus property is prohibited from acquiring such property. 
Chapter 3.08 - COLLECTION OF MONEYS 

3.08.010 - Presentation to Clerk-Order to deposit with Treasurer. 
    All moneys collected by the City Chief of Police, or by any other officer of the City, shall be, by the officer collecting the same, first presented to the Clerk of the City, who shall issue to the officer collecting the same an order directing the officer to deposit the money with the Treasurer of the City, and the money shall thereupon be deposited with the Treasurer, and the officer depositing the same shall take the Treasurer's receipt therefore in duplicate, one copy of which receipt shall be filed forthwith with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 35 §1, 1913) 
3.08.020 - Action by Clerk-Entry on books. 
    The Clerk of the City shall upon issuing his order for the depositing of such money with the City Treasurer, enter on his books an account, charging the Treasurer with the amount so ordered to be paid to him. 
(Ord. 35 §2, 1913) 
3.08.030 - License moneys-Procedures. 
    All license moneys not paid to the City Clerk at the beginning of each and every month or on the day when such license moneys are due, if they are payable daily, shall be collected by the Chief of Police and the City Clerk shall deliver to the Chief of Police the license for such uncollected moneys and shall charge the Chief of Police with all licenses so delivered to him, and upon the return of the moneys collected for such licenses the City Clerk when he issues to the Chief of Police his orders to deposit the moneys, with the City Treasurer, shall also enter a credit upon his books crediting the Chief of Police with the moneys so collected. 
(Ord. 35 §3, 1913) 
3.08.040 - Itemized report to the City Council. 
    Each officer of the City who shall have collected or received any moneys during anyone month shall, at the first meeting of the City Council during the succeeding month, make an itemized report to the City Council of the City, showing the amount of moneys, from whom collected, and for what purpose collected or under the provisions of what ordinance collected, which accounts shall be, after approval by the Council, filed with the City Clerk and become a part of the records of the City. 
(Ord. 35 §4, 1913) 
Chapter 3.12 - PAYMENT OF CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 

3.12.010 - Filing claims with the City Clerk and presentation to and payment by the City Council. 
A.  All claims or demands against the City shall be verified and presented to the City Clerk within the time limits set forth in Government Code Section 911.2. All claims presented to the City Clerk shall meet any and all requirements for claims as set forth in Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 commencing with section 900) of the Government Code and other State law specifically applicable to the claim presented. All claims for damages shall be governed by all applicable limitations contained therein. 
B.  If the claim or demand so presented shall be allowed by the City Council, and ordered paid, the City Manager shall draw a warrant for the amount allowed in such claim, which warrant shall be countersigned by those authorized to sign warrants by resolution of the City Council and shall specify for what purpose the warrant is issued. 
C.  Pursuant to authority granted under Government Code Section 935, claims otherwise exempted from presentation requirements under Government Code Section 905 shall be presented to the City Clerk for allowance or rejection by the City Council in accordance with the procedures and limitations set forth in this Section. 
(Ord. 36 §2, 1913; Ord. 691 §2, 1990) 
3.12.020 - Payment of claims, demands, etc. 
A.  Payment Approval. Pursuant to § 37202 of the California Government Code, demands against the City for payment shall be audited by the City Treasurer and City Finance Director and thereafter submitted to the City Council for approval or rejection prior to payment, either separately or in a register of audited demands, and shall have attached thereto an affidavit or certificate of the City Treasurer and City Finance Director certifying as to the accuracy of the demands and the availability of funds for payment thereof; 
B.  Prepayment. In conformance with the authority provided by § 37208 of the Government Code, the following demands and payments need not be audited by the City Council prior to payment provided such payments shall be included in the register of audited demands presented to the City Council at the first meeting after delivery of such warrants or checks: 
i.  Properly approved and certified payroll warrants or checks; 
ii.  Warrants or checks certified or approved by the City Treasurer and City Finance Director as conforming to the authorized expenditures set forth in the Council-adopted City budget. 
C.  City Finance Director Approval. The responsibilities of the City Clerk to audit, certify and present warrants under Government Code §§ 37201-37208 are hereby delegated to the City Finance Director as authorized by Government Code § 37209. 
(Ord. 36 §3, 1913; Ord. No. 1066, § 3, 10-6-2015 ) 
Chapter 3.16 - ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF PROPERTY TAX 

3.16.010 - Duties of assessing and collecting performed by County Assessor. 
    The duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the County Assessor and the County Tax Collector of this City, shall be performed by the County Assessor and the County Tax Collector, as provided in Section One, Chapter 254 of the laws of 1913. 
(Ord. 44 §1, 1914) 
3.16.020 - Filing of ordinance-Collection of taxes. 
    A certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be filed with the auditor of the county, on or before the first Monday in February, 1914, and thereafter all assessments made by the County Assessor, as the same may be equalized or corrected by the board of supervisors or the State Board of Equalization, shall be used as a basis for the levy of the taxes of the City, and the taxes shall be collected by the assessor and tax collector at the same time and in the same manner county taxes are collected, until the City shall by ordinance elect not to have such duties performed by the assessor and tax collector for any longer time. 
(Ord. 44 §2, 1914) 
Chapter 3.20 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 

3.20.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Beaumont." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 383 §1, 1967) 
3.20.020 - Imposition. 
    There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale, exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 383 §2, 1967) 
3.20.030 - Payment. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.20.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 383 §3, 1967) 
3.20.040 - Non-applicability-Instruments in writing to secure debt. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 383 §4, 1967) 
3.20.050 - Parties not liable-Exception. 
    The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor, except as provided in Section 11,922 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 383 §5, 1967; Ord. 570 §5, 1983) 
3.20.060 - Non-applicability-Certain conveyances to make effective plan of reorganization or adjustment. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected; 
5.  Instruments taken in lieu of' foreclosure as provided for in Section 11,926 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 11,927 of the Revenue and Taxation Code which provides for marital property. 
B.  Subdivisions 1 through 4, inclusive, of subsection A of this section shall apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Ord. 383 §6, 1967; Ord. 570 §6, 1983) 
3.20.070 - Non-applicability-Certain conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 383 §7, 1967) 
3.20.080 - Realty partnership cases where levy not imposed. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership, or another partnership, is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purpose of this Chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon, all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 383 §8, 1967) 
3.20.090 - Administration of Chapter. 
    The county recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 383 §9, 1967) 
3.20.100 - Claims for refund of taxes. 
    Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5, commencing with Section 5096, of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 383 §10, 1967) 
Chapter 3.22 - LOCAL TRANSPORTATION FACILITY MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), adopted Sept. 5, 2017 , amended Ch. 3.22 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.22, §§ 3.22.010-3.22.140, pertained to road and bridge facility fee program, and derived from Ord. No. 837, § 4, adopted Feb. 18, 2003. 

3.22.010 - Purpose. 
    The City Council finds that the cumulative impact of all new development permitted under the General Plan will result in traffic volumes exceeding the capacity of the local roadway network as it presently exists causing unacceptable decreases in transportation service levels. To prevent these undesirable consequences, improvements to the local roadway network must be provided at a rate which will accommodate the expected growth in the City. The City Council acknowledges that the demand for transportation facilities varies by types of development. The Local Transportation Facility Mitigation Fee apportions the cost of the necessary improvements among the different types of new development according to the reasonably estimated demand that each type of development places upon transportation facilities. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.020 - Terms and definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    "Developer" means an individual or entity submitting an application for a building permit or other entitlement for development. 
    "Development" means: 
1.  A new residential unit, including conversion of an existing unit to more than one residential unit. 
2.  New commercial, office, and industrial development. 
    "Facility fee" means the Local Transportation Facility Mitigation Fees developed pursuant to the "City of Beaumont Transportation Facilities Impact Fee Study" dated August 15, 2017, as it may hereafter be amended, and adopted, from time to time, pursuant to this Ordinance or by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 3.22.030. 
    "Fee schedule" means the list of facility fees adopted by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 3.22.040 of this Chapter. 
    "Public facilities" means those certain public facilities identified in that certain "City of Beaumont Transportation Facilities Impact Fee Study" dated August 15, 2017, as it may hereafter be amended, which are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare as may be determined by the City Council from time to time and which are not otherwise provided by, or required of new development within the City. Public facilities shall also include architectural, administrative, engineering, legal, planning, environmental, plan check, inspection, surveying, construction management and other services required in connection with the implementation of this Chapter and the construction of the public facilities. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.030 - Adoption of the facility fee. 
    There is hereby adopted the "City of Beaumont Road and Bridge Facility Fee" to be levied and collected as provided in this Chapter. The amount of the facility fee shall be established by this ordinance and, from time-to-time, by resolution of the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.040 - Applicability. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, the facility fee is payable with respect to each development within the City for which a building permit is issued. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.050 - Amount of the fee. 
A.  The amount of the facility fee shall be automatically adjusted at the beginning of each fiscal year by an amount equal to the cumulative percentage increases in the Construction Cost Index of the Engineering News Record Index published for the month nearest the effective date of the adjustment as compared with the amount of the same in effect at the time of the nearest prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or the previous adjustment, as appropriate. The fee as revised annually, shall be calculated by the City Manager or his or her designee and shall be included in a report to the City Council. 
B.  The fee schedule may be periodically reviewed and the amounts adjusted by the City Council by resolution. The fees may be increased or decreased to reflect changes in actual and estimated costs of the facilities, debt service, lease payments and construction costs. The adjustment of the fees may also reflect changes in the transportation system facilities required to be constructed, in estimated revenues received pursuant to this Ordinance as well as the availability or lack thereof of other funds with which to design construct the transportation system 
C.  The amount of the facility fee shall be calculated by the Building Department prior to issuance of the building permit, based upon the then-current fee schedule adopted by this Ordinance and by resolution of the City Council pursuant to this Chapter. 
D.  In the event a developer does not agree with the calculation of the facility fee by the Building Department, he or she may within five business days of the date of the calculation of the fee appeal the calculation of the fee to the Planning Director. 
E.  The developer shall be notified in writing of the Planning Director's determination. Such determination shall be made within 30 days of the Planning Director's receipt of the appeal. The developer may provide additional information to assist the Planning Director in making the determination. The developer may appeal the determination of the Planning Director to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.22.110 of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.060 - Payment of the fee. 
A.  The full amount of the fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
B.  No City official may issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or certify a final inspection for a development until the fee required by this Chapter is paid. 
C.  The City shall not accept prepayments of the Facility Fee unless prepayment is authorized in a development or other agreement or is otherwise approved by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.070 - Credits and reimbursements. 
    If the developer desires to construct a public facility, the developer and the City Council may enter into an agreement regarding a credit or reimbursement of facility fees due or paid. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.080 - Exemptions. 
    Unless a development or other agreement provides otherwise, the following projects shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from the facility fee otherwise required by this Chapter: 
A.  Low income residential housing. 
B.  The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal residential dwelling unit and/or the replacement of an existing dwelling unit. 
C.  The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any non-residential structure where there is no net increase in square footage. Any increase in square footage shall pay the then-current Facility Fee. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.090 - Use of funds. 
    The fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall, except for temporary investments or capital expenditures, shall be placed in the Local Transportation Facility Fee Fund and managed to prevent commingling of the fees with operating revenues or other funds of the City, and shall be used solely for the purposes of designing, acquiring and constructing the public facilities identified in the fee study and as provided in this Ordinance. Any interest income earned on the fund shall only be expended for the purposes set forth in this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.100 - Refunds. 
    Refunds may be made where: 
A.  Development has ceased, the building permit has expired and no extensions have been granted, or if granted, the extension(s) has expired; as to a development for which the Facility Fee required under this Chapter has been collected; provided that the claim for such a refund is filed no later than 60 days after the expiration date of the building permit or any extension thereof as may have been approved by the City; or 
B.  A refund is specifically authorized by resolution of the City Council adopted pursuant to Government Code section 66001(d). Such amounts shall be refunded by the City to the then-current record owners of the development on a prorated basis. The City may effect such refund by direct payment, or by providing credit towards future Facility Fees, or by any other means consistent with the intent of Government Code section 66001. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
3.22.110 - Appeals. 
    A developer may appeal to the City Council any determination made pursuant to this Chapter. All appeals shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning Director and shall be filed within 15 days of the date of determination. Any appeal not filed within such period shall be deemed waived. The City Council shall set the matter for hearing within 45 days of the date of receipt by the City Clerk of the notice of the appeal. 
( Ord. No. 1092, § 4(Exh. B), 9-5-2017 ) 
Chapter 3.24 - SALES AND USE TAX 

3.24.010 - Title. 
    The chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the City of Beaumont." 
(Ord. 288, § 1, 1957) 
3.24.020 - Purpose. 
    The City Council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a nine-tenths of one percent tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be , administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 288 § 2, 1957; Ord. 336 §1, 1961) 
3.24.030 - Operative date-Contract with state. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become operative on July 1, 1957, and prior thereto the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization, as above set forth, prior to July 1, 1957, the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the City and by the State Board of Equalization; provided further, that the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not become operative prior to the operative date of the uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the county. 
(Ord. 288 §3, 1957) 
3.24.040 - Sales tax. 
A.  1.  For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the City at the following fractions of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the City on and after the operative dates of this subsection at the rates shown in the following schedule: 
Sales Tax Rate Operative Date (fraction of 1%) 0.91 October 1, 1971 0.92 July 1, 1972 0.93 July 1, 1973 0.94 July 1, 1974 0.95 July 1, 1975 0.96 July 1, 1976 0.97 July 1, 1977 0.98 July 1, 1978 0.99 July 1, 1979 1.00 July 1, 1980  
2.  For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of Equalization. 
B.  1.  Except as provided in this chapter, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code, as amended and in force and effect on the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, applicable to sales taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
2.  Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the City shall be substituted therefore. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the City for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the "title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the City be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to. certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code; nor to impose this tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; and, in addition, the name of the City shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted. 
3.  If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by reason of this section. 
4.  There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured: 
a.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; 
b.  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Ord. 288 §4, 1957; Ord. 336 §§2-4, 1961; Ord. 433 §1, 1971; Ord. 449 §§1, 2, 1973; Ord. 563 §3 (part), 1983; Ord. 589 §1, 1984) 
3.24.050 - Use tax. 
A.  An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer at the following fractions of one percent of the sales price of the property on and after the operative dates of this section at the rates shown in the following schedule. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
Use Tax Rate Operative Date (fraction of 1%) 0.91 October 1, 1971 0.92 July 1, 1972 0.93 July 1, 1973 0.94 July 1, 1974 0.95 July 1, 1975 0.96 July 1, 1976 0.97 July 1, 1977 0.98 July 1, 1978 0.99 July 1, 1979 1.00 July 1, 1980  
B.  1.  Except as provided in this chapter, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Code, as amended in force and effect on the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, applicable to use taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
2.  Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing' agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefore. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the City for the word "state" when the word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State treasury, or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the City be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or consumption of other tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that Code; and in addition, the name of the City shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the City shall not be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
3.  There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section: 
a.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; 
b.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and county, county, or City in this state. 
c.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Ord. 288 § 5, 1957; Ord. 336 § 5, 6, 1961; Ord. 433 § 2, 1971; Ord. 449 § 3, 1973; Ord. 563 § 3 (part), 1983; Ord. 589 § 2, 1984) 
3.24.060 - Amendments. 
    All amendments of the said Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which relate to the sale and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 288 § 6, 1957) 
3.24.065 - Credit against taxes due and payable to redevelopment agency. 
    In the event that the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Beaumont adopts an ordinance pursuant to the provisions of Section 7202.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of California which provides for the levying of a sales and use tax within a project area of the Redevelopment Agency of the City, and retailer or other person required to pay a sales or use tax pursuant to provisions of this Ordinance in the amount of sale and/or use taxes payable to the Redevelopment Agency of the City under such ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of said Section 7202.6. In the event the Redevelopment Agency of the City issues obligation secured in whole or in part by taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Section 7202.6 of the Revenues and Taxation Codes of California, the City shall not revoke this credit in whole or in part nor shall it reduce its sales and use tax rate. 
(Ord. 742 § 2, 1993, Ord. 781, § 2, 1998) 
3.24.070 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state of this City, or against any officer of the state or this City, to present or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 288 § 7, 1957) 
3.24.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than six months in the City jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord.288 § 9, 1957) 
Chapter 3.26 - SAN TIMOTEO SEWER FACILITY FEE 

3.26.010 - Purpose. 
    The City Council finds that the cumulative impact of all new development permitted under the General Plan will result in unacceptable decreases in sewer facility service levels. To prevent these undesirable consequences, sewer facilities must be provided at a rate which will accommodate the expected growth in the City. The City Council acknowledges that the demand for sewer facilities varies by types of development. The proposed facility fee apportions the cost of the necessary improvements among the different types of new development according to the reasonably estimated demand that each type of development places upon sewer facilities. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.020 - Terms and definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    "Fee schedule" means the list of facility fees adopted by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 3.26.040 of this Chapter. 
    "Developer" means an individual or entity submitting an application for a building permit or other entitlement for development. 
    "Development" means: 
1.  New residential unit, including conversion of an existing unit to more than one residential unit. 
2.  New commercial, office, and industrial development. 
3.  Additions greater than 750 gross square feet to existing commercial, office and industrial developments. 
    "San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee Area" is that area described within the San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee Study (Fee Study) dated October 7, 2003. 
    "San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee (facility fee)" is that fee for sewer facilities to be imposed on new development within the San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee Area pursuant to this Chapter. 
    "Service area" means the area which benefits from the sewer facilities. 
    "Sewer facilities" means those certain sewer facilities identified in the fee study which are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare as may be determined by the City Council from time to time which are not otherwise provided by, or required of development within the City pursuant to the General Plan, the Master Sewer Plan and the Beaumont Municipal Code. Sewer Facilities shall also include architectural, administrative, engineering, legal, planning, environmental, plan check, inspection, surveying, construction management and other services required in connection with the implementation of this Chapter and the construction of the foregoing improvements as part of the City of Beaumont Comprehensive Public Facilities Financing Program. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.030 - Adoption of the San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee. 
    There is hereby adopted the San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee and the various service area components thereof to be levied and collected as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.040 - Applicability. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, the facility fee required under this Chapter is payable with respect to each development within the City for which a building permit is issued on or after the effective date as adopted in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.050 - Amount of fee. 
A.  The amount of the facility fee shall be calculated by the Building Department prior to issuance of the building permit, based upon the then current Fee Schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  In the event a developer does not agree with the calculation of the facility fee by the Building Department, he or she may within five business days of the date of the calculation of the fee appeal the calculation of the fee to the Planning Director. 
C.  The developer shall be notified in writing of the Planning Director's determination. Such determination shall be made within 30 days of the Planning Director's receipt of the appeal. The developer may provide additional information to assist the Planning Director in making the determination. The developer may appeal the determination of the Planning Director to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.26.110 of this Chapter. 
D.  The amount of the facility fee shall be subject to adjustment from time to time by the City Council. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.060 - Payment of fee. 
A.  The full amount of the facility fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
B.  No City official may issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or certify a final inspection for a development until the facility fee with respect to such development required by this Chapter is paid in accordance with this section. 
C.  The City shall not accept prepayments of the facility fee, unless prepayment is authorized in a development or other agreement or otherwise is approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.070 - Credits and reimbursements. 
    If the developer desires to construct a public facility, the developer and the City Council may enter into an agreement regarding a credit or reimbursement of facility fees due or paid. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.080 - Exemptions. 
    Unless a development or other agreement provides otherwise, the following projects shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from the facility fee otherwise required by this Chapter: 
A.  Residential development consisting of the repair or replacement, on a one-to-one basis. 
B.  Commercial or industrial development consisting of the repair or replacement of structures, provided, that such repair or replacement does not result in any conversion or change in land use, or any enlargement of gross floor area beyond that of the previous structure more than 750 square feet. In the event a commercial or industrial use expands more than 750 square feet, the facility fee shall be calculated based on the percentage of square feet of expanded floor area of the total multiplied by the total development acreage in accordance with the fee schedule. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.090 - Use of funds. 
    The fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall, except for temporary investments or capital expenditures, shall be placed in the San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee Fund and managed to avoid commingling of the fees with operating revenues or other funds of the City, and shall be used solely for the purpose of designing, acquiring and constructing the sewer facilities identified in the Fee Study or other facility adopted as equal in the Capital Improvement Plan. Any interest income earned on the fund shall only be expended for the purposes set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.100 - Refunds. 
    Refunds may be made where: 
A.  Development has ceased, the building permit has expired and no extensions have been granted, or if granted, the extension(s) has expired; as to a development for which the Facility Fee required under this Chapter has been collected; provided that the claim for such a refund is filed no later than 60 days after the expiration date of the building permit, or any extension thereof as may have been approved by the City, as the case may be; or 
B.  A refund is specifically authorized by resolution of the City Council adopted pursuant to Government Code section 66001(d). Such amounts shall be refunded by the City to the then-current record owners of the development on a prorated basis. The City may affect such refunding by direct payment, or by providing credit towards future facility fees, or by any other means consistent with the intent of Government Code section 66001. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.110 - Appeals. 
    A developer may appeal to the City Council any determination made pursuant to this Chapter. All appeals shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning Director and shall be filed within 15 days of the date of determination. Any appeal not filed within such period shall be deemed waived. The City Council shall set the matter for hearing within 45 days of the date of receipt by the City Clerk of the notice of the appeal. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.120 - Expiration of fee. 
    The San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee shall expire when the sewer facilities are completed and all debt service related to such public improvements are paid and satisfied. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.130 - Supplementary fee. 
    It is the intent of the City Council that the San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee shall be supplementary to the fees, dedications and conditions imposed upon development pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, California Environmental Quality Act, and other state laws and City ordinances, policies or conditions which may authorize the imposition of fees, dedications or conditions thereon. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
3.26.140 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any person, association, corporation or to any property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of the City to impose the fee provided in this Chapter. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter, or any fee imposed upon any person or entity is found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter, and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this Chapter, or its effect on other persons or entities. It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that this Chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter had not been included herein; or had such person or entity been expressly exempted from the application of this Chapter. To this end, the provisions of this Chapter are severable. 
(Ord. 849, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Chapter 3.28 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 

3.28.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the City of Beaumont." 
(Ord. 387 §1, 1968) 
3.28.020 - Definitions. 
    Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portions thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or housing purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax administrator" means the Treasurer of the City, or such other person as the City Council may from time to time designate. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. 
(Ord. 387 §2, 1968) 
3.28.030 - Tax imposed. 
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the operator shall nevertheless be civilly liable for the payment of such tax to the City. 
(Ord. 754 §1, 1995) 
3.28.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax provided in this chapter; 
2.  Any federal or political subdivision of the state, officer or employee when on official business; 
3.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefore made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 387 §4, 1968) 
3.28.050 - Operator's duties. 
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent imposed is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 387 §5, 1968) 
3.28.060 - Registration. 
A.  Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is the later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a "transient occupancy registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
B.  The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
1.  The name of the operator; 
2.  The address of the hotel; 
3.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
4.  This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purposes of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Ord. 387 §6, 1968) 
3.28.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
    Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected from transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 387 §7, 1968) 
3.28.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent tax on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the tax first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first became delinquent until paid. 
(Ord. 387 §8, 1968) 
3.28.090 - Failure to collect and report tax-Determination of tax by tax administrator. 
A.  If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. 
B.  As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. 
C.  In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known address. 
D.  Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. 
E.  If application by the operator for a -hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. 
F.  If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. 
G.  At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. 
H.  After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. 
I.  The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.28.100. 
(Ord. 387 §9, 1968) 
3.28.100 - Appeal. 
    Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The City Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known address. The findings of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 387 §10, 1968) 
3.28.110 - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records that may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax that he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect and audit at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 387 §11, 1968) 
3.28.120 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefore, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator, that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected such excess, erroneous, or illegal tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 387 §12, 1968) 
3.28.130 - Actions to collect. 
    Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be civil liable to the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 387 §13, 1968) 
3.28.140 - Allocation. 
    Funds received from the transient occupancy tax shall be allocated to a community promotion fund, established by the City Council, and such funds shall be earmarked for community and tourist promotion, or the administration thereof. 
(Ord. 387, §15, 1968) 
3.28.150 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefore by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who does so with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Ord. 387 §14, 1968) 
Chapter 3.32 - FIXING FEES, CHARGES AND TAXES 

3.32.010 - Generally. 
    Licenses and permits are issued by, and certain services are provided by the City, for which fees, charges and taxes are imposed and required to be paid, for the purpose of raising revenue, providing police regulation and protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 360, 1965) 
3.32.020 - Flexible procedures. 
    The convenience of the public is best served by providing for flexible procedures whereby the amounts of such fees, charges and taxes may be established. 
(Ord. 360 §2, 1965) 
3.32.030 - Fixed by resolutions. 
    All such fees, charges and taxes shall be fixed, regulated and determined by appropriate resolutions duly adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 360 §3, 1965) 
3.32.040 - Payment of fees required. 
    All such fees, charges and taxes are required to be paid to the City as a condition precedent to engaging in the regulated activities on which the fees, charges and taxes are imposed and for which licenses and permits are issued. 
(Ord. 360 §4, 1965) 
3.32.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the City jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 360, §5, 1965) 
Chapter 3.34 - REGIONAL PARK, MULTIPURPOSE TRAIL AND OPEN SPACE FACILITY FEE 

3.34.010 - Purpose. 
    The residents of the City of Beaumont are presently served by two regional parks, Noble Creek Park and the City of Beaumont Sports Park. Both parks are presently operating at capacity serving existing residents. The City Council has been advised that the cumulative impact of all new development permitted under the General Plan will exceed the capacity of the two regional parks. In order to meet the increased demand, facilities at the two parks must be upgraded and expanded, and two new regional parks are needed on the east and south sides of the City, connected to existing and future open space by a system of multipurpose trails. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.020 - Terms and definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following term shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    "Developer" means an individual or entity submitting an application for a building permit or other entitlement for development. 
    "Development" means: 
1.  A new residential unit, including conversion of an existing unit to more than one residential unit. 
    "Facility fee" means the Regional Park, Multipurpose Trail and Open Space Facility Fee developed pursuant to the "City of Beaumont Regional Park, Multipurpose Trail and Open Space Facility Fee Study" dated September 6, 2005, as it may hereafter be amended, and adopted, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 3.34.030. 
    "Fee schedule" means the list of facility fees adopted by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 3.34.040 of this Chapter. 
    "Public facilities" means those certain park, trail and open space facilities identified in that certain "City of Beaumont Regional Park, Multipurpose Trail and Open Space Facility Fee Study" dated September 6, 2005, as it may hereafter be amended, which are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare as may be determined by the City Council from time to time and which are not otherwise provided by, or required of new development within the City. Public facilities shall also include architectural, administrative, engineering, legal, planning, environmental, plan check, inspection, surveying, construction management and other services required in connection with the implementation of this Chapter and the construction of the public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.030 - Adoption of the facility fee. 
    There is hereby adopted the "City of Beaumont Regional Park, Multipurpose Trail and Open Space Facility Fee" to be levied and collected as provided in this Chapter. The amount of the Facility Fee shall be established, from time-to-time, by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.040 - Applicability. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, the facility fee is payable with respect to each development within the City for which a building permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.050 - Amount of the fee. 
A.  The amount of the facility fee shall be calculated by the Building Department prior to issuance of the building permit, based upon the then-current fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  In the event a developer does not agree with the calculation of the facility fee by the Building Department, he or she may within five business days of the date of the calculation of the fee appeal the calculation of the fee to the Planning Director. 
C.  The developer shall be notified in writing of the Planning Director's determination. Such determination shall be made within 30 days of the Planning Director's receipt of the appeal. The developer may provide additional information to assist the Planning Director in making the determination. The developer may appeal the determination of the Planning Director to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.34.110 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.060 - Payment of the fee. 
A.  The full amount of the fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
B.  No City official may issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or certify a final inspection for a development until the fee required by this Chapter is paid. 
C.  The City shall not accept prepayments of the facility fee unless prepayment is authorized in a development or other agreement or is otherwise approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.070 - Credits and reimbursements. 
    If the developer desires to construct a public facility, the developer and the City Council may enter into an agreement regarding a credit or reimbursement of facility fees due or paid. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.080 - Exemptions. 
    Unless a development or other agreement provides otherwise, the following projects shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from the facility fee otherwise required by this Chapter: 
A.  Low income residential housing. 
B.  The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal residential dwelling unit and/or the replacement of an existing dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.090 - Use of funds. 
    The fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall, except for temporary investments or capital expenditures, be placed in the Regional Park, Multipurpose Trail and Open Space Facility Fee Fund and managed to avoid commingling of the fees with operating revenues or other funds of the City, and shall be used solely for the purpose of designing, acquiring and constructing the Public Facilities identified in the Fee Study or other facility adopted as equal in the Capital Improvement Plan. Any interest income earned on the fund shall only be expended for the purposes set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.100 - Refunds. 
    Refunds may be made where: 
A.  Development has ceased, the building permit has expired and no extensions have been granted, or if granted, the extension(s) has expired; as to a development for which the facility fee required under this Chapter has been collected; provided that the claim for such a refund is filed no later than 60 days after the expiration date of the building permit or any extension thereof as may have been approved by the City; or 
B.  A refund is specifically authorized by resolution of the City Council adopted pursuant to Government Code section 66001(d). Such amounts shall be refunded by the City to the then-current record owners of the development on a prorated basis. The City may affect such refund by direct payment, or by providing credit towards future facility fees, or by any other means consistent with the intent of Government Code section 66001. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.110 - Appeals. 
    A developer may appeal to the City Council any determination made pursuant to this Chapter. All appeals shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning Director and shall be filed within 15 days of the date of determination. Any appeal not filed within such period shall be deemed waived. The City Council shall set the matter for hearing within 45 days of the date of receipt by the City Clerk of the notice of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.120 - Expiration of the fee. 
    The facility fee shall expire when the public facilities are completed and all debt service related to such public improvements are paid and satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.130 - Supplementary fee. 
    It is the intent of the City Council that the facility fee shall be supplementary to the fees, dedications and conditions imposed upon development pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, and other state laws and City ordinances, policies or conditions which may authorize the imposition of fees, dedications or conditions thereon. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
3.34.140 - Severability. 
    If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter, or any fee imposed upon any person or entity is found to be unconditional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter, and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this Chapter, or its effect on other persons or entities. It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that this Chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter had not been included herein; or had such person or entity been expressly exempted from the application of this Chapter. To this end, the provisions of this Chapter are severable. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 9-20-05) 
Chapter 3.36 - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS FACILITIES FEES 

3.36.010 - Purpose. 
    City Council finds that the cumulative impact of all new development under the General Plan will result in population growth that will overwhelm the City's ability to temporarily care for and shelter victims of disasters and other emergencies. To prevent these undesirable consequences, Emergency Preparedness Centers must be provided at a rate which will accommodate the expected growth in the City. The City Council acknowledges that the demand for such Centers is shared by new development as well as by existing development. The proposed facilities fee apportions the cost of the necessary public improvements among the different categories of new and existing users according to the reasonably estimated demand that each group of users places upon such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.020 - Terms and definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the means indicated in this Section: 
    "Emergency Preparedness Centers" means those improvements necessary to provide those facilities identified in the City of Beaumont General Plan, the City's Multi-hazard Functional Plan and the Emergency Preparedness Facilities Fee Study dated January 26, 2001, and other improvements in connection therewith, as may be determined by the City Council from time to time, which are not otherwise provided by, or required of, development within the City pursuant to BMC Title 17 (Zoning), Title 16 (Subdivisions), and Title 15 (Building and Construction). Emergency Preparedness Centers shall also include architectural, administrative, engineering, legal, planning, environmental and other services required in connection with the implementation of this Chapter and the construction of the foregoing improvements. 
    "Developer" means an individual or entity submitting an application for a building permit or other entitlement for development. 
    "Development" means: 
1.  New residential unit, including conversion of existing unit to >1 unit. 
2.  New commercial, office, and industrial development. 
3.  Additions to existing commercial, office and industrial development greater than 200 gross square feet. 
    "Future growth" means the total amount of potential new development in the City permitted under the General Plan. Future growth is expressed in terms of gross square footage for industrial and commercial development, and in terms of the number of dwelling units for residential development. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.030 - Applicability. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, the facilities fee required under this Chapter is payable with respect to each development within the City for which a building permit or other entitlement for development is issued on or after the effective date of the fee as adopted in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.040 - Amount of fee. 
A.  The amount of the fee shall be determined by the Building Department prior to issuance of the building permit, based upon the Master Fee Schedule. 
B.  In the event a developer is not satisfied with the calculation of the fee by the Building Department, s/he may request that the type of land use and the amount of the facilities fee required of the development be determined by the Planning Director. 
C.  The developer shall be notified in writing of the Planning Director's determination about the type of land use and the public facilities fee applicable to the development. Such determination shall be made within 30 days of the Planning Director's receipt of the report and any other additional materials reasonably requested to assist in making the determination. The developer may appeal the determination of the Planning Director to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.36.100 of this Chapter. 
D.  The amount of the fee shall be subject to an annual inflation adjustment on January 1 of each year based upon the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for the Los Angeles Area. 
E.  The amount of the fee shall be reviewed at least every four years. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.050 - Payment of fee. 
A.  The full amount of the fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
B.  No City official may issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or certify a final inspection, as the case may be, for a development until the facilities fee with respect to such development required by this Chapter is paid in accordance with this Section. 
C.  The City shall not accept prepayment of the facilities fee, unless prepayment is authorized in a development or other agreement. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.060 - Credits. 
    If the developer desires to construct an Emergency Preparedness Center, the developer and the City may enter into an agreement regarding the credit against facilities fees due. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.070 - Exemptions. 
    Unless a development or other agreement provides otherwise, the following projects shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from the facilities fee otherwise required by this Chapter: 
A.  Residential development consisting of the repair or replacement, on a one-to-one basis. 
B.  Commercial or industrial development consisting of the repair or replacement of structures, provided, that such repair or replacement does not result in any conversion or change in land use, or any enlargement of gross floor area beyond that of the previous structure. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.080 - Use of funds. 
    The fees paid pursuant to this Chapter shall, except for temporary investments, be placed in a separate fund in a manner to avoid commingling of the fees with other revenues or funds of the City, and shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring and constructing the facilities identified by the City Council in the Master Plan or facilities included in the City's capital improvement plan. Any interest income earned on the fund shall also be deposited therein and shall only be expended for the purposes set forth in this Section. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.090 - Refunds. 
    Refunds may be made where: 
A.  Development has ceased, the building permit has expired and no extensions have been granted, or if granted, the extension(s) has expired; as to a development for which the fee required under this Chapter has been collected; provided that the claim for such refund is filed no later than six months after the expiration date of the building permit, or any extension thereof as may have been approved by the City, as the case may be; or 
B.  A refund is specifically authorized by resolution of the City Council adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 6600I(d). Such amounts shall be refunded by the City to the then-current record owners of the development on a prorated basis. The City may affect such refunding by direct payment, or by providing credit towards future facilities fees, or by any other means consistent with the intent of Government Code Section 66001. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.100 - Appeals. 
    A developer may appeal to the City Council any determination made pursuant to this Chapter. All appeals shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning Director and shall be filed within 15 days of the date of mailing to the developer any written notice of the applicable determination. Any appeal not filed within such period shall be deemed waived. The City Council shall set the matter for hearing within 45 days of the date of receipt by the City Clerk of the notice of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.110 - Expiration of fee. 
    The fees required by this Chapter shall expire when the facilities are completed and all debt service related to such public improvements are paid and satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.120 - Supplementary provisions. 
    It is the intent of the City Council that the fees required by this Chapter shall be supplementary to the fees, dedications or conditions imposed upon development pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, California Environmental Quality Act; and other state laws and City ordinances, policies or conditions which may authorize the imposition of fees, dedications or conditions thereon. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
3.36.130 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any person, association, corporation or to any property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of the City to impose the fee provided in this Chapter. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter, or any fee imposed upon any person or entity is found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter, and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this Chapter, or its effect on other persons or entities. It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that this Chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section or part of this Chapter had not been included herein; or had such person or entity been expressly exempted from the application of this Chapter. To this end, the provisions of this Chapter are severable. 
(Ord. No. 814, § 2, 9-18-01) 
Chapter 3.38 - EXHAUSTION OF REMEDIES WITH RESPECT TO CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 

3.38.010 - Exhaustion of remedies. 
    Before seeking judicial relief with respect to a dispute regarding a tax, fee or other charge imposed by the City, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer or other person must exhaust administrative remedies by: (i) exhausting any administrative remedies specified by any other provision of this Code or other applicable law, (ii) paying the full amount owed, including applicable penalties and interest, and (iii) presenting a claim for refund under Chapter 1.20 of this Code. 
(Ord. 968, 4-20-10) 
3.38.020 - Statement of purpose. 
    This Chapter is intended to apply the requirements of Article XIII, Section 32 of the California Constitution to disputes involving taxes and fees imposed by the City. These requirements include the "pay first, litigate later" rule that requires those who dispute their taxes to pay them before suing for a refund. In the absence of such a rule, any taxpayer could impose significant hardship on the City and undermined its ability to predict its revenues and manage its resources for the benefit of the public it serves. The lack of such a rule would give unwarranted hold-up leverage to every taxpayer, no matter how unfounded his or her refund claim might be. 
(Ord. 968, 4-20-10) 
3.38.030 - Severability. 
    Should any provision of this Chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance be determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this Chapter or the application of this Chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions are severable. 
(Ord. 968, 4-20-10) 
Chapter 3.39 - WESTERN RIVERSIDE COUNTY TRANSPORTATION UNIFORM MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM 

3.39.010 - Title. 
    This Ordinance shall be known as the "Western Riverside County Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Program Ordinance of 2017" ("Ordinance"). 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
3.39.020 - Findings. 
A.  The City is a member agency of the Western Riverside Council of Governments ("WRCOG"), a joint powers agency comprised of the County of Riverside and 18 cities located in Western Riverside County. Acting in concert, the WRCOG Member Agencies developed a plan whereby the shortfall in funds needed to enlarge the capacity of the Regional System of Highways and Arterials in Western Riverside County (the "Regional System") could be made up in part by a Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee ("TUMF") on future residential, commercial and industrial development. A map depicting the boundaries of Western Riverside County and the Regional System is attached here as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein. 
B.  WRCOG, with the assistance of TUMF Participating Jurisdictions, has prepared an updated nexus study entitled "Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Nexus Study: 2016 Update" ("2016 Nexus Study") pursuant to California Government Code sections 66000 et seq. (the Mitigation Fee Act), for the purpose of updating the fees. On July 10, 2017, the WRCOG Executive Committee reviewed the 2016 Nexus Study and TUMF Program and recommended TUMF Participating Jurisdictions amend their applicable TUMF ordinances to reflect changes in the TUMF network and the cost of construction in order to update the TUMF Program. 
C.  The City Council has been informed and advised, and hereby finds, that if the capacity of the Regional System is not enlarged and unless development contributes to the cost of improving the Regional System, the result will be substantial traffic congestion in all parts of Western Riverside County, with unacceptable levels of service. Furthermore, the failure to mitigate growing traffic impacts on the Regional System will substantially impair the ability of public safety services (police and fire) to respond and, thus, adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. Therefore, continuation of a TUMF Program is essential. 
D.  The City Council finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the use of the TUMF and the type of development projects on which the fees are imposed because the fees will be used to construct the transportation improvements that are necessary for the safety, health and welfare of the residential and non-residential users of the development in which the TUMF will be levied. 
E.  The City Council finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the need for the improvements to the Regional System and the type of development projects on which the TUMF is imposed because it will be necessary for the residential and non-residential users of such projects to have access to the Regional System. Such development will benefit from the Regional System improvements and the burden of such developments will be mitigated in part by payment of the TUMF. 
F.  The City Council finds and determines that the cost estimates set forth in the new 2016 Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for constructing the Regional System improvements and the facilities that compromise the Regional System, and that the amount of the TUMF expected to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share cost to such development. 
G.  The fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be used to help pay for the design, planning, construction of and real acquisition for the Regional System improvements and its facilities as identified in the 2016 Nexus Study. The need for the improvements and facilities is related to new development because such development results in additional traffic and creates the demand for the improvements. 
H.  By notice duly given and published, the City Council set the time and place for a public hearing on the 2016 Nexus Study and the fees proposed thereunder and at least ten days prior to this hearing, the City Council made the 2016 Nexus Study available to the public. 
I.  At the time and place set for the hearing, the City Council duly considered data and information provided by the public relative to the cost of the improvements and facilities for which the fees are proposed and all other comments, whether written or oral, submitted prior to the conclusion of the hearing. 
J.  The City Council finds that the 2016 Nexus Study proposes a fair and equitable method for distributing a portion of the unfunded costs of improvements and facilities to the Regional system. 
K.  The City Council hereby adopts the 2016 Nexus Study and its findings. The 2016 Nexus Study is attached and incorporated herein as Exhibit "B." 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
Editor's note- Exhibits "A" and "B", referenced above, are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the city offices. 
3.39.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Class 'A' Office" means an office building that is typically characterized by high quality design, use of high end building materials, state of the art technology for voice and data, on site support services/maintenance, and often includes full service ancillary uses such as, but not limited to a bank, restaurant/office coffee shop, health club, printing shop, and reserved parking. The minimum requirements of an office building classified as Class 'A' Office shall be as follows: (i) minimum of three stories (exception will be made for March JPA, where height requirements exist); (ii) minimum of 10,000 square feet per floor; (iii) steel frame construction; (iv) central, interior lobby; and (v) access to suites shall be from inside the building unless the building is located in a central business district with major foot traffic, in which case the first floor may be accessed from the street to provide entrances/ exits for commercial uses within the building. 
B.  "Class 'B' Office" means an office building that is typically characterized by high quality design, use of high end building materials, state of the art technology for voice and data, on site support services/maintenance, and often includes full service ancillary uses such as, but not limited to a bank, restaurant/office coffee shop, health club, printing shop, and reserved parking. The minimum requirements of an office building classified as Class 'B' Office shall be as follows: (i) minimum of two stories; (ii) minimum of 15,000 square feet per floor; (iii) steel frame, concrete or masonry shell construction; (iv) central, interior lobby; and (v) access to suites shall be from inside the building unless the building is located in a central business district with major foot traffic, in which case the first floor may be accessed from the street to provide entrances/exits for commercial uses within the building. 
C.  "Development project" or "project" means any project undertaken for the purposes of development, including the issuance of a permit for construction. 
D.  "Gross acreage" means the total property area as shown on a land division of a map of record, or described through a recorded legal description of the property. This area shall be bounded by road rights of way and property lines. 
E.  "Habitable structure" means any structure or part thereof where persons reside, congregate or work and which is legally occupied in whole or part in accordance with applicable building codes, and state and local laws. 
F.  "Industrial project" means any development project that proposes any industrial or manufacturing use allowed in the following Ordinance No. 1016 zoning classifications: I-P, M, M-S-C, M-M, M-H, M-R, M-R-A, A-1, A-P, A-2, A-D, W-E, or SP with one of the aforementioned zones used as the base zone. 
G.  "Low income residential housing" means "Residential Affordable Units": (A) for rental housing, the units shall be made available, rented and restricted to "lower income households" (as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5) at an "affordable rent" (as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50053). Affordable units that are rental housing shall be made available, rented, and restricted to lower income households at an affordable rent for a period of at least 55 years after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for new residential development and (B) for for-sale housing, the units shall be sold to "persons or families of low or moderate income" (as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093) at a purchase price that will not cause the purchaser's monthly housing cost to exceed "affordable housing cost (as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5) Affordable units that are for-sale housing units shall be restricted to ownership by persons and families of low or moderate income for at least 45 years after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the new residential development. 
H.  "Multi-family residential unit" means a development project that has a density of greater than eight residential dwelling units per gross acre. 
I.  "Non-residential unit" means retail commercial, service commercial and industrial development which is designed primarily for non-dwelling use, but shall include hotels and motels. 
J.  "Recognized financing district" means a Financing District as defined in the TUMF Administrative Plan as may be amended from time to time. 
K.  "Residential dwelling unit" means a building or portion thereof used by one family and containing but one kitchen, which is designed primarily for residential occupancy including single-family and multi-family dwellings. "Residential dwelling unit" shall not include hotels or motels. 
L.  "Retail commercial project" means any development project that proposes any retail commercial activity use not defined as a service commercial project allowed in the following Ordinance No. 1016 classifications: R-1, R-R, R-R-O, R-1-A, R-A, R-2, R-2-A, R-3, R-3-A, R-T, R-T-R, R-4, R-5, R-6, C-1/C-P, C-T, C-P-S, C-R, C-O, R-V-C, C-V, W-2, R-D, N-A, W-2-M, W-1, CC, CG or SP with one of the aforementioned zones used as the base zone, which can include any eating/dining facility residing on the retail commercial development premises. 
M.  "Service commercial project" means any development project that is predominately dedicated to business activities associated with professional or administrative services, and typically consists of corporate offices, financial institutions, legal, and medical offices eating/dining facilities, and other uses related to personal or professional services. 
N.  "Single family residential unit" means each residential dwelling unit in a development that has a density of eight units to the gross acre or less. 
O.  "TUMF participating jurisdiction" means a jurisdiction in Western Riverside County which has adopted and implemented an ordinance authorizing participation in the TUMF Program and complies with all regulations established in the TUMF Administrative Plan, as adopted and amended from time to time by the WRCOG. 
P.  "Disabled veteran" means any veteran who is retired or is in process of medical retirement from military service who is or was severely injured in a theatre of combat operations and has or received a letter of eligibility for the Veterans Administration Specially Adapted Housing (SAH) Grant Program. 
Q.  "Government/public buildings, public schools, and public facilities" means any owned and operated facilities by a government entity in accordance with Section G. Exemptions, Subsection 2. of this Ordinance. A new development that is subject to a long-term lease with a government agency for government/public buildings, public schools, and public facilities shall apply only if all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The new development being constructed is subject to a long-term lease with a government agency. 
(b)  The project shall have a deed restriction placed on the property that limits the use to government/public facility for the term of the lease, including all extension options, for a period of not less than 20 years. Any change in the use of the facility from government shall trigger the payment of the TUMF in effect at the time of the change is made. 
(c)  No less than 90 percent of the total square footage of the building is leased to the government agency during the term of deed restriction the long term and any extensions thereof. 
(d)  The new development is constructed at prevailing wage rates. 
(e)  A copy of the lease is provided to the applicable jurisdiction and to WRCOG. 
(f)  Based on the facts and circumstances WRCOG determines that the intent of the lease is to provide for a long-term government use, and not to evade payment of TUMF. 
R.  "Non-profit organization" means an organization operated exclusively for exempt purposes set forth in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and none of its earnings may inure to any private shareholder or individual. In addition, it may not be an action organization, i.e., it may not attempt to influence legislation as a substantial port of its activities and it may not participate in any campaign activity for or against political candidates. For the purposes of the TUMF Program, the non-profit may be a 501(c)(3) charitable organization as defined by the Internal Revenue Service. 
S.  "Long-term lease" as used in the TUMF Program, a "long-term lease" shall mean a lease with a term of no less than 20 years. 
T.  "Mixed-use development" as used in the TUMF Program, means developments with the following criteria: (1) three or more significant revenue-producing uses, and (2) significant physical and functional integration of project components. 
U.  "Guest dwellings" and "detached second units" according to the State of California legal definition as following: 1) The second unit is not intended for sale and may be rented; 2) The lot is zoned for single-family dwellings; 3) The lot contains an existing single-family dwelling; 4) The second unit is either attached to the existing dwelling and located within the living area of the existing dwelling or detached from the existing dwelling and located on the same lot as the existing dwelling; and 5) Are ministerially amended by each jurisdiction's local codes. 
V.  "TUMF Administrative Plan" means that the TUMF Administration Plan adopted by the WRCOG Execution Committee May 5, 2003, as amended, setting forth detailed administration procedures and requirements for the TUMF program. 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
3.39.040 - Establishment of the Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee. 
A.  Adoption of TUMF Schedule. The City Council shall adopt an applicable TUMF schedule through a separate resolution, which may be amended from time to time. 
B.  Fee Calculation. The fees shall be calculated according to the calculation methodology fee set forth in the WRCOG TUMF Fee Calculation Handbook adopted July 14, 2003, as amended from time to time. In addition to data in the Fee Calculation Handbook, WRCOG Staff and the local agency may consider the following items when establishing the appropriate fee calculation methodology: 
 Underlying zoning of the site 
 Land-use classifications in the latest Nexus Study 
 Project specific traffic studies 
 Latest Standardized reference manuals such as the Institute of Traffic Engineers Trip Generation Manual 
 Previous TUMF calculations for similar uses 
 WRCOG staff shall approve final draft credit / reimbursement agreement prior to execution 
WRCOG shall have final determination regarding the appropriate methodology to calculate the fee based on the information provided. In case of a conflict between the applicant, WRCOG, and/or the local agency regarding the fee calculation methodology, the dispute resolution process in the TUMF Administrative Plan will apply. 
C.  Fee Adjustment. The fee schedule may be periodically reviewed and the amounts adjusted by the WRCOG Executive Committee. By amendment to the Resolution referenced as subsection A, above, the fees may be increased or decreased to reflect the changes in actual and estimated costs of the Regional System including, but not limited to, debt service, lease payments and construction costs. The adjustment of the fees may also reflect changes in the facilities required to be constructed, in estimated revenues received pursuant to this Ordinance, as well as the availability or lack thereof of other funds with which to construct the Regional System. WRCOG shall review the TUMF Program no less than every four years after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
D.  Purpose. The purpose of the TUMF is to fund those certain improvements to the Regional System as depicted in Exhibit "A" and identified in the 2016 Nexus Study, Exhibit "B." 
E.  Applicability. The TUMF shall apply to all new development within the City, unless otherwise exempt hereunder. 
F.  Exemptions. The following types of new development shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance and in TUMF Administrative Plan: 
1.  Low income residential housing as described in Section 3.39.030 Definitions, Subsection G of this Ordinance and in the TUMF Administrative Plan. 
2.  Government/public buildings, public schools, and public facilities as described in Section 3.39.030 Definitions, Subsection Q. of this Ordinance and in the TUMF Administrative Plan. Airports that are public use airports and are appropriately permitted by Caltrans or other state agency. 
3.  Development projects which are the subject of a Public Facilities Development Agreement entered into pursuant to Government Code section 65864 et seq., prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 839, wherein the imposition of new fees are expressly prohibited, provided that if the term of such a Development Agreement is extended by amendment or by any other manner after the effective date of Ordinance No. 839, the TUMF shall be imposed. 
4.  The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any habitable structure in use on or after January 1, 2000, provided that the same or fewer traffic trips are generated as a result thereof. 
5.  Guest dwellings and detached second units as described in this Ordinance in Section 3.39.030 Definitions, Subsection U. and in the Administrative Plan. 
6.  Kennels and catteries established in connection with an existing single family residential unit. 
7.  Any sanctuary, or other activity under the same roof of a church or other house of worship that is not revenue generating and is eligible for a property tax exemption (excluding concert venues, coffee/snack shops, book stores, for-profit pre-school day-cares, etc., which would be assessed TUMF.) 
8.  Any nonprofit corporation or nonprofit organization offering and conducting full-time day school at the elementary, middle school or high school level for students between the ages of five and 18 years. 
9.  New single-family homes, constructed by non-profit organizations, specially adapted and designed for maximum freedom of movement and independent living for qualified disabled veterans. 
10.  Other uses may be exempt as determined by the WRCOG Executive Committee as further defined in the TUMF Administrative Plan. 
G.  Credit. Regional System improvements may be credited toward the TUMF in accordance with the TUMF Administrative Plan and the following: 
Regional Tier 
i.  Arterial Credits: If a developer constructs arterial improvements identified on the Regional System, the developer shall receive credit for all costs associated with the arterial component based on approved Nexus Study for the Regional System effective at the time the credit agreement is entered into. WRCOG staff must pre-approve any credit agreements that deviate from the standard WRCOG approved format. 
ii.  Other Credits: In special circumstances, when a developer constructs off-site improvements such as an interchange, bridge, or railroad grade separation, credits shall be determined by WRCOG and the City in consultation with the developer. All such credits must have prior written approval from WRCOG. 
iii.  The amount of the development fee credit shall not exceed the maximum amount determined by the Nexus Study for the Regional System at the time the credit agreement is entered into or actual costs, whichever is less. 
Local Tier 
i.  The local jurisdictions shall compare facilities in local fee programs against the Regional System and eliminate any overlap in its local fee program except where there is a Recognized Financing District has been established. 
ii.  If there is a Recognized Financing District established, the local agency may credit that portion of the facility identified in both programs against the TUMF in accordance with the TUMF Administrative Plan. 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
Editor's note- Exhibits "A" and "B", referenced above, are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the city offices. 
3.39.050 - Reimbursements. 
    Should the developer construct Regional System improvements in excess of the TUMF fee obligation, the developer may be reimbursed based on actual costs or the approved Nexus Study effective at the time the agreement was entered into, whichever is less. Reimbursements shall be enacted through an agreement between the developer and the City, contingent on funds being available and approved by WRCOG. In all cases, however, reimbursements under such special agreements must coincide with construction of the transportation improvements as scheduled in the five-year Zone Transportation Improvement Program's adopted annually by WRCOG. 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
3.39.060 - Procedures for the levy, collection and disposition of fees. 
A.  Authority of the Building Department. The Director of Building & Safety, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to levy and collect the TUMF and make all determinations required by this Ordinance in a manner consistent with the TUMF Administrative Plan. 
B.  Payment. Payment of the fees shall be as follows: 
i.  The fees shall be paid at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued for the development project or upon final inspection, whichever comes first (the "payment date"). However this section should not be construed to prevent payment of the fees prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or final inspection. Fees may be paid at the issuance of a building permit, and the fee payment shall be calculated based on the fee in effect at that time, provided the developer tenders the full amount of his/her TUMF obligation. If the developer makes only a partial payment prior to the payment date, the amount of the fee due shall be based on the TUMF fee schedule in place on the payment date. The fees shall be calculated according to fee schedule set forth in the Ordinance and the calculation methodology set forth in the Fee Calculation Handbook adopted July 14, 2003, as amended from time to time. 
ii.  The fees required to be paid shall be the fee amounts in effect at the time of payment is due under this Ordinance, not the date the Ordinance is initially adopted. The City shall not enter into a development agreement which freezes future adjustments of the TUMF. 
iii.  If all or part of any development project is sold prior to payment of the fee, the property shall continue to be subject to the requirement for payment of the fee. The obligation to pay the fee shall run with the land and be binding on all the successors in interest to the property. 
iv.  Fees shall not be waived. 
C.  Disposition of Fees. All fees collected hereunder shall be transmitted to the Executive Director of WRCOG along with a corresponding remittance report by the tenth day of the close of the month for the previous month in which the fees were collected for deposit, investment, accounting and expenditure in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, TUMF Administrative Plan, and the Mitigation Fee Act. 
D.  Appeals. Appeals shall be filed with WRCOG in accordance with the provisions of the TUMF Administrative Plan. Appealable issues shall be the application of the fee, application of credits, application of reimbursement, application of the legal action stay and application of exemption. 
E.  Reports to WRCOG. The Director of Building and Safety, or his/her designee, shall prepare and deliver to the Executive Director of WRCOG, periodic reports as will be established under Section 3.39.070 of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
3.39.070 - Appointment of the TUMF Administrator. 
    WRCOG is hereby appointed as the Administrator of the Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Program. WRCOG is hereby authorized to receive all fees generated from the TUMF within the City, and to invest, account for and expend such fees in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the Mitigation Fee Act. The detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this Ordnance shall be contained in the TUMF Administrative Plan. Furthermore, the TUMF Administrator shall use the Fee Calculation Handbook adopted July 14, 2003, as amended from time to time, for the purpose of calculating a developer's TUMF obligation. In addition to detailing the methodology for calculating all TUMF obligations of different categories of new development, the purpose of the Fee Calculation Handbook is to clarify for the TUMF Administrator, where necessary, the definition and calculation methodology for uses not clearly defined in the respective TUMF ordinances. 
    WRCOG shall expend only that amount of the funds generated from the TUMF for staff support, audit, administrative expenses, and contract services that are necessary and reasonable to carry out its responsibilities and in no case shall the funds expended for salaries and benefits exceed one percent of the revenue raised by the TUMF Program. The TUMF Administrative Plan further outlines the fiscal responsibilities and limitations of the Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
3.39.080 - Effect. 
    No provisions of this Ordinance shall entitle any person who has already paid the TUMF to receive a refund, credit or reimbursement of such payment. This Ordinance does not create any new TUMF. 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
3.39.090 - Severability. 
    If any one or more of the terms, provisions or sections of this Ordinance shall to any extent be judged invalid, unenforceable and/or voidable for any reason whatsoever by a court of competent jurisdiction, then each and all of the remaining terms, provisions and sections of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby and shall be valid and enforceable. 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
3.39.100 - Judicial review. 
    In accordance with State law, any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul this Ordinance shall be commenced within 90 days of the date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-5-2017 ) 
TITLE 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
DIVISION I. - GENERAL LICENSING PROCEDURES 
Chapter 5.04 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.04.010 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations to transact, engage in, run, maintain, carryon or conduct, within the City, any business, trade, profession, exhibition, or occupation in his, her or its name, or as agent or agents for any other person, persons, firms or corporations, without first procuring from the City a license or permit therefore. 
(Ord. 333 §2, 1961) 
5.04.020 - Separate licensing. 
A.  Separate licenses must be obtained for each branch, establishment, or separate place of business in which the business is carried on. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation who conducts, manages or carries on two or more allied businesses, licensed by this Title at the same location and under the same management shall pay the highest license fee provided for in this Title for only one of such businesses, trades, professions, exhibitions or occupations carried on by the same person and under the same management whether in adjoining or adjacent rooms connected by doors or an entrance, or not, shall pay the separate license as set forth in this Title. For the purpose of this Title, "different lines of business" means businesses, trades, professions, exhibitions or occupations that do not plainly demonstrate their need and use in alliance with another business. 
C.  No person who is an employee or who is the direct representative of a licensee shall be required to pay a license fee for the doing of any part of the work of such license. 
(Ord. 333 §2-a, 1961) 
5.04.030 - Delinquency-Penalty. 
    All renewal licenses shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the expiration of the license. A ten percent penalty shall be added to delinquent licenses unless otherwise provided. If still unpaid, additional penalties often percent shall be added on the last day of each succeeding month; provided, that the amount of such penalties shall not exceed 50 percent of the license tax due. 
(Ord. 333 §2-d, 1961; Ord. 388 §1(part), 1968) 
5.04.040 - Engaging in business without license-Penalty. 
    Any persons, firms or corporations who engage in any business, trade, profession, exhibition or occupation without first obtaining an appropriate license shall be penalized 100 percent of that appropriate license fee. 
(Ord. 333 §2-da, 1961; Ord. 499 §1, 1979) 
5.04.050 - Fees to be prorated. 
    Those persons, firms or corporations engaged in any business, trade, profession, exhibition, or occupation beginning after October 1, but before December 31 of any calendar year, shall be liable for the payment of three-fourths of their appropriate business license fee. Those persons, firms or corporations' engaged in any business, trade, profession, exhibition, or occupation beginning after January 1, but before March 31 of any calendar year, shall be liable for the" payment of one-half of their appropriate business license fees. 
    Those persons, firms, or corporations engaged in any business, trade, profession, exhibition, or occupation beginning after April 1 but before June 30 of any calendar year shall be liable for the payment of one-fourth of their appropriate business license fee. This section is not applicable to those business licenses which are not issued for the fiscal year. 
(Ord. 333 §2-e, 1961; Ord. 388 §1 (part), 1968) 
5.04.060 - City reserves right of refusal. 
    The City Council shall have the discretion to refuse to permit the issuance of a license to any applicant who in the judgment of the City Council will conduct or attempt to conduct such business in an unlawful manner or in an illegal way or in violation of any law or ordinance. 
(Ord. 333 §4, 1961) 
5.04.070 - Transfer of license. 
    No license issued under this title shall be in any manner transferred or assigned nor shall the license authorize any, person, persons, firms, or corporations other than the therein mentioned or named, to transact any manner of business within the City. 
(Ord. 333 §4-a, 1961) 
5.04.080 - Refund. 
    No license fee or any part of the license fee paid under the provisions of this title shall be refunded. 
(Ord. 333 §4-b, 1961) 
5.04.090 - Duplicate copy. 
    In cases where the original license has been lost or destroyed, a charge of $1.00 shall be made for a duplicate copy. 
(Ord. 333 §4-c, 1961) 
5.04.100 - Location. 
    No license shall be issued on any application if the location of the business, trade, profession, exhibition or occupation is not in the proper zone as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. 333 §4-d, 1961) 
5.04.110 - Policing. 
    It is made the duty of the Chief of Police and/or the Business License Control Officer, and/or their deputies to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter, and each of them shall have the power to make arrests of such violators; each of them shall have the right to enter, free of charge, at any time during normal business hours, any place of business and require exhibition of the current license by any person engaged or employed therein. 
(Ord. 333 § 4-e, 1961; Ord. 578, 1983) 
5.04.120 - License posted. 
    Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the same address and in the same place where such business is operated. In the event that such business has no fixed address, then such license shall be exhibited when requested by the Chief of Police or any of his deputies. 
(Ord. 333 §4-f, 1961) 
5.04.130 - City Council to grant permits. 
    No licenses shall be issued for any wrecking yard, junk collector, astrologer, auctioneer, billiard hall, poolroom, skating rink, shooting gallery, bowling alley, merry-go-round or other similar games and pastimes, until the City Council shall have issued a permit therefore, at a meeting of a committee of the City Council which may be appointed for review of circumstances regarding the application for a license. 
(Ord. 333 §4-g, 1961) 
5.04.140 - Revocation of license. 
    Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this title may be revoked by the City Council for what it may deem good and sufficient reasons in order to preserve the peace, health, safety or general welfare of the City. The findings and conclusions by the City Council thereon shall be final and conclusive, with right of appeal by the licensee to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 333 §5, 1961) 
Chapter 5.08 - DEFINITIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- For the purposes of this title, the definitions of the words set out in this chapter shall apply. 

5.08.010 - Advertising vehicle. 
    "Advertising vehicle" means the business of operating upon the streets any wheeled vehicle equipped with music or a musical device, loud speaker or other device for attracting attention, or who operates upon the streets any wheeled vehicles for advertising purposes, and to which wheeled vehicle there are attached signs, placards, billboards, or other advertising matter. 
(Ord. 333 §7-f, 1961) 
5.08.020 - Astrologer. 
    "Astrologer" means a person who practices or who professes to practice the business or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, card reading, fortune telling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, crystal gazing, hypnotism, medium-ship, prophesy, augury, divination, magic, or necromancy, and who accepts a gift or fee for such practice or charges therefor. 
(Ord. 333 §7-g, 1961) 
5.08.030 - Auctioneer. 
    "Auctioneer" means any person engaged in the selling at auction any real or personal property whatsoever; provided, however, the provisions of this title shall not apply to any person having an established and permanent place of business in the City, and paying a license fee to the City therefore, who may auction any goods, wares, or merchandise for the purpose of closing out any special line of goods, wares, or merchandise or other personal property that may be in his possession at the commencement of the auction at the place of business or place where the property is regularly kept without making a regular practice of so doing, or adding to the stock to be auctioned after the commencement of the auction. 
(Ord. 333 §7-h, 1961) 
5.08.040 - Coin-operated machine business. 
    "Coin-operated machine business" means the letting the use of, or renting location for, or placing with or in business houses within the City, of any and all types of amusement or skill games or machines or vending machines, the operation or use of which is permitted by state law or county ordinance, controlled or operated by the deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening in such machine or machines. The licensee shall furnish an identification tag for each machine or machines. The licensee shall furnish an identification tag for each machine put in use which shall be affixed in plain sight on such machine, and which shall contain the name and address of the licensee. 
(Ord. 333 §7-i (part), 1961) 
5.08.050 - Contractor; subcontractor. 
A.  "Contractor" means any person who engages with the owner or leasee, or other person in possession of any lot or parcel of land, or building, or structure, for the erection, construction, moving or repair of any building or structure in the City, or for the doing of any plumbing, wiring, heating, air conditioning, drainage, irrigation, brick laying, cement work, carpenter work, glazing, painting, sheet metal work, lathing, plastering, roofing, shingling, landscaping, fencing, interior decorating, or any other work in connection with any of the building trades in the City, whether the same be by contract at a fixed price for the whole or per unit of construction, or upon the cost of labor and material basis, or upon a percentage thereof basis, or other compensation other than wages. 
B.  "Subcontractor" means every contractor who under a general contractor or another subcontractor takes part in the construction, alteration to, or improvement of any building, highway, road, excavation or other structure, project development or improvement, as above set forth. Before a license is issued to a contractor or subcontractor as defined in this title, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk satisfactory evidence that such person has a contractor's license and workmen's compensation insurance coverage required by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 333 §7-j, (part), 1961) 
5.08.060 - Employee. 
    "Employee" means a person who receives his compensation from any employer that carries workman's compensation, makes all necessary payroll deductions from the compensation, including withholding tax and social security deductions, and assumes all necessary payroll deductions from the compensation, including withholding tax and social security deductions, and assumes all other responsibilities as an employer. Any person who is not an employee -shall be deemed self-employed and engaged in business for himself subject to the provisions of the title. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in a work of improvement for one other than himself, themselves or itself, requiring a building permit shall be licensed pursuant to this title. The Building Inspector, when issuing permits and when making building inspections in the field, will reasonably assure himself that all persons, as defined in this chapter, doing construction work in the City are properly licensed to do so by the City. 
(Ord. 333 §7-j (part) 1961) 
5.08.070 - Gross receipts. 
    "Gross receipts" includes the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service, or Employment, of whatever nature it may be, for which charge is made or credit allowed, whether 'or not such act, service, or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares and merchandise, or the rendition of personal services. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction there from on account of the cost of the property sold, cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses, or other expenses whatsoever, and receipts attributable to selling activities or personal service within the City. Excluded shall be cash discounts allowed and taken on sales, Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold, any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser. All fees and taxes set forth in this title may be amended from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 333 §7-i (b), 1961; Ord. 532 §2, 1981) 
5.08.080 - Itinerant salesman; itinerant vendor. 
    "An itinerant salesmen" or "an itinerant vendor" means any person, firm or corporation that shall engage in, do, or transact any temporary business at wholesale or retail for the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business shall have, use, or occupy a building, car, vehicle, booth, boat, or room for the exhibition and sale of such merchandise, whether such person, firm or corporation be a principal, agent, or employee. 
(Ord. 333 §7-d, 1961) 
5.08.090 - On-sale liquor business. 
    "On-sale liquor business" means the business of dispensing alcoholic beverages for public consumption in a place of business for the operation of which business an "On Sale" license is required under the laws of the state pertaining to the dispensing of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 333 §7-k, 1961) 
5.08.100 - Pamphlet and literature business. 
    "Pamphlet and literature business" means the selling or offering for sale by any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or for any other person, or for any firm or corporation, either at a fixed place of business or on the streets or sidewalks of the City, of pamphlets, literature or books, symbols or signs. 
(Ord. 333 §7-1, 1961) 
5.08.110 - Patio, garage and/or yard sales. 
    "Patio, garage and/or yard sales" means a sale held at a private residence by the owner or owners, tenant and/or occupant thereof and since it is recognized that it is necessary to dispose of personal property by means of an on-side sale, this section is designed to define the limits of such sales: 
A.  Patio, garage and/or yard sales shall be held no more often than once each six months at any residential address and for a period not to exceed five consecutive days. 
B.  A license shall be required for sales such as described in subsection A of this section and such license shall not be issued more often than once in each six months, shall be valid only for a stated residential address and for no longer than five consecutive days. 
C.  Licenses required under this title shall be issued by the City Treasurer upon the payment of the license fee therefore, as provided in this title, and the licenses shall state the beginning and ending dates of such sale. 
D.  Estate sales for the disposition of personal property of a deceased occupant of a residence may be issued by the City Treasurer to the personal representative of such decedent. The duration of such sales shall be for a reasonable length of time as determined by the City Treasurer. 
E.  Nothing contained in this section is intended, nor shall it prevent or prohibit various types of sales held by recognized charitable or social organizations having their headquarters within the corporate limits of the City. 
F.  All goods, products and merchandise proposed to be sold at a patio, garage and/or yard sale are subject to inspection by any peace officer of the City in the exercise of his duty as such. 
(Ord. 333 §7-r, 1961; Ord. 442 §1, 1972) 
5.08.120 - Peddler. 
    "Peddler" includes any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, medicines, drugs, vitamins, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products, or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and; provided further, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this title shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this title. "Peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(Ord. 333 §7-c, 1961) 
5.08.130 - Pool hall business. 
    "Pool hall business" means the business of keeping pool tables in a place of business where the public is invited to play games in which pool tables and billiard tables are used and a charge is made the public for the use of such tables. A permit as provided in for in this title shall be obtained for this business before a license is issued. 
(Ord. 333 §7-m, 1961) 
5.08.140 - Public dance. 
    "Public dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is participated in, either as the main purpose for such gathering or an incident to some other purpose, and to which premises the public is admitted for a fee. 
(Ord. 333 §9 (part), 1961; Ord. 442 §2 (part), 1972) 
5.08.150 - Registration. 
    Solicitors, peddlers, and itinerant salesmen or itinerant vendors must register with the Police Department of the City, giving whatever information the Chief of Police may require. 
(Ord. 333 §7-e, 1961) 
5.08.160 - Regular, established or fixed place of business. 
    "Regular, established or fixed place of business" means a permanent store, office or place where business is legally transacted from month to month in such manner as business of that nature is generally conducted, and where the circumstances show an intention to become an established, fixed and continuous part of the regular and legitimate business life of the City and not otherwise and not on the public street or highway or in any lodging room or place where only temporary desk room is used or where any temporary expedient is resorted to for temporary purposes or permanent business in this City. 
(Ord. 333 57-a, 1961) 
5.08.170 - Rooming house business. 
    "Rooming house business" means the renting of rooms by the day, week or month, where five or more rooms are under the same proprietorship and hotel maid service is furnished. 
(Ord. 333 §7-n, 1961) 
5.08.180 - Solicitor. 
    "Solicitor" includes any person, whether a resident of the City or not, who goes, either as principal or agent, from house to house or place to place, soliciting and taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, including subscriptions to magazines, periodicals, or other publications, or the distributing or offer to distribute any coupon, certificate, ticket, card, or other token which is redeemable in goods, discount, wares, merchandise, premium or services, whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided, that, much definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, form, or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
(Ord. 333 §7-b, 1961) 
5.08.190 - Steam laundry. 
    "Conducting, managing or carrying on the business of a steam laundry" includes besides the business of conducting or managing of a steam laundry in the usual, popular and generally accepted meaning thereof, any place where clothes are washed or ironed or laundered for compensation and where power is used to operate machinery in connection with the washing or ironing or laundering of such clothes and also the business of soliciting, collecting and delivering, or receiving laundry for a steam laundry, for compensation, whether on a commission basis or otherwise. 
(Ord. 333 §7-b, 1961) 
5.08.200 - Towel service. 
    "Towel service business" means a business of dealing in, selling or washing or ironing or exchanging of towels or linen for compensation either, directly or indirectly. 
(Ord. 333 §7-p, 1961) 
5.08.210 - Wholesale business by vehicle. 
    "Wholesale business by vehicle" applies to the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise to retail merchants or manufacturers in the City at wholesale prices for the purpose of resale or for use or consumption on or off the premises. "Business by vehicle" and "wholesale business by vehicle" does not apply to persons, firms and corporations operating such vehicles together with and in conjunction with a fixed place of business within the City for which such business a license fee is paid under other provisions of this title nor shall the provisions of this title be construed as imposing a tax upon vehicles, but as a method of classification of businesses and distinguishing between those maintaining a fixed place of business in the City in the conduct of which vehicles are used and those maintaining a business in the conduct of which vehicles are used but who do not have a fixed place of business within the City. 
(Ord. 333 §7-q, 1961) 
Chapter 5.12 - APPLICATIONS 

5.12.010 - Application forms. 
    All applicants for a license shall give in writing any information concerning the applicant and the business that may be required by the City Council, City Clerk, City Treasurer, or Chief of Police of the City; and in case the applicant is doing business under a fictitious name or as co-partnership, the application shall show the names of all persons doing business under a fictitious name or as a co-partnership. 
(Ord. 333 §3, 1961; Ord. 406 §1 (part), 1969) 
5.12.020 - Council discretion. 
    In all cases of doubt as to any applicant being entitled to an exemption from any license fee or from the application of any of the provisions of this title, the burden of establishing the right of such exemption shall be upon the applicant. 
(Ord. 333 §3-a, 1961; Ord. 406 §1 (part), 1969) 
5.12.030 - Form of license. 
    Except for those businesses whereby it is provided in this title that the City Council shall first direct the issuance of a license to the applicant, the City Clerk and/or City Treasurer shall issue a license under this title to every person on application therefore and payment of the license fees provided for in this title, in such form as the City Clerk and/or City Treasurer shall provide, which license shall state the amount of any fee therefore, the period of time covered thereby, the name and address of the licensee, the business licensed, and the location of the place where the business is to be carried on. 
(Ord. 333 §3-b, 1961; Ord. 406 §1 (part), 1969) 
5.12.040 - Retirements in cases of error. 
    In no case shall any error made by the City Clerk and or City Treasurer or their respective deputies or assistants in preparing a license or stating the amount of fee therefore, or determining the proper classification under this title, prejudice the collection of the proper license fee by the City; nor shall the issuance of any license authorize the carrying on of any business, trade or occupation in any zone, or location contrary to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 333 §3-c, 1961; Ord. 406 §1 (part), 1969) 
Chapter 5.16 - EXEMPTIONS 

5.16.010 - Disabled veterans. 
    Every honorably discharged or honorably released person having served in the Armed Forces of the United States, who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who shall be a qualified elector of the state, may distribute, circulate and hawk, peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him without payment of any license fee whatsoever. 
(Ord. 333 §6-a, 1961) 
5.16.020 - Charitable organizations. 
    The provisions of this title shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license to conduct, manage or carryon any business, occupation or activity or require the payment of any license from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes within the county. 
(Ord. 333 §6-b, 1961) 
5.16.030 - Growers. 
    The license provisions of this title shall not include or apply to farmers, poultry men, vegetable gardeners, or horticulturists who may sell their own products exclusively. This exemption shall not apply to any farmer, poultryman, vegetable gardener, or horticulturist buying any goods or wares or merchandise for resale. 
(Ord. 333 §6-c, 1961) 
5.16.040 - Domestic household help. 
    The license provisions of this title shall not include or apply to domestic household help in the employ of an individual householder. 
(Ord. 333 §6-d, 1961) 
5.16.050 - Wholesale salesmen and agents. 
    The provisions of this title shall not apply to salesmen or agents for wholesale houses or firms who solicit orders from businesses for resale, or supplies for conducting a business or profession licensed to do business under this title; or to manufacturers or processors for manufacturing or processing purposes, or to bids for public works or supplies. 
(Ord. 333 §6-e, 1961) 
5.16.060 - Issuance of permit without payment of regular fee-Rights reserved to council. 
    It is further provided that nothing in this title shall be deemed or construed as preventing the City Council for good cause shown satisfactory to them, from ordering the issuance of a license to any one applying to the council at a regular meeting of that body, for less than the fee provided in this title, or without the payment of any fee whatsoever. 
(Ord. 333 §6-f, 1961) 
Chapter 5.20 - LICENSE FEES AND RATES 

5.20.010 - Fiscal year for payment of licenses. 
    The fiscal year for the payment of licenses shall be from July 1 to June 30 of the succeeding year. When the licenses provided by this title are fixed at so much per year, they shall be for the full year, except that new operations commencing after January 1 may obtain a half-year license. The fee shall be 50 percent of the normal yearly license fee, all fees payable in advance. 
(Ord. 333 §8-a, 1961; Ord. 531 §1, 1981) 
5.20.020 - Fee schedules-Regulations generally. 
    Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV, Class V, Class VI and Class VII fee schedules are adopted by reference as an integral portion of this section and may from time to time be changed by the governing bodies' action and certified by the City Clerk as to current fee schedules for any or all classes. 
(Ord. 333 §8-b, 1961; Ord. 531 §2, 1981) 
5.20.030 - Fee schedules-Amendment by resolution. 
    All fees and taxes set forth in this title may be amended from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 333 §8-c, 1961; Ord. 531 §3, 1981) 
5.20.040 - Licensees not maintaining place of business within City. 
    Except where otherwise specifically provided for in this title, every person, firm or corporation not maintaining a bona fide and fixed place of business within the corporate limits of the City who delivers goods, wares or merchandise of any kind, sort or nature whatsoever and/or provides any service to residents of the City other than a retail establishment already licensed by the City under this title and in so doing operates a vehicle or vehicles in the City, shall be licensed and pay a license fee therefore of $48.00 per year. This section is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. All other ordinances and sections of this title shall remain in full force and effect so far as their regulatory provisions are concerned except as to those businesses, occupations and professions licensed to do business by the state or the United States of America, so as to completely occupy the field of regulations. 
(Ord. 333 §8-e, 1961; Ord. 426 §1, 1971) 
5.20.050 - Licenses for businesses not specifically enumerated. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this title to license, either for revenue or regulation, or both, as set forth in this title, all business conducted within the City, other than those specifically excepted in this title, and if application for a license is made for any business not specifically referred to in this title, or not included in any of the provisions of this title fixing license fees, the City Clerk shall refer any such application to the City Council for consideration and classification and the City Council shall fix the license fee to be charged therefore. 
(Ord. 333 §8-f, 1961) 
5.20.060 - Public utility operating under franchise-Exemption. 
    Any public utility operating in the City which is required to make payments under a franchise agreement with the City, providing they do not engage in retail business other than the sale of the commodity for which they are franchised, is exempt from the license fees imposed by this title. 
(Ord. 333 §8-g, 1961; Ord. 426 §2, 1971) 
5.20.070 - Coin-operated machines-Schedule-Requirements. 
A.  Every individual or firm engaged exclusively in the business of renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines dispensing tangible personal property within the City limits shall pay a license tax based upon gross receipts in accordance with the following schedule: 
CLASS VIII Annual Gross Receipts License Fee Annually $ 0-2,500 $25.00  2,500-5,000 35.00  5,001-10,000 40.00  10,001-15,000 60.00  15,001-20,000 80.00  20,001 and up 100.00  
B.  Every individual or firm engaged exclusively in the business of renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines dispensing intangible personal property within the City limits shall pay a license tax based upon gross receipts in accordance with the following schedule: 
CLASS IX Annual Gross Receipts License Fee Annually $ 0-2,500 $45.00  2,500-5,000 75.00  5,001-10,000 90.00  10,001-15,000 105.00  15,001-20,000 120.00  20,001-25,000 135.00  25,001-30,000 150.00  30,001-35,000 165.00  35,001-40,000 180.00  40,001-45,000 195.00  45,001-50,000 210.00 $1.00 per $1,000.00 for all in excess of $50,000.00.  
C.  Any such license for the conduct of vending machine business as defined in this title may be revoked for failure of the licensee to report to the City the gross receipts from such machines. The licensee shall furnish to the City an audit of the business of each licensee and the City may require such licensee to submit a copy of state sales and use tax returns filed relative to such machines. 
D.  1.  The annual gross receipts upon which the rates are based shall be the annual gross receipts for the calendar year immediately preceding the license year for business done within the City, excepting for a new business which had no gross receipts for the immediately preceding year. 
2.  Such new business shall estimate its gross receipts and pay the license fees as set forth in subsections A and B of this section based upon such estimate. This amount, however, shall be tentative only and such licensee shall within 30 days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued furnish the City Clerk on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk executed under penalty of perjury showing the actual gross receipts during the period of such license and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid within 30 days of, the close of the year for which such license was issued. If not so paid within the 30-day period there shall be ten percent penalty added thereto. 
3.  The City Clerk shall not issue a license to any person, firm or corporation until the proposed licensee shall have furnished to the City Clerk the written statement and have paid the license tax provided in this title to be paid. 
4.  All information furnished and secured by the City in pursuance of this title shall be kept confidential. 
E.  The license fee imposed by this title is solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended to be for regulatory purposes. 
(Ord. 333 § 7-i (a), (c), (d), (e), 1961; Ord. 440 §1, 1972; Ord. 532 §1, 1981) 
5.20.080 - License rates-Designated. 
    License rates shall be as follows: 
Accountants. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Advertising. For the business of advertising, including posting, affixing, stenciling or painting advertising bills or signs upon any post, fence, billboard, advertising signboard, building or other structure, as well as the operating or maintaining of any billboard, signboard, advertising structure or sign device; per year, $24.00. 
Advertising vehicle. Permit from Police Department required; per day $5.00. 
Agents. For every agent, solicitor, canvasser, hawker, or peddler or other person, other than a licensed merchant doing business in the City, not otherwise provided for in this title, selling commodities, or any other articles in this City, by samples or otherwise. See Section 5.08.150. 
Air-conditioning. Sales and service (other than contractor). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Ambulance. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Animal show. Permit from the City Council required. Per day, $50.00. 
Apartment houses. Without maid service; no charge. With maid service; same as hotels. 
Appraiser. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Architect. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Arena. Boxing, wrestling, etc.; permit from the City Council required; per year $10.00. For each day during which is conducted boxing, wrestling matches, or exhibitions, permit from the City Council required, per day $15.00. 
Art and curio store. Refer to Sections 5.20.01.0 through 5.20.060. 
Astrologers. Permit from the City Council required, per quarter of year, $300.00. 
Attorneys. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Auction. Special permit from the City Council required, per year, $600.00. 
Auto court. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Auto radiator shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Auto wash rack. When not connected with service station, agency or garage. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Automobile accessories. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Automobile paint and/or upholstery shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Automobile, sales of. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Automobiles, parking. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Automobiles, wrecking and sale of parts. Permit from the planning commission and the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Awning and tent shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Bakery. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Bakery vehicle. 
1.  For every person, firm, or corporation, having regularly established or fixed place of business, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of selling bread or the products of a bakery at retail from a wagon or other vehicle, or soliciting for same by said means. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
2.  For every person, firm or corporation not having a regularly established or fixed place of business, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of selling bread or the products of a bakery at retail from a wagon or other vehicle, or soliciting for same by said means, for each wagon or vehicle, per year, $48.00. 
Bankrupt stocks. For the business of selling insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged or other goods, wares or merchandise brought to the City for such sale, and every itinerant or transient merchant having a temporary place of business selling or offering for sale any insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged or other goods, wares or merchandise, permit from the City Council required, per day $100.00. 
Barbershop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Baths. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Beauty parlor. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Beer parlor. Where food, goods, wares and/or merchandise including beer and wine, other than beverages having an alcoholic content greater than 20 percent by volume are sold thereat. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Beverage wholesale distributor. Per year, $12.00. 
Bicycles or motor-driven cycles-Sale or rental. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Billiards or pool. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Blacksmith. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Blueprint shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Boardinghouse. Less than five boarders, free; over five, same as hotels. 
Book agents. For each agent or canvasser not having a regularly established place of business, or a resident local agent, in the City, selling, peddling or advertising any book or set of books, magazines or other literature or canvassing for any newspaper, the sum of $100.00 per year. The above rate is not to apply to official publications or professional books or religious or charitable organizations when agent carries proper credentials. 
Book and/or stationery store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Bootblack stand. Per year, $1.00. 
Bottling works. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Bowling alley. Permit from the City Council required, $10.00 per year plus $2.50 per quarter for each quarter for each alley in excess of the first three alleys. 
Box ball. Permit from the City Council required. Same as bowling alley. 
Boxing and/or wrestling. See Arena. Broker, Stock or Bond Broker. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Building blocks. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Building supplies. 
1.  For every general building supplies business, which business is conducted and carried on at a fixed place of business within the City and which fixed place of business is subject to ad valorem taxes of this City. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
2.  For every general building supplies business for a fixed place of business outside the City, and directly or indirectly, individually or by agent, representative, servant or employee or otherwise conducting, carrying on or engaging in the business of selling building supplies or soliciting or accepting orders for the sale of building supplies in the City, per year, double amount in Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Bus station. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Cabinet shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Candy store and/or shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Canvasser. Per year $100.00. 
Carnival. Permit from the City Council required; per day, $100.00. 
Check room service. Per year, $24.00. 
Cigar store (retail). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Circus or menagerie. Permit from the City Council required; per day, $50.00. 
Civil engineer. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Clothing store (retail). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Clubs, private or recreational. Private clubs at which recreational sport or other facilities are provided for members and others. Permit from the City Council required; per year, $100.00. 
Cobbler shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060 
Cocktail lounge and/or bar. per year, $100.00. 
Coin operated machine business. Per year, $100.00. 
Cold storage plant. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Collection agency. Permit from City Council required; per year, $100.00. 
Confectionery. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Contractor, subcontractor, or self-employed person. 
1.  Contractor, subcontractor, or self-employed person who engages in any of the building trades as enumerated in Section 5.08.060, having a regularly established place of business in the City; per year, $50.00. 
2.  Contractor, subcontractor, or a self-employed person who engages in any of the building trades as enumerated in Section 5.08.060, not having a regularly established place of business in the City; per, $100.00. 
3.  Provided, however, that on or after the first day of July, 1961, every contractor, subcontractor, or self employed person who engages in any of the building trades not having a regularly established place of business in the City, upon making application for the renewal of a license which has not lapsed for a period in excess of 30 days, per year $50.00. 
Creamery. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Credit bureau. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Dairy products. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Dance, public. Permit from City Council required. Same as Arena. 
Dancing school. Refer to sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Delicatessen. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Dentist. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Department store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Detective, private. For conducting a detective agency or a night watch service in the City. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Doctors. For every chiropractor, chiropodist, dentist, masseur, medical doctor, naturopath, oculist, optician, optometrist, osteopathic physician or surgeon, dietician, roentgenologist, X-ray specialist, and every other person conducting the business of ministering to sick and ailing human beings. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Dog kennel. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Drug store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Dress shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Dry-cleaning and laundry business. 
1.  For a laundry or cleaning business for laundering, washing, cleaning, dry-cleaning, ironing or pressing clothing, bedding or any other fabrics or articles, which business is carried on at a fixed place of business within the City. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
2.  The following named businesses shall not be construed as falling within the definition of laundry or cleaning business and shall be licensed in the amounts indicated below (with or without fixed places of business): 
* Note: Payable in advance for one year from the first of the month in which application is made and may be renewed on expiration date for succeeding year. 
a.  Diaper service; per year, $24.00. 
b.  Laundry, hand; per year, $24.00. 
c.  Laundry, self-help; per year, $24.00. 
d.  Linen and/or towel supply; per year, $24.00. 
e.  Overall service; per year, $24.00. 
Dry-goods store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Eating places. For every cafeteria, lunch counter, cafe, coffee shop, or restaurant. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Electric motor repair. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Electrical store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Employment agency. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Escrow office. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Feed store. Refer to Sections5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Fertilizer. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Fish and poultry market. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Five and ten cent store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060 
Florist. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Foundry. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Fountain and/or malt shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Fruit stand. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Fruit and vegetable (retail). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060 
Fruit and vegetable (grown by seller). Free. 
Fruit and vegetable wagon. For selling fruit, melons and vegetables on the public streets or from wagons or other vehicles. Each such wagon or vehicle shall have legibly posted conspicuously thereon the City license number thereof. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Fur store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Fumigation and/or spraying. Refer to 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Furniture store or dealer. Refer to 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Funeral director. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Garage and repair shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Gas and fuel delivery (retail). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Golf and driving range or archery range. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Grocery (retail). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Groceries where sold from vehicle. 
1.  For every person, firm or corporation having a regularly established or fixed place of business, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of selling at retail from a wagon or other vehicle, or soliciting for same by said means; each wagon or vehicle. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
2.  For every person, firm or corporation, not having a regularly established or fixed place of business, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of selling groceries at retail from a wagon or other vehicle, or soliciting for same by said means, the sum of $100.00. 
annually, payable in advance for each wagon or vehicle. 
Haberdasher. Refer to sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Hawker. Per year, $100.00. 
Hardware store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Hat blocking and cleaning. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Hospitals. Permit from the City Council required. Same as hotels. 
Hotels. One to nine rooms, inclusive; per year, $24.00; ten to 24 rooms, inclusive; per year, $30.00; 25 rooms and over; per year, $36.00. 
Ice, manufacture and/or sale. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Ice cream. Sale of ice cream in any form at retail from scooter or other vehicle. Permit from City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Implement dealer. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Interior decorating. (Professional services only). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Investments and loans. (Other than pawnbroker). Fixed place of business. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Insurance. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Itinerant salesman. Per year, $100.00. 
Janitor service. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Jeweler. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Job printing. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Junk dealer. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Keys, locksmiths, tool sharpening and grinding. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Laboratory. (Chemical or other). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Laundry. See Dry-cleaning. 
Lumber dealers. 
1.  For conducting or carrying on a lumber business or lumberyard, which business or yard is conducted and carried on at a fixed place of business is subject to ad valorem taxes of the City. Per year, refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
2.  For conducting or carrying on a lumber business or lumberyard from a fixed place of business outside the City and directly or indirectly, individually or by agent, representative servant or employee, or otherwise conducting, carrying on or engaging in the business of selling lumber or soliciting or accepting orders for the sale of lumber in the City; per year, double the amounts outlined in Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Liquor store. Off-sale. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Machine shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Machinery and equipment. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Manufacturing. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Mattress works. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Meat market. Refer to Sections 5.20,010 through 5.20.060. 
Merchandise (general). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Merry-go-round. Permit from the City Council required; per day, $20.00. 
Messengers or messenger service. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Milk and/or other dairy products (retail store). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Milk and/or other dairy products (by vehicle). Same as Bakery vehicle. 
Millinery shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Mortuary. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Music dealer. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Newspaper dealers or agents. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060 
Newsstand. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Nursery. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Office supplies. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
On-sale liquor business. Per year, $100.00. 
Paint and oil dealer. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Patio, garage or yard sales. Per sale, $5.00. 
Pawnbroker. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Peanut and popcorn vendor. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Peddler. Per year, $100.00. 
Peddling, general. Per year, $100.00. 
Photographer (fixed place of business). For every photography business or camera shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060 
Photographer. For the business of soliciting any photographing, painting, picture framing, picture, portraits or orders for retouching or changing the same, or orders for printing, or advertising in connection therewith by any persons, firm or corporation not having a fixed place of business in the City, the sum of $100.00 per year. 
Planning mill and/or cabinet shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Plunge. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Pony ride. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Poultry market. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Public stenographer. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Radio broadcasting stations. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Radio, sale or service. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Ready-cut buildings. 
1.  For conducting or carrying on the business of selling ready-cut buildings, which business or yard is conducted and carried on at a fixed place of business within the City; per year, same as contractor. 
2.  For conducting or carrying on the business of selling ready-cut buildings outside the City and directly or indirectly, individually or by agent, representative, servant or employee or otherwise conducting, carrying on or engaging in the business of selling ready-cut buildings or soliciting or accepting orders for the sale of ready-cut buildings in the City: per year, same as contractor. 
Real estate brokers. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Riding academy. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Rodeo. Permit from the City Council required; per day, $25.00. 
Rooming houses. Less than five roomers, etc.; free. (Without hotel maid service). More than five roomers, same as hotel. 
Sand and gravel. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Sanitarium, rest home. Permit from the City Council required. Same as Hotels. 
Secondhand store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Sewing machine and service. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Shoe repair shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Shoeshine stand. Per year, $1.00. 
Shoe store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Shooting gallery and skeet shooting. Permit from the City Council required. For every shooting gallery, $50.00 per year. For every skeet shooting or trap shooting range, $100.00 per year. 
Shows. Permit from the City Council required: per day, $.5.00. 
Signs, sales and service. Same as Contractor. 
Sign painting. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Skating rink. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Soft drink stand. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Solicitor. Per year, $100.00. 
Spices and extracts (retail store). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Sporting goods. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Swimming pool. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Tailor. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Taxicabs or automobiles for hire. (Two vehicles). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. Each additional vehicle, $2.00. Permit from the City Council required. 
Telegraph and/or telephone companies (intra-state business). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Termite and bug control. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Theaters and shows. 
1.  Permit from the City Council required. For every motion picture or vaudeville theater at an established place of business wholly within a permanent building constructed for theater purposes; per year, refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
2.  For every open-air theater or tent show wherein vaudeville, comic, dramatic or operatic productions or performances are given or motion pictures exhibited, the sum of $10.00 per day. 
Tile and pottery shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Tire recapping and repairs. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Tool shop and grinder. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Transfer and hauling. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Tree surgery. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Undertaker. Permit from the City Council required. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Upholstery shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Variety store. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Vending and other coin-operated machines. See Sections 5.08.040, 5.08.070 and 5.20.070; per year, $100.00. 
Veterinary. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Warehouses. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Water bottler and distributor. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Water company. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Water softener. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Welding shop. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Wholesale delivery vehicles. (Not operated under a bona fide business license under this title). Per year, $12.00. 
Wholesale merchant (fixed place of business). Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
Wholesale merchant. Wholesale merchant who has no fixed place of business within the City and who carries merchandise with him for immediate delivery, $48.00 per year. 
Wired music and phonographs. (Including juke boxes). Per year, $100.00. 
Wood and coal. Refer to Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.060. 
(Ord. 333 §9(part), 1961; Ord. 442 §2(part), 1972) 
Chapter 5.24 - ENFORCEMENT 

5.24.010 - Penalty. 
    If any person, persons, firms, or corporations, or their agents (hereinafter "individual"), shall transact, engage in, or carry on any business, trade, profession, exhibition or occupation, within the City, without first procuring from the City a license or permit therefor, he, she, it or they, for each violation of this Title, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. Such individual shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted. Any individual convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be: (1) guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; (2) guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance and perpetrated by the same individual. The third and any additional violations of the same ordinance and perpetrated by the same individual shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or six (6) months in jail, or both. Notwithstanding the above, the first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Payment of any penalty herein shall not relieve an individual from the responsibility for correcting the violation. Any individual who removes any notice or order posted, as required in the Chapter, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 333 § 2-b, 1961; Ord. No. 799, §§ 1, 2, 12-28-99) 
5.24.020 - Conviction-Effect on debt. 
    The conviction and punishment of any person having engaged in business without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license fee due or unpaid at the time of such conviction, and the same shall remain a debt to the City and nothing contained in this Chapter shall prevent a civil liability for any violation of any provision of this Title. 
(Ord. 333 §2-c, 1961) 
DIVISION II. - SPECIFIC BUSINESSES 
Chapter 5.27 - APPLICATION PROCESS 

5.27.010 - Application process. 
    Applications for licenses, permits, permit modifications, amendments, and other matters pertaining to the Chapter 5 Division II "Specific Business", shall be filed with the City of Beaumont on the appropriate City application form. The following procedures apply to the granting of a license/permit application: 
A.  Submittal Information. All plans, and any other information required by the City shall be submitted with the application form. Applications shall be completed by the owner(s) of properties, their agents, or other persons who have written authority from the property owner(s) to complete and file the application on the owner's behalf. Any person or authorized representative desiring a permit or approval required by this Title, shall file an application with the City on forms provided by the City. 
B.  Application is Deemed Completed. No application shall be processed until it is deemed complete by the City. No application shall be deemed complete until all required information is provided in the required quantity and format. 
C.  Concurrent Applications. Whenever more than one permit or approval is required for a proposed Project or use, all applications shall be filed and processed concurrently. All such related applications will be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth for the application requiring the highest level of review. 
D.  Application Fees. Each applicant for a permit authorized by this Chapter shall pay those fees and costs as established by resolution of the City Council. 
E.  Imposition of Conditions of Approval. In granting a license, permit, or other approval, the City or City Council may impose such conditions as deemed necessary to ensure that the public health, safety and general welfare are protected and that the proposed use is not a detriment to the community. All conditions shall be binding upon the applicant, heirs, successors, or assignees. 
F.  Permit/License Time Limits. The grantee of a license, permit or other approval shall have one year from the effective date of the license, permit or other approval to establish a right to use the license, permit or other approval; otherwise, the license, permit or other approval shall lapse and become void. For the purposes of this section, such a right shall be established if either: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction commenced and diligently pursued towards completion of the project; or 
2.  In the event that no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy and/or business license has been issued for the use. 
G.  Re-submittal of Application. Whenever an application or portion of an application has been denied or revoked and the denial or revocation becomes final, no new application for the same or similar request may be accepted within one year of the date of the denial, unless the City finds that the conditions surrounding the application have sufficiently changed to warrant a new application. Changed conditions shall mean a substantial change in land use on properties in the vicinity, improved infrastructure in the vicinity, altered traffic patterns, or any such similar change resulting in a changed physical environment. 
(Ord. 1050) 
Chapter 5.28 - AUTOMOBILES FOR HIRE 

5.28.010 - Defined. 
    An "automobile for hire" includes every automobile or motor- propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon any public street in the City and not over a regular or defined route, irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the City or not; automobile for hire shall include taxicabs and ambulances. 
(Ord. 293 §1, 1958) 
5.28.020 - Permit-Required. 
    It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an automobile for hire upon any public street within the City, without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Except that no permit shall be required of a vehicle for hire delivering passengers into the City from outside the City, a vehicle operated by the holder of a franchise duly and regularly issued by the City Council, or a vehicle operated by a duly authorized passenger stage corporation as defined in the Public Utilities Code of the State. 
(Ord. 293 §2, 1958) 
5.28.030 - Permit-Application. 
    Any person desiring to obtain the permit required by this Chapter, shall pay an application fee of $50.00 to the City Clerk, and shall make application for the permit to the City Clerk, which application shall set forth the following: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant, and if the same is a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same is a partnership, the names of the partners, with the address of each; 
B.  A statement as to whether the permit is desired for a taxicab, ambulance or other classification; 
C.  A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, giving the trade name, motor and serial numbers, and State license numbers; 
D.  Body style, and seating capacity; 
E.  The street number and exact location of the place or places where the applicant proposes to stand each such automobile for hire; 
F.  The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia which shall be used on such automobiles for hire; 
G.  Proposed schedule of rates and fares to be charged for carrying passengers; 
H.  If any proposed stand is in a public street, the application shall be accompanied by a written consent thereto of all the occupants of the ground floor of any building in front of which such vehicle is to be located, and for 25 feet each way there from, or if there is no such occupant, by the written consent thereto of the owner or lessee of such building or lot. 
5.28.040 - Hearing-Notice. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the City Clerk shall set a time not less than ten days nor more than 30 days thereafter for the hearing of the applicant before the City Council, and shall give notice to the applicant by mail at the time so set, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. 293 §4, 1958) 
5.28.050 - Hearing-Examination of applicant. 
    At the time set for the hearing of such application and determine whether or not the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the permit. Upon the favorable finding by the City Council, it shall order the City Clerk to issue a permit in accordance with the application, subject to the filling and approval of the policies of insurance required under this chapter. 
(Ord. 293 §5, 1958) 
5.28.060 - Requirements of changing or rates or color scheme. 
    In the event that any permit holder desires to change his schedule of rates or charges, or color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia used on such automobiles for hire, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles operated by him, he shall first make application for permission to do so from the City Council, which permission shall be granted if, in the discretion of the City Council, it deems public interest, necessity and convenience will be sub-served by such change; and, provided further, that the permit holder has complied with all provisions of the chapter. 
(Ord. 293 §6, 1958) 
5.28.070 - Transfer of permits. 
    No permits issued under this chapter shall be transferred whether by contract or operation of law, without the permission of the City Council, and any such attempted transfer shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. 293 §7, 1958) 
5.28.080 - Denial of application-Grounds. 
    The following reasons shall be sufficient for denial of the application for a permit: 
A.  That the application does not contain the information required by this chapter; 
B.  That the vehicle or vehicles described in the application are inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which they are used; 
C.  That the color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia to be used upon such automobile for hire is in conflict with or imitates any color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia used by any other person, firm or corporation, in such a manner, as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public; 
D.  That the location of the stand designated in the application, will congest or interfere with travel on any public street; 
E.  That the applicant has had been previous permit provoked, or has been previously convicted of a felony, or is not of sound moral character; 
F.  If the City Council determines that there is a sufficient number of automobiles for hire of the classification applied for, in the City, to adequately serve the public, or that the granting of additional permits would unduly congest traffic and interfere with the free use of the streets by the public, or that the public interest, convenience and necessity do not require the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. 293 §8, 1958) 
5.28.090 - Insurance-Required. 
    Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant shall deliver to the City Council a policy or policies of insurance providing for the payment of all legal claims for damages to persons or property resulting from the operation of the automobile or automobiles referred to in the application. 
(Ord. 293 §9, 1958) 
5.28.100 - Insurance-Amount. 
    The minimum amount for which liability shall be assumed for injury to or death of one person in anyone accident shall be $700,000.00, and for injury of or death of more than one person in anyone accident shall be $700,000.00, and the minimum amount for which liability shall be assumed for injury to or destruction of property in anyone accident shall be $700,000.00. Such insurance policies shall be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 707 §3, 1992) 
Chapter 5.32 - BINGO 

5.32.010 - Short title. 
    This Chapter may be cited as the "City of Beaumont Bingo Ordinance." 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.020 - Authority for enactment. 
    This Chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IV, Section 19 of the California Constitution as implemented by Sections 326.3 and 326.4 and 326.5 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.030 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and give this Chapter its most reasonable application: 
A.  "Bingo" has the same meaning set forth in Penal Code Section 326.5(o) as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
B.  "Calendar week" means Monday through Sunday. 
C.  "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Beaumont or his or her designee. 
D.  "Commission" means the California Gambling Control Commission. 
E.  "Conduct," "operate," and "staff" all mean persons directly involved in the conduct of a bingo game and include, but are not limited to, calling numbers, distributing cards, and the awarding of prizes. 
F.  "Licensee organization" means an organization to which the City Manager has issued a license to conduct bingo games under this Chapter. 
G.  "Premises" means real property within the City on which bingo games are or may be licensed under this Chapter and that are: (i) owned or leased by an organization, or property the use of which is donated to the organization, and (ii) which is used by that organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Premises need not be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, a licensee organization. 
H.  "Remote caller bingo game" has the meaning set forth in Penal Code Section 326.3(u) as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
I.  "Security personnel" means one or more persons exclusively employed to protect persons and property at bingo games. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.040 - Bingo games authorized; remote caller bingo authorized. 
A.  Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the holding of any bingo games in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter by organizations exempted from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701(l) and 23701w, and of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or by a mobile home park association of a mobile home park that is situated in the City, senior citizens organizations, and school districts; provided that the organization conducting the game shall have been incorporated or in existence for three years or more, the operation of bingo is not the primary purpose for which the organization was organized, the organization conducting the game is licensed pursuant to subdivision (l) of Section 326.5, the receipts of such games are used solely for charitable purposes, and the organization conducting the game determines the disbursement of the net receipts of the game. 
B.  Bingo games for charitable purposes are authorized by Section 19, Article IV of the California Constitution, and Penal Code Sections 326.3, 326.4, and 326.5, and in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Eligible organizations may apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the City under the provisions of Penal Code Section 326.5, and in the case of remote caller bingo, Sections 326.3 and 326.4, and the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Remote caller bingo games for charitable purposes are authorized by Section 19, Article IV of the California Constitution, and Penal Code Sections 326.3 and 326.4. Remote caller bingo games shall be conducted in accordance with Penal Code Sections 326.3 and 326.4 and this Chapter and not otherwise, and only by organizations exempted from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701(l) and 23701w, and of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or by a mobile home park association of a mobile home park that is situated in the City, senior citizens organizations, and charitable organization affiliated with school districts; provided that: 
1.  The organization conducting the game shall have been incorporated or in existence for three years or more, 
2.  The operation of bingo is not the primary purpose for which the organization was organized, 
3.  The receipts of such games are used solely for charitable purposes, 
4.  The organization conducting the game determines the disbursement of the net receipts of the game, and 
5.  The organization has a City-issued license to conduct bingo games. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.050 - California Penal Code Section 326.3 incorporated. 
    The provisions of Penal Code Section 326.3 are incorporated herein by this reference and apply along with provisions of this Chapter to control remote caller bingo games authorized by this Chapter. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and Penal Code Section 326.3, Section 326.3 shall control. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.060 - California Penal Code Section 326.4 incorporated. 
    The provisions of Penal Code Section 326.4 are incorporated herein by this reference and apply along with provisions of this Chapter to control remote caller bingo games authorized by this Chapter. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and Penal Code Section 326.4, Section 326.4 shall control. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.070 - California Penal Code Section 326.5 incorporated. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Penal Code Section 326.5(a), the provisions of Penal Code Section 326.5 are incorporated herein by this reference and apply along with provisions of this Chapter to control bingo games authorized by this Chapter. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and Penal Code Section 326.5, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.080 - License required. 
    No person or organization may conduct or allow another to conduct bingo games in the City without first obtaining a license from the City to do so. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.090 - Application for license. 
A.  Applications for a license to conduct bingo games in the City shall be in writing on a form provided by the City, accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee, as set out in Section 5.32.110 of this Chapter, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Evidence that the applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.32.040 of this Chapter; 
2.  The legal name of the applicant organization and the address of record of the agent upon whom legal notice may be served; 
3.  The mailing address of the applicant organization; 
4.  The names, and addresses and signature of the presiding officer and at least one other officer of the applicant organization; 
5.  The mailing and street addresses of the premises on which bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy load of the room or rooms in which bingo will be played provided by the fire code in effect in the City when the application is made; 
6.  The proposed day or days of the week and hours during which the applicant organization proposes to conduct bingo games; 
[7.  Reserved.] 
8.  A statement setting forth the character, location and extent of the charitable work of the applicant organization; 
9.  A statement of the charitable use to which the proceeds of bingo games will be put; 
10.  A statement that the applicant intends or does not intend to conduct remote caller bingo games; 
11.  In the event the applicant does not intend to conduct remote caller bingo games, the applicant organization shall submit the names of organization members and security personnel who will operate and staff the bingo games to the Chief of Police for purposes of conducting a background investigation regarding such persons. This requirement may be waived upon presentation, by any person who will operate and staff the bingo games, of a recent background investigation conducted by a law enforcement agency such that it is deemed satisfactory to the Chief of Police. The cost of conducting these investigations shall be imposed upon the applicant organization in an amount not to exceed the actual costs of conducting the background investigation pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.5(l)(2), and in accordance with Section 5.32.110(A) of this Chapter. Results of required background investigations shall be attached to and submitted with the application for a bingo license other than for a remote caller bingo license; 
12.  If the applicant does intend to conduct remote caller bingo games, the Commission shall regulate remote caller bingo, including, but not limited to, licensure of staff members and the operation of games. The U.S. Department of Justice shall conduct any necessary background investigations and costs of such investigations shall be paid and accounted for in accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 19867, all pursuant to Penal Code Section 326.3(q)(1) and (2); 
13.  The following documentation shall be attached to an application for a license for remote caller bingo as follows: 
(a)  A certificate issued by the Franchise Tax Board certifying that the applicant is exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax pursuant to Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
(b)  Other evidence as the City Manager determines is necessary to verify that the applicant is a duly organized mobile home park association of a mobile home park situated in the City; 
14.  If applicable, a statement that the applicant agrees to conduct remote caller bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code Section 326.3 and 326.4 and this Chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and understands that the City Manager may revoke the bingo game license for a violation of any such provision; 
15.  Such other information as may be required by the City Manager; 
16.  A license shall not be issued until the City Manager has verified the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant is qualified. 
B.  Any license for remote caller bingo issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to the conditions contained in Penal Code Sections 326.3 and 326.4. 
C.  All applications for a bingo license shall be signed under penalty of perjury by a person or persons with authority to bind the applicant organization. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.100 - Contents of licenses. 
    Upon determining that an applicant is qualified to conduct bingo games in the City, the City Manager shall issue a license stating: 
A.  The name and legal nature of the organization to which the license is issued; 
B.  The address of the premises on which bingo games may be conducted; 
C.  The capacity of the room or rooms in which bingo games may be conducted; 
D.  The date the license expires; 
E.  The City-issued license number; 
F.  Any rules for the conduct of bingo games imposed pursuant to state law; and 
G.  Such other related information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.110 - License fee. 
A.  Except as provided in subdivision (B), each initial application for an organization and any renewal request related to a bingo license shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount determined from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council. An additional fee for law enforcement and public safety costs incurred by the City that are directly related to bingo activities may be imposed and shall be collected monthly by the City; however, the fee shall not exceed the actual costs incurred in providing the service. If the applicant for a license is denied or the renewal thereof is denied, one-half of the fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
B.  Each initial application and any renewal request for a remote caller bingo license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.120 - Duration of license. 
    A license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid for one year, at which time the license shall expire. A new license shall only be obtained upon filing a new application and payment of the license fee. The fact that a license has been issued to an applicant creates no vested right on the part of the licensee to continue to offer bingo for play. The City expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this Chapter at any time by resolution. If this Chapter is repealed, all licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall cease to be effective for any purpose on the effective date of the repealing resolution. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.130 - Investigation by Police. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a license for the conduct of traditional bingo games, other than remote caller bingo, the City Manager shall forward the application to the Chief of Police for study and investigation. The Chief of Police shall investigate all persons listed on the application in accordance with Section 5.32.090(A)(11) of this Chapter. No person may operate or staff a bingo game who has been convicted of embezzlement, theft, fraud or gambling. Based on the study and investigation, the Chief of Police shall recommend to the City Manager either denial or approval of the license application. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.140 - Change in facts must be reported. 
A.  A licensee organization shall immediately report to the City Manager any change in the information provided on an application for a license under this Chapter. 
B.  Prior to conducting remote caller bingo games, a licensee organization shall supplement its license application by providing the City with a statement that the licensee organization agrees to conduct remote caller bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code Sections 326.3 and 326.4 and this Chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and understands that the City Manager may revoke the bingo game license for a violation of any such provision. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.150 - Posting of license and rules. 
    At all times during which bingo is played, the licensee organization shall post conspicuously at the public entrance to the room or rooms in which bingo is played: the licensee organization license, any rules and regulations established by the City Manager for the conduct of bingo games under the license, and the licensee organization's rules of bingo operation. The posted rules shall be legible and accessible to all players. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.160 - Hours and days of operation. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, traditional bingo games shall be conducted between noon and midnight for a maximum of six hours per day and no more than two days per calendar week by any licensee organization or on any one premises whether or not more than one organization is licensed to conduct bingo games on those premises. 
B.  Remote caller bingo games shall not be conducted by any licensee organization on more than two days during any week, except that a licensee may hold one additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.170 - Operation and staffing of games. 
A.  Remote caller bingo and traditional bingo shall be operated and staffed in accordance with state law. 
B.  All persons who operate or staff bingo games shall wear an identification insignia or badge on the outside of their clothing, no less than two and one-half by three and one-half inches in size, bearing the name of the licensee organization and the name and any title of the staff member. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.180 - Proceeds from games. 
A.  Proceeds from bingo games shall be administered in accordance with state law. 
B.  If the monthly gross receipts from traditional bingo games of an organization exceed $5,000.00, a minimum percentage of the proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes not relating to the conducting of bingo games and the balance shall be used for prizes, rental of property, overhead, administrative expenses, and payment of license fees. The amount of proceeds used for rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses is subject to the limitations specified in Penal Code Section 326.5(k)(2). 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.190 - Inspection of premises. 
A.  No person shall interfere with, prevent or refuse to permit a duly authorized representative of the City Manager, the Fire Department or any peace officer to inspect any place in which bingo games or remote caller bingo games are conducted in the City, whether or not bingo games or remote caller bingo games are being conducted at the time of the inspection. 
B.  Failure to allow, or interference with, an inspection constitutes a violation and shall be grounds for revocation of a license or denial of a bingo application or license. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.200 - License revocation. 
A.  Whenever it shall be shown or whenever the City Manager has knowledge that a licensee, or agent thereof, has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter or state law, the City Manager shall immediately suspend the license and give the organization written notice, ("Notice of Suspension") by registered mail to the address of record of the agent upon whom legal notice may be served, of the suspension and a brief statement of the reasons therefor. 
B.  Upon receipt of the notice of suspension, the organization shall cease from conducting any bingo game or remote caller bingo game, and the failure to do so shall constitute a separate and further violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.210 - Appeal. 
A.  In the event of any finding or decision of the City Manager which is adverse to the application of an organization for a license or renewal thereof under this Chapter, or if a license is suspended or revoked, the organization may appeal to the City's Board of Appeals, or the City Council if there is no Board, provided, that such appeal is filed with the City Clerk within 15 calendar days from the date of the finding or decision of the City Manager. The City Manager shall notify the organization of this right to appeal, and such notice shall accompany each and every adverse finding and decision of the City Manager. The finding or decision and the notice of this right to appeal shall be mailed by registered mail, to the organization at the address that appears on the application for a license or renewal thereof. 
B.  Failure of the City Manager to receive a timely request for an appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest the finding or decision. Unless a timely appeal is filed, a finding or decision of the City Manager becomes final and no longer subject to appeal. 
C.  Within 30 calendar days of the filing date of an appeal, the Board of Appeals (or City Council) shall conduct a hearing on the appeal. The City shall give the appellant at least five calendar days' mailed notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing at the address(es) specified on the appeal. The failure of any appellant to receive a properly addressed notice of hearing shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this Chapter. 
D.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Within ten calendar days after conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Appeals (or City Council) shall render its decision. The decision of the Board (or City Council) shall be a final decision. 
E.  The failure of any appellant to appear at the hearing without such cause as the Board (or City Council) may deem sufficient to justify a continuance shall constitute a default and the finding or decision of the City Manager shall thereupon be final and no longer subject to appeal. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.220 - Audit and accounting requirements. 
A.  Prior to July 31 and prior to January 31 of each year, a licensee organization shall, at its own expense, submit to the City Manager a report of gross revenues, expenses and other information reasonably required by the City Manager to enforce this Chapter. A licensee organization shall annually submit to the City Manager a copy of its federal tax return not later than 60 calendar days after that return is filed with the Internal Revenue Service. 
B.  A licensee organization shall maintain complete and accurate records of income received from, and prizes and other expenses disbursed in connection with, the operation and staffing of bingo games. 
C.  The City Manager may at any time demand a complete and detailed accounting of the records required under subsection (B) of this section and any other data or information pertaining to the operation of bingo games maintained by a licensed organization. The City Manager may subject that accounting and such data and information to, an agreed-upon procedures examination, audit, and/or any other accounting review which may extend to, without limitation: (i) proceeds from the operation of bingo games, (ii) an accounting of the number of players and number of games played over a designated period, (iii) an inspection of bingo cards, funds, equipment or any other records or documentation in connection with the operation of games over a designated period. Such detailed accounting or further data or information shall be provided at the expense of the licensee organization if, in the sole discretion of the City Manager, such detailed accounting or further data or information is necessary for the enforcement of this Chapter. 
D.  In the event a licensee organization fails to render an accounting or provide information pursuant to the provisions of this Section within 60 calendar days of the City Manager's request, the City Manager may suspend that organization's license until the requested accounting or information is provided. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
5.32.230 - Civil remedies and criminal penalties. 
    In the event of a violation of this Chapter: 
A.  In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17.200 et seq. or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040; or 
B.  The City Attorney may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this Chapter; or 
C.  A violation of any provision of this Chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor punishable under Section 1.24.110 of this Code or pursuant to applicable state law; or 
D.  If a violation of Penal Code Section 326.3(d) or Section 326.5(b) is filed by a prosecutorial agency, then such violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000.00, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. 
(Ord. 1008, 12-20-2011) 
Chapter 5.35 - REGULATING STATE-ISSUED FRANCHISES TO PROVIDE VIDEO SERVICES 

5.35.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Chapter 5.35 to implement within the City of Beaumont the provisions of the "Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006" (California Public Utilities Code, Sections 5800 et seq.). 
(Ord. 932) 
5.35.020 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter 5.35, the definitions set forth in California Public Utilities Code, Section 5830 are hereby incorporated herein by this reference as though set forth at length. 
(Ord. 932) 
5.35.030 - State franchise required. 
A.  No person may construct, operate, maintain or repair a cable system or video service provider's network within the City without first obtaining a state franchise therefor. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided by the California Public Utilities Code, a state franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for: 
1.  Compliance with generally-applicable requirements for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City, including, but not limited to, compliance with the conditions that the City may establish before facilities may be constructed for, or providing, non-video services; 
2.  Any permit or authorization, other than a state franchise, required in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property, including, but not limited to, encroachment permits, street work permits, and street cut permits; and 
3.  Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other property of the City or any private person to which access is not specifically granted by the state franchise. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in the California Public Utilities Code, a state franchise shall not relieve a franchisee of its duty to comply with all laws, including the ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other laws of the City, and every state franchisee shall comply with the same. The City reserves its rights to the lawful exercise of police and other powers the City now has or may later obtain. 
D.  The City reserves the right to construct, operate, maintain or repair its own cable system or video service provider network. 
(Ord. 932) 
5.35.040 - Administration and regulations. 
A.  The City may, from time-to-time adopt rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Chapter 5.35 consistent with the California Public Utilities Code. 
B.  The failure of the City, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or require compliance or performance under this Chapter 5.35 or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right has been specifically waived in writing or its exercise by the City is not permitted by the California Public Utilities Code. 
C.  The City may designate one or more entities, including itself, to control and manage the use of PEG access channels, and any PEG facilities and equipment. 
(Ord. 932) 
5.35.050 - Construction, operation, maintenance and repair. 
A.  A video service provider operating within the City shall, in its use of public rights-of-way and public and private property, be considered a "utility" within the meaning of the Beaumont Municipal Code and any provisions thereof which are applicable to any utility or utilities. Any application to use the public rights-of-way shall include a description, including locations, of the state franchisee's existing or proposed network. 
B.  No video service provider may construct, operate, maintain or repair a cable system or network in the public rights-of-way without first complying with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.). 
(Ord. 932) 
5.35.060 - Franchise fee. 
A.  Every state franchisee operating within the City limits shall pay a franchise fee to the City in the amount of five percent of that state franchisee's gross revenues derived from the operation its network to provide cable or video services within the City. 
B.  For purposes of this Chapter 5.35, "gross revenue" shall have the meaning set forth in California Public Utilities Code, 5860. 
C.  A state franchisee shall remit the franchise fee to the City quarterly, within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the franchise fee. 
D.  If a state franchisee fails to pay the franchise fee when due, or underpays the proper amount due, the state franchisee shall pay a late payment charge at an annual interest rate equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. 
(Ord. 932) 
5.35.070 - Public, educational and governmental ("PEG") access channel capacity and support. 
A.  Every state franchisee operating within the City limits shall provide PEG access channel capacity and support as more specifically provided for in California Public Utilities Code, Section 5870 and as the City and the state franchisee may otherwise mutually agree upon. 
B.  Every state franchisee operating within the City shall pay a PEG support fee to the City in the amount of one percent of that state franchisee's gross revenues derived from the operation of its network to provide cable or video services within the City. The PEG support fee shall be used by the City for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law. The state franchisee shall remit the PEG support fee to the City quarterly, within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the PEG support fee. If a state franchisee fails to pay the PEG fee when due, or underpays the proper amount due, the state franchisee shall pay a late payment charge at an annual interest rate equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. 
(Ord. 932) 
5.35.080 - Audits and records. 
A.  Not more than once annually, the City or its designee may examine and audit the business records of a state franchisee to ensure compliance with the franchise fee payment obligation of Sections 5.35.060 and 5.35.070. 
B.  A state franchisee shall keep all business records reflecting any gross revenues, even if there is a change in ownership of the state franchisee, for at least four years after such gross revenues are recognized by the state franchisee on its books and records. In the case of subscriber numbers used for calculating the PEG fee, a state franchisee shall keep data on the number of its subscribers in the City, even if there is a change in ownership of the state franchisee, for at least four years after the close of each calendar quarter on which the PEG support fee is to be paid. 
C.  To the extent consistent with the California Public Utilities Code and other applicable law, the City may request, and a state franchisee shall provide, information and books and records to the extent necessary to monitor a state franchisee's compliance with the Chapter 5.35. 
(Ord. 932) 
5.35.090 - Customer service and protection. 
A.  A state franchisee shall comply with Sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2 and 53088.2 of the California Government Code, the FCC Customer Service and Notice Standards set forth in Sections 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603 and 76.1619 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 637.5 of the California Penal Code, the Privacy Standards of Section 551 of Title 47 of the United States Code, and all other applicable state and federal customer service and consumer protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, including any such standards hereafter adopted. 
B.  The City Manager will provide a state franchisee with written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service or consumer protection standards, and will allow the state franchisee 30 days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period shall be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the City: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each violation. 
2.  For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation. 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each violation. 
C.  A state franchisee may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The Council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The Council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. 
(Ord. 932) 
Chapter 5.36 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE 
PART 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

5.36.100 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to promote competition in the telecommunications industry, facilitate the development of telecommunications infrastructure, minimize aesthetic impacts and damage to public property, provide for the payment of reasonable compensation for the commercial use of public property, and establish customer service standards. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.105 - Definitions. 
    All of the following definitions shall be construed liberally for the purpose of maximizing the scope of this Chapter. 
    "Basic service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
    "Cable operator" means any person or group of persons (A) who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    "Cable programming service" means any video programming provided over a cable system regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: (1) Video programming carried on the Basic Service tier; (2) Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis; or (3) A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis, so long as the combined service consists of commonly-identified video programming and is not bundled with any regulated tier of service. 
    "Cable service" means (A) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    "Cable system" means a facility within the City, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is considered a cable system under federal law; or (D) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    "Gross revenues" means the revenue derived by a Cable Operator from the operation of the cable system to provide cable service. Gross revenues includes, but is not limited to, revenue from (1) subscriber payments for service, equipment, late fees, franchise fees and other charges; (2) advertising carried on the cable system or in subscriber bills; and (3) programmers or others relating to transmissions carried on the cable system, including but not limited to payments to carry programming and home shopping revenues. Gross revenues includes, but is not limited to, all gross revenue whether or not actually received. Gross revenues shall include all gross revenue which is not actually received, such as the value of free service provided to Cable Operator's employees and the value of services bartered or exchanged for non-monetary consideration. Gross revenues includes, but is not limited to, revenues derived from the operation of the cable system received or attributed to the franchisee, any direct or indirect affiliate of the franchisee or any partner, joint venture or other entity related in any similar way to franchisee. Gross revenues includes revenues derived from the provision of internet access, cable modems and similar services, unless specifically excluded by federal law. Nothing shall be excluded from gross revenues for any reason, including but not limited to the fact that the Cable Operator may itemize particular items on subscriber bills such as franchise fees. This definition shall be deemed to include all gross receipts and revenues to the full extent permitted by federal law. 
    "Gross non-cable revenues" means the revenue derived from the operation of telecommunications facilities other than revenue defined in this section as gross revenue. Gross non-cable revenues includes, but is not limited to, revenue from (1) subscriber payments for service, equipment, late fees, franchise fees and other charges; (2) advertising carried on the telecommunications facilities or in subscriber bills; and (3) programmers or others relating to transmissions carried on the telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to payments to carry programming and home shopping revenues. Gross non-cable revenues includes, but is not limited to, all gross revenue whether or not actually received. Gross non-cable revenues shall include all gross revenue which is not actually received, such as the value of free service provided to Telecommunications Operator's employees and the value of services bartered or exchanged for nonmonetary consideration. Gross non-cable revenues includes, but is not limited to, revenues derived from the operation of the telecommunications facilities received or attributed to the franchisee, any direct or indirect affiliate of the franchisee or any partner, joint venturer or other entity related in any similar way to franchisee. Gross non-cable revenues includes revenues derived from the provision of internet access, cable modems and similar services, unless a Cable Operator has paid a cable television franchise fee based on the identical revenues. This definition shall be deemed to include all gross receipts or revenues to the full extent permitted by federal law. 
    "Other telecommunications operator" means any person or group of persons other than a cable operator, an open video system operator, a wireless telecommunications operator or a telephone company (A) who provides telecommunications services over telecommunications facilities and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such telecommunications facilities, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such telecommunications facilities. 
    "Open video system" means a system within the City for the provision of video programming operated in compliance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
    "Open video system operator" means any person or group of persons who have been certified by the Federal Communications Commission as an Open Video System Operator for an Open Video System located within the City and (A) who provides video programming over the Open Video System and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such Open Video System, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such an Open Video System. 
    "Telecommunications operator" means any person or group of persons (A) who provides telecommunications services over telecommunications facilities and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such telecommunications facilities, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such telecommunications facilities. 
    "Telecommunications services" means the transmission of voice, video, data or other information between two or more points along wires, optical fibers or other transmission media, or using radio waves or other wireless media, including but not limited to cable television services, telephone services, cellular telephone services, personal communications services, internet services, open video system services and other similar services. 
    "Telecommunications facilities" means facilities within the City used or related to the provision of telecommunications services including, but not limited to, wires, optical fiber, antenna, cabinets, pedestals and equipment. 
    "Telephone company" means any telephone or telegraph corporation as defined by Sections 234-236 of the Public Utilities Code (or any successor sections) which has obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the California Public Utilities Commission. 
    "Wireless telecommunications operator" means any person or group of persons who provides wireless telecommunications services including, but not limited to, cellular telephone, personal communications system, spread spectrum or other wireless services, and (A) who provides telecommunications services over telecommunications facilities and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such telecommunications facilities, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.110 - Applicability. 
    All Telecommunications Operators shall comply with all provisions of this Section (General Provisions) and all other applicable provisions of this Code. In addition, all Cable Operators shall comply with Sections 5.36.200 through 5.36.740 below; all Open Video system Operators shall comply with Sections 5.36.750 through 5.36.785 below; all Telephone Companies shall comply with Section 5.36.800 below; all Wireless Telecommunications Operators shall comply with Section 5.36.850 below; and all other Telecommunications Operators shall comply with Section 5.36.900 below. All Telecommunications Operators which provide services that fall within more than one of the foregoing categories shall comply with each and every applicable section of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.115 - Registration. 
    All Telecommunications Operators who own or lease any telecommunications facilities located in the public right-of-way (excluding Telecommunications Operators who merely purchase bandwidth on facilities owned by others) shall register with the City on forms provided by the Planning Department. These forms shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The name and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates who are required to register pursuant to this section; 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of an officer, agent or employee who will serve as the contact point for the registrant; 
3.  A description of the registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities that are owned or will be used within the City, together with a list of any other Telecommunications Operators who will be using those telecommunications facilities; 
4.  A description of the telecommunications services that the registrant is or will be offering using telecommunications facilities within the City; 
5.  A copy of the registrant's applicable Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity, if any, issued by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
6.  A registration fee in the amount established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.120 - Use of public property; encroachment permit. 
    Prior to excavating, installing telecommunications facilities upon (including but not limited to placing telecommunications facilities within existing conduit), or otherwise using City-owned property for any purpose that requires an encroachment permit under the City's encroachment permit ordinance, a Telecommunications Operator shall obtain an encroachment permit pursuant to this Code and comply with all other applicable requirements of those sections. The encroachment permit application shall also include a description of any surplus conduit that the applicant intends to install and the capacity of the telecommunications facilities being installed. If the Telecommunications Operator is proposing to install telecommunications facilities without utilizing existing surplus conduit, the Telecommunications Operator shall submit a description of all existing surplus conduit along the proposed route together with an explanation of why that existing surplus conduit is not being utilized. In such a situation, the Telecommunications Operator shall also submit evidence that it has contacted all other Telecommunications Operators who are reasonably likely to be installing telecommunications facilities along all or part of the same route and has offered to participate in a joint installation project on reasonable terms. In such a situation where, in addition, the Telecommunications Operator proposes to install overhead telecommunications facilities, the Telecommunications Operator shall submit evidence that it has offered to participate on reasonable terms together with other entities utilizing the utility poles to install the telecommunications facilities and other facilities underground. If the Telecommunications Operator proposes to install utility cabinets or other above-ground facilities, the Telecommunications Operator shall include information about noise generated by the facilities and alternatives for reducing the aesthetic impacts of the facilities, including but not limited to size reductions, screening, alternative locations and undergrounding. The Planning Department may deny the encroachment permit for failure to comply with the foregoing or any other lawful reason. The Planning Department may also attach any reasonable conditions to the encroachment permit, including but not limited to requiring some or all telecommunications facilities to be placed underground, requiring boring rather than trenching, specifying a future time period when all excavations must take place, specifying the location where facilities may be installed, requiring trenches to remain open for a reasonable period of time to permit installation of facilities by the City or its designees, and requiring the installation of surplus conduits and dedication of such conduits to the City subject to the payment of the direct marginal cost of installing such surplus conduits by the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.125 - Location of facilities. 
    All telecommunications facilities shall be installed within existing underground ducts or conduits whenever excess capacity is available on reasonable terms. Overhead facilities may be installed only if space is available on existing utility poles. Whenever existing telecommunications facilities or electric utility facilities are located underground along a particular street or public way, new telecommunications facilities must be installed underground along that street or public way. Whenever any new or existing telecommunications facilities or electric utility lines are located or relocated underground along a particular street or public way, the Telecommunications Operator shall relocate its telecommunications facilities underground concurrently with the other lines at its sole expense to the full extent permitted by law. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a street or otherwise make the installation of future telecommunications facilities impractical, the Telecommunications Operator installing the new telecommunications facilities shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities designated by the Planning Department for reasonable nondiscriminatory access by other Telecommunications Operators. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.130 - Relocation or removal of facilities. 
    Within 30 days following written notice from the City, a Telecommunications Operator shall relocate or remove, without expense to the City, any facilities installed, used and/or maintained by such Telecommunications Operator if and when such relocation or removal is reasonably necessary or convenient for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any City or other public improvement, or for any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any public street, way, alley, or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct, by or on behalf of the City, irrespective of the funding source, or if the facilities have been abandoned or have not been used for a period of 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.135 - Damage to facilities. 
    Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful acts of the City, the City and its officials, employees, agents and volunteers shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facilities as a result of or in connection with any public works or any other acts of the City or its officials, employees, agents or volunteers. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.140 - Restoration of property. 
    When a Telecommunications Operator or any person acting on its behalf does any work in or affecting any public property, the Cable Operator shall, at its sole expense, promptly remove any unauthorized obstructions there from and restore such property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.145 - Indemnification. 
    A Telecommunications Operator shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and its officers, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any and all liability, loss, damage, expense, costs (including without limitation costs and fees of litigation) of every nature arising from the operations of, or the use of public property by, the Telecommunications Operator or its officers, employees, agents or contractors, except such loss or damage which was caused by the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.150 - Compliance with zoning. 
    All telecommunications facilities shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Code, including but not limited to zoning requirements and building code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.155 - Waiver of provisions. 
    The City Council may waive any provision of this Code to the extent permitted by law in exchange for exceptional public benefits provided by a Telecommunications Operator. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.160 - Franchises. 
    Any person required to obtain a franchise pursuant to this Code shall, in addition to all other requirements, reimburse the City for all of its costs, including but not limited to all costs of retaining consultants, related to the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.165 - Violations. 
a.  Civil Action. The City may initiate a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this Chapter. 
b.  Termination or Modification of Agreements. If any person breaches any franchise agreement or other agreement made pursuant to this Chapter, the City may, following reasonable notice, opportunity to cure and opportunity to be heard, terminate the agreement or reduce the term of the agreement. 
c.  Cumulative Remedies. The foregoing remedies shall be deemed non-exclusive, cumulative remedies and in addition to any other remedy the City may have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.170 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Chapter is determined by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any federal or state agency having jurisdiction over its subject matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount federal or state law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that court or agency to require modification in order to conform to the requirements of that paramount law or regulation, then that provision will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent part of this Chapter, and such determination will not affect the validity and enforceability of any other provisions. If that paramount federal or state law or regulation is subsequently repealed or amended so that the provision of this Chapter determined to be invalid or subject to modification is no longer in conflict with that law or regulation, then that provision will again become effective and will thereafter be binding on the City and any affected video or telecommunications service provider; provided, however, that the City must give the affected video or telecommunications service provider 30 days written notice of that change before requiring compliance with that provision, or such longer period of time as may reasonably be required for the video or telecommunications service provider to comply with that provision. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
PART 2. - CABLE TELEVISION 

5.36.200 - Franchising procedures. 
5.36.205 - Franchise required. 
    No person shall establish, construct, operate, or maintain within this City a cable system unless a franchise has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this division, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.210 - Granting. 
    The City Council may grant one or more nonexclusive revocable franchises to establish, construct, operate and maintain cable systems within the City. A franchise shall be effective only upon execution of a franchise agreement between the City and a Cable Operator and compliance with all requirements of this Code. The franchises shall be subject to the provisions of this Code as they may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.212 - Multiple franchises. 
a.  The City may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable state and federal law. The City may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
1.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone gas, and sewerage. 
2.  The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service. 
3.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents, property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations within the public rights-of-way. 
b.  The City may require that any new Cable Operator be responsible for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the City's opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.215 - Term of franchise. 
    A franchise shall be granted for ten years or such other period as may be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.220 - Franchise applications. 
    All applicants for a new franchise, a franchise renewal or a franchise transfer shall submit a written application to the City. All applicants shall be expected to offer to subscribers a modern, efficient, cost-effective system that will facilitate quality maintenance, deliver a variety of programming and services, and provide the flexibility needed to adjust to changing technology and new developments in the industry. Applicants are encouraged to formulate their proposals in an innovative fashion, so as to meet the informational requirements of the City and the service needs of subscribers. Proposals shall contain sufficient material to enable the City Council to make fully informed judgments concerning the adequacy of the proposal and the applicant's qualifications to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the City. All applicants shall, at a minimum, provide the following information unless waived by the City Manager: 
(1)  The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant. 
(2)  A description of the cable services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities. 
(3)  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the Cable Operator to offer or provide such cable services. 
(4)  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the City, all in sufficient detail to identify: 
(a)  The location and route requested for applicant's proposed cable facilities. 
(b)  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way along the proposed route. 
(c)  The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the cable facilities of other cable carriers. 
(d)  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
(5)  If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its cable facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route. 
(6)  If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify: 
(a)  the excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's cable facilities; 
(b)  the excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's cable facilities. 
(7)  A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates. 
(8)  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles by a certified public accountant or other accountant satisfactory to the City demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities. If in the normal course of its business, the applicant does not prepare a separate financial statement for the franchised system, the applicant may submit a combined financial statement for the local region, which statement shall include the franchised system. 
(9)  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the cable facilities and services described in the application. 
(10)  Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the cable services. 
(11)  A detailed description of all telecommunications services that the applicant intends to provide and sufficient information to determine whether such services are subject to franchising. 
(12)  An accurate map showing the location of any existing cables facilities in the City that applicant intends to use or lease. 
(13)  A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the City and other public, educational and governmental institutions. 
(14)  A description of applicant's access and line extension policies. 
(15)  The area or areas of the City the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area. 
(16)  The number of activated, programmed channels that the applicant intends to provide to together with the programming that the applicant intends to provide. 
(17)  All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Sections 5.36.160, 5.36.225 and the City's Planning and Building Departments. 
(18)  Such other and further information as may be requested by the City Manager. 
If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.225 - Application fee. 
a.  An application fee for a new, renewal or transfer of franchise shall be required in the amount established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
b.  The purpose of the application fee is to pay the cost of studying, investigating and otherwise processing such application, which shall be in consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in whole or in part. Application fees are over and above construction inspection and permit fees. Application fees shall include, but not be limited to, all costs incurred in assessing community needs, conducting public meetings, and renewing applications and negotiating franchise agreements, including consultant and attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.227 - Contents of cable television franchise agreements. 
a.  The terms and provisions of a franchise agreement for the provision of cable television and related telecommunications services may relate to or include, without limitation, the following subject matters: 
1.  The nature, scope, geographical area, and duration of the franchise. 
2.  The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the City, including the amount, the method of computation, and the time for payment. 
3.  Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal 
laws  and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable television system. 
4.  Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency capability, and parental control devices. 
5.  Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the performance of the Cable Operator's obligations under the franchise agreement. 
6.  Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance, workers' compensation insurance, and indemnification. 
7.  Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service standards. 
8.  Requirements relating to the Cable Operator's support of local cable usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental access channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and financial support for public, educational, and governmental access channels. 
9.  Requirements relating to the Cable Operator's agreement (if any) to provide an institutional network, and channel capacity on that institutional network for educational or governmental use, subject to the City's rules and procedures for the use of such channel capacity and for compatibility with any telecommunications network that has been or may be developed by the City. 
10.  Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable television system within the public rights-of-way, including compliance with all applicable building codes and permit requirements of the City, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and compliance with FCC technical standards. 
11.  Requirements relating to recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and performance reviews, and the inspection of Grantee's books and records. 
12.  Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for such breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages, suspension, revocation, and termination. 
13.  Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer or change in control of the franchise. 
14.  The Cable Operator's obligation to maintain continuity of service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the City's operation and management of the cable system. 
15.  Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and that will, in the judgment of City staff and the City Council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety. 
b.  This Telecommunications Ordinance shall be incorporated into each franchise agreement by reference, as though set forth in full; provided, however, that if there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the City Council and provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.230 - New franchise procedure. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a new franchise, the City Council may, by resolution, approve or conditionally approve a franchise agreement with the applicant or deny the application. In making any determination hereunder as to any application, the City Council shall give due consideration to: the quality of the service proposed; rates to subscribers; experience, character, background and financial responsibility of the applicant, its management and owners; system design; technical and performance quality of equipment; willingness and ability to meet construction requirements to and abide by franchise limitations and requirements; and other considerations deemed pertinent by the City Council for safeguarding the interests of the City and the public. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.235 - Franchise renewal procedure. 
a.  During the six-month period which begins with the 36-month before the franchise expiration, a proceeding to consider the renewal of a franchise shall be commenced either upon receipt of a written notice from the Cable Operator requesting such a proceeding, or upon the City's own initiative. If the City receives such a notice from the Cable Operator, it shall commence the proceeding within six months of receipt. This proceeding shall be for the purpose of, among other thing, identifying the future cable-related community needs and interests, and reviewing the performance of the Cable Operator under the franchise during the then current franchise term. The proceeding shall include, without limitation, a review of the foregoing matters by City staff and at least one noticed public meeting. The proceeding shall not be deemed complete until the review has been completed and the City has given the Cable Operator written notice of cable system and service features necessary to meet future cable-related community needs and interests, and of information that must be included in a proposal for a renewal, and of a deadline for submission of a renewal proposal. 
b.  Upon completion of the proceeding described in subsection (a) above, the Cable Operator may submit a proposal for renewal. Any such proposal shall include the matters described in Section 5.36.220 above and subsection (a) above. 
c.  Upon receipt of a renewal proposal pursuant to subsection (b) above, the City shall provide prompt public notice of the proposal. Within four months after receipt of the proposal, the City shall either (l) renew the franchise or renew the franchise subject to conditions by adoption of a City Council resolution approving a franchise agreement; or (2) issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed and, at the request of the operator or on its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding concerning the renewal. 
d.  Any administrative proceeding pursuant to subsection (c)(2) shall consider whether: 
(1)  the Cable Operator has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law; 
(2)  the quality of the operator's service, including but not limited to signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix or quality of cable services or other services provided over the system, has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
(3)  the operator has the financial, legal, and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set forth in the operator's proposal; and 
(4)  the operator's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. The Cable Operator shall be given at least 30 days advance notice of the administrative proceeding. The Cable Operator shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence, to require the production of evidence and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of the proceeding. At the completion of the proceeding, the City shall issue a written decision, with the reasons therefor, granting, conditionally granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of the proceeding. The City shall transmit a copy of the decision to the Cable Operator. Any denial of a proposal for renewal made in compliance with subsection (b) above shall be based on one or more adverse finding made with respect to the factors described in this subsection. A denial may not be based on any violation of the franchise or any events described in subsection (d)(2) above which occurred after 1984 unless the City provided the Cable Operator with notice and the opportunity to cure, or in any case in which it is documented that the City waived its right to object, or the Cable Operator gave written notice of a failure or inability to cure and the City failed to object within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice. 
e.  The City and a Cable Operator may agree to waive the provisions of subsections (a) through (d). If the City and a Cable Operator agree to such a waiver, the Cable Operator may submit a proposal for the renewal of a franchise pursuant to this subsection at any time, and the City may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, renew the franchise or renew the franchise subject to conditions by adoption of a City Council resolution approving or conditionally approving a franchise agreement, or deny the franchise renewal. The provisions of subsection (a) through (d) above shall not apply to a decision to grant or deny a renewal pursuant to this subsection. The denial of a renewal pursuant to this subsection shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is submitted in accordance with subsections (a) through (d) above. 
f.  The provisions of subsections (a) through (d) above are intended to reflect federal law and may be modified to conform to any changes in federal law. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.240 - Transfer of ownership. 
(1)  A franchise is a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original Cable Operator. A Cable Operator shall not sell, transfer, lease, dispose of or assign this franchise or any rights there under, including any beneficial interest or right to operate there under, by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, or by operation of law, without the prior approval of the City Council. 
(2)  If a Cable Operator is a partnership or a corporation, prior approval of the City Council is also required when there is an actual change in control of the Cable Operator. A change in control shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, the following: (a) in the case of a partnership, the general partner changes, (b) ownership of 20 percent or more of its voting stock or the voting stock of any parent or affiliate which directly or indirectly through other affiliates owns 20 percent or more of the Cable Operator's voting stock is to be acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert. The word "control" as used in this Section is not limited to major stockholders but includes de facto control or significant influence with respect to the operation of the Cable Operator's cable system. For purposes of this Section, "significant influence" occurs where a person other than the Cable Operator or a person controlling controlled by or under common control with the Cable Operator or exercises working or effective control of decisions affecting the operation of the cable system. 
(3)  The consent of the City Council is not required for transfer of the franchise to a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Cable Operator or to any person controlling, controlled by or under common control with the Cable Operator providing any such person agrees in writing to be bound by the existing franchise and provides bonds and insurance acceptable to the City. The City shall continue to regard the Cable Operator and its transferee as a single entity for all purposes. 
(4)  A Cable Operator's execution of a deed of trust, mortgage or other instrument given merely to secure the payment of any indebtedness of a Cable Operator shall not constitute a transfer under this division and shall not require the consent of the City Council. 
(5)  Upon foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system or upon the termination of a lease covering all or a substantial part of the system, the Cable Operator shall notify the City of the fact. The notification shall be considered as notice that a change in control of the Cable Operator has occurred. In this case the City Councils approval of the new owner of the system must be obtained as herein required. 
(6)  Prior to any transfer or change in control, a Cable Operator shall submit to the City any form required by federal law together with the matters described in Section 5.36.220 above. The City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the transfer or change in control within 120 days following receipt of all required material, unless an extension is agreed to by the City and the Cable Operator. Conditions of approval may include, but are not limited to, the following: (a) Resolution of any outstanding franchise violations or performance deficiencies; (b) Payment of any outstanding franchise fees; (c) Payment of City costs incurred in reviewing the transfer; (c) Filing of any appropriate bonds, insurance endorsements, letters of credit or guarantees; and (d) Written assumption of all obligations of the transferor by the transferee. 
(7)  Within 30 days after the date of the resolution approving transfer of the franchise, or within such extended period of time as the City Council in its discretion may authorize, the transferee shall file with the clerk of the City Council its written acceptance of the franchise, in a form satisfactory to the City, together with all required bonds and insurance certificates, and its agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all thing required of it by the provisions of this division and the franchise award resolution. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the transferee before a notary public and shall be in a form and content satisfactory to and approved by the City Attorney. 
(8)  The City may cancel a franchise 60 days or later after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the Cable Operator, whether in receivership, or other action or proceeding, unless the receivership or trusteeship is vacated prior to the expiration of the 60 days, or unless: 
(a)  within 60 days after his election or appointment, the receiver or trustee complies with this division and remedies all defaults; and 
(b)  such receiver or trustee, within 60 days, executes an agreement, approved by the court, whereby the receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by this division and the franchise granted to Cable Operator. 
(9)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section is a material breach of this Title, subject to the remedies provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.245 - Unauthorized operation of cable system. 
    If a cable system is established, constructed, operated or maintained within the City without the franchise required by this division, the City may notify the Cable Operator of the franchise requirement. If the Operator continues an unauthorized operation for 30 days after such notice from the City, the Operator shall forfeit to the City all gross revenues from the system for so long as such unauthorized operation continues. The City may also pursue any civil or criminal remedies, including but not limited to obtaining injunctive relief to immediately enjoin the continue unauthorized operation. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.250 - Annexations. 
    Within 30 days after annexation of areas to the City which are served by a Cable Operator who does not have a franchise from the City, the Cable Operator shall apply for a new franchise. Pending consideration of such a franchise, the Cable Operator shall comply with each and every provision of this Article, including but not limited to the franchise fee requirement. If a newly annexed area is not actively served by a Cable Operator, the Cable Operator(s) serving the area within the City contiguous to the newly annexed area shall provide service to that area subject to the provisions of its franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.255 - Joint exercise of powers agreement. 
    Should a joint exercise of powers agreement (Gov. Code, § 6500 et seq.) or similar agreement be entered between the county and a city or cities located therein in accordance with law providing for the joint regulation of Cable Operators and cable service or other cooperative arrangements, involved Cable Operators shall be governed by, and subject to that agreement, pursuant to this Title's provisions, provided that no such joint powers agreement shall impair any right or obligation of the Cable Operator under a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.260 - Reservation of rights. 
    Insofar as it is not preempted by Federal or state regulations, the City reserves all rights it may have or subsequently acquire under state, federal or other law with respect to the regulation of cable services or other communications services by a Cable Operator. The City further reserves the right to amend this Code and apply such amendments to an incumbent Cable Operator in any manner that is consistent with a franchise agreement or applicable law. A franchise granted pursuant to this Article shall not be deemed to authorize or prohibit the provision of telecommunications services other than Cable Services. The provision of such other telecommunication services shall be governed exclusively by other Articles of this Title. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.265 - Consumer protection and service standards. 
a.  General Standards. A Cable Operator must meet or exceed all applicable consumer protection and service standards that are customary in the cable television industry and that are recommended or required by the following: 
1.  Federal statutes, and the rules, regulations, and orders of the Federal Communications Commission, including the following: 
(a)  The provisions of Section 76.309(c) of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended. 
(b)  The provisions of Section 76.630 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended. 
(c)  The provisions of Section 551 of Title 47, United States Code, as it now exists or may later be amended. 
2.  The provisions of California Government Code Sections 53054, et seq., entitled the "Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act." 
3.  The provisions of California Government Code Section 53088, et seq., entitled the "Video Customer Service Act." 
4.  The provisions of California Civil Code Section 1722(b)(1)-(6) relating to service or repair transactions between cable television companies and their subscribers. 
b.  Franchise Agreement. Unless preempted by paramount federal law, the consumer protection and service standards referenced above in paragraph a that are the most stringent, and that afford the greatest degree of protection to consumers, will be specified in the cable television franchise agreement and will apply, without limitation, to all video, voice, and data services that are provided by the Cable Operator to its subscribers within the franchise area. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.300 - City regulation of franchise. 
5.36.305 - Administration. 
    The office of the City Manager is designed as having primary responsibility for the administration of the franchise and this article. Whenever a right may be exercised under this article by the City or the City Manager, such right may also be exercised by a designee or employee. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.310 - Cable programming. 
    If provided for in the franchise agreement, the cable programming offered by the Cable Operator shall include at a minimum each of the following categories as is appropriate to the franchise area: community, family, children's, news and public affairs, sports, cultural, arts and music, minority or foreign language, and educational for all ages. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.315 - Basic service. 
    Basic service shall be available to all subscribers. No subscriber shall be required to purchase any other service as a prerequisite to purchasing basic service. Basic service shall include all public, educational and governmental channels at no extra charge. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.320 - Required channel capacity. 
    The cable system shall have the capacity, the number of activated and programmed channels and the data/video return ("two-way" or "upstream") capability specified in the franchise agreement. The cable system shall have a maximum frequency of no less than 750 MHz or such other frequency that is specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.325 - Performance evaluation sessions. 
    The City and each Cable Operator shall hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions as specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.330 - Integration of advancements in technology. 
    In addition to such upgrades as may be required under a franchise agreement, it is the responsibility of a Cable Operator to periodically review upgrading its cable system to integrate advancements in technology as may be required to meet the needs and interests of the community in light of the costs thereof. It is recognized that Subscribers in the City have an especially strong interest in a System design that will eliminate the need for set-top converters not necessary for advances in technology and/or otherwise permit Subscribers to fully utilize the capabilities of consumer electronic equipment while receiving Cable Service. To assist the City to understand the practical applications of developments in cable technology, the Franchisees shall submit a report to the City every odd-numbered year during the Franchise term. Each report shall describe developments in cable technology that have been incorporated into cable systems of comparable size in the United States, and whether, how, and by what date the Franchises plans to incorporate those technological developments into the System. In addition, the report shall describe the effect of those developments on public, educational, and governmental use of the cable system, and the effect and compatibility of those technological changes on other consumer electronic equipment. Except as provided in a franchise agreement, the City, on receipt of each plan, may promptly schedule hearings to consider whether Cable Operator's timetable for implementing the new technologies is adequate to meet the future cable related needs and interests of the City. Except as provided in a franchise agreement, if the City considers the plan to be adequate, the City shall adopt it and the Franchisee shall be bound to implement it as if it were set forth herein. Any increase in charges by a Cable Operator to Subscribers for providing Basic Cable Services in compressed or digitized forms shall comply with standard industry practices at the time such technology is introduced into the System. The introduction of compressed or digitized programming shall be a business decision of the Cable Operator made in good faith after due consideration of the needs and interests of the community, advancements in technology, the availability of programming, and the cost to Subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.335 - Cable service to public buildings occupied by public agencies. 
    Upon request by the City, a Cable Operator shall install, at no charge, as set forth in the franchise agreement, at least one service outlet per public agency at all buildings occupied by public agencies within the Franchise Area, and shall charge only its time and material costs for any additional service outlets to such facilities. The Cable Operator shall provide Basic Cable Service and Cable Programming Service to all outlets in such buildings free of charge. "Public agency" shall mean an agency of the City, the City, State or Federal Governments, and special districts, including school and water districts and any political subdivision of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.340 - PEG channels. 
    The Cable Operator shall make available one or more dedicated channels on its cable system for purposes of public, educational and governmental access, as set forth in the franchise agreement. Such channels shall be available on the lowest tier of basic service. Such channels shall not be used for any advertisements or commercial programming. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.345 - PEG facilities. 
    The Cable Operator shall provide facilities, services and equipment for use in relation to public, educational and governmental access to the extent provided in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.350 - Public access usage management. 
    Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from delegating to an independent nonprofit entity such as a commission or nonprofit corporation the authority to manage all or any part of the City's PEG facilities, programming and/or funds. The commission or nonprofit corporation may be established jointly with neighboring jurisdiction at the City's sole option. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.355 - Interconnection. 
    A Cable Operator shall design its System so that it may be two-way interconnected with any or all other cable television systems or similar communication systems in the area, interconnection of systems may be made by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other appropriate methods. 
    A Cable Operator may interconnect its system with other cable systems upon its own initiative, or upon request of the City Council to interconnect. If so requested, a Cable Operator shall begin good faith negotiations concerning interconnection with the other affected system or systems. If so requested, a Cable Operator shall interconnect with any adjacent cable system which is controlled by the Cable Operator or which is under common control. 
    All signals to be interconnected will comply with FCC technical standards for all classes of signals and will result in no more than a low level of distortion. 
    A Cable Operator shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority, state or federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, facilitating, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of communications systems beyond the boundaries of the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.360 - Emergency override. 
    To provide an emergency alert capability, the Cable Operator shall install and maintain an Emergency Alert System which allows the City to simultaneously override audio signals and broadcast emergency messages on all television channels. In case of public emergency, the City may, as directed by the Administrator of Emergency Services or other authorized official, activate and use such emergency override system for the duration of the emergency. The Cable Operator shall assist and cooperate with the City in periodic testing of the emergency override system. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.365 - Tree trimming. 
    When trimming trees, a Cable Operator shall comply with all City regulations applicable to utilities. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.370 - Removal and abandonment of cable system. 
    In the event that a franchise is terminated or expires without being renewed, or if all or a portion of the cable system is not used for a period of 90 days, the Cable Operator shall either remove the cable system or the abandoned portion thereof or shall obtain the permission of the Director of Community Development to abandon the cable system in place within 90 days. The Cable Operator shall obtain an encroachment permit prior to removing the cable system. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.375 - Acquisition of cable system. 
    Notwithstanding the granting of a franchise, the City retains the right to acquire the cable system at any time by negotiated sale or eminent domain, and retains the right to resell the cable system to any third party. If the City denies the renewal of the franchise, the City may acquire the cable system at a price not to exceed fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself or any use of the cable system for purposes other than Cable Television Services. If the City revokes a franchise, the City may acquire the cable system at a price not to exceed the depreciated book value of the cable system. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.400 - Customer service. 
5.36.405 - Continuity of service. 
    Customers have the right to receive, and the Cable Operator has the obligation to provide, efficient service, high-quality reception, prompt repairs and service interrupted only for good cause and for the shortest possible time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Cable Operator are honored. In the event that the Cable Operator elects to over build, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the City Council gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the Cable Operator shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.410 - Non-discriminatory services. 
    The Cable Operator shall not deny service or access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability or occupation. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit senior discounts. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.415 - Local office. 
    The Cable Operator shall maintain a local business office in a location specified in the franchise agreement which shall be open to the public during convenient hours (for working people) on weekdays and on weekends. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.420 - Line extensions. 
(1)  The Cable Operator must extend and make cable television service available to every business location (other than home occupations) unless, due to the low density of businesses in a particular area, the City waives this requirement. The Cable Operator must extend and make cable television service available to every dwelling unit within three months in any un-served area reaching the average density of ten occupied residential dwelling units per one-quarter mile, as measured from the nearest active coaxial feeder line. Extension of cable television service to any un-served area satisfying the foregoing requirements will be subject to the following: 
(a)  Each occupied residential dwelling unit must be located within a distance of no more than 150 feet from the anticipated location of such extension, provided that an occupied residential dwelling unit located more than this distance from the anticipated location of such extension shall be counted if the owner or occupant agrees to pay the Cable Operator an additional amount not to exceed the actual time and materials cost of the portion of the drop to such residential dwelling unit exceeding 150 feet; and 
(b)  The Cable Operator is able to secure all necessary easements or rights-of-way for purposes of locating its cable system in the area of such extension. 
(2)  In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of service, the Cable Operator shall provide, upon the request of a potential subscriber desiring service, an estimate of the reasonable costs required to extend service to said subscriber, including materials, labor, overhead and private easements, if necessary. The Cable Operator shall then extend service within four months upon request of said potential subscriber, who shall be responsible for all reasonable costs associated with the extension. The Cable Operator may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the Cable Operator. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.425 - New service requests. 
(1)  The Cable Operator shall provide service to all dwelling units and all business locations within the City (subject to the limitations on line extensions in the previous section) pursuant to the following requirements. 
(2)  In any case in which either no new drop is required, or a new aerial drop is required of no more than 150 feet, or a new underground drop is required of 75 feet or less as measured from the nearest active or required feeder line along a reasonably direct route, the Cable Operator shall make cable service available at the standard connection charge within seven days of receipt of any service request. In any case in which a new drop is required which is longer than the foregoing standards, the Cable Operator shall make cable service available at the standard connection charge within 14 days of receipt of any service request. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the service request requires a drop in excess of 150 feet, the Cable Operator may charge the business or resident requesting service an additional amount which shall not exceed the actual time and materials cost of the drop in excess of 150 feet. 
(3)  Upon receiving a request for new service the Cable Operator shall make reasonable efforts to promptly acquire all easements or rights of occupancy necessary for extension of service to such resident's home and not already secured by the Cable Operator. The Cable Operator shall not be required to install service until such easements or rights of occupancy have been acquired. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.430 - System or individual outage complaints. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a service complaint, the Cable Operator shall respond as follows: (1) to a system outage of one or more channels, within two hours; (2) to an individual outage of one or more channels, within 24 hours; and (3) to all other reception problems, by the next working day or as agreed upon by the subscriber and the Cable Operator. The Cable Operator shall have available at all times a sufficient number of technicians capable of responding to the foregoing matters within the foregoing time frames. 
(2)  The Cable Operator will be deemed to have responded to a service complaint when a field service representative competent to fix the problem arrives at the service location (which may be some portion of the cable system and not a subscriber's residence) and begins work on the problem. In the case of a response which involves request for service at a subscriber's residence, and the subscriber is not home when the field service representative arrives, response will be deemed to have taken place if the field service representative leaves notification of arrival and instructions for rescheduling on the subscriber's front door. 
(3)  Where the Cable Operator is unable to respond to a service complaint with in the applicable time period specified in this section, the Cable Operator shall make reasonable efforts, within such time period, to notify the complainant of the reason(s) and the estimated time frame for correction, and shall proceed to correct the service complaint at the earliest possible time. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.435 - Scheduling appointments. 
    All appointments for service, installations, or disconnection shall be specified by date. At the subscriber's option, weekday service calls shall be scheduled as morning or afternoon appointments during specified four-hour blocks of time. For service calls responding to system or individual outages, holiday and weekend scheduling shall also be available. If the appointment cannot be kept, the Cable Operator shall make reasonable efforts to promptly notify the subscriber in advance and reschedule the appointment. A Cable Operator may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
    Subscribers who have experienced a missed appointment due to the fault of a Cable Operator shall receive installation free of charge (if the appointment was for installation). The subscriber shall receive a credit against the Basic Service Charge in the minimum amount of $20.00 if the missed appointment is for a service call. Alternatively, subscribers may pursue their remedies pursuant to Civil Code section 1722. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.440 - Notification of service interruptions. 
    Where service interruptions of one hour duration or longer are planned, the Cable Operator shall notify subscribers at least 24 hours before the anticipated interruption, provided that no notification shall be required for service interruptions occurring between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Notification need not be repeated before each anticipated interruption as long as the initial notification advises of the possibility of repeated interruptions during a specified period not to exceed one month. To the extent feasible, the Cable Operator shall avoid interruptions between 5:00 p.m. and midnight. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.445 - Notification of service or channel changes. 
    The Cable Operator shall notify subscribers of any changes in programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notices must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the Cable Operator. Cable Operator shall provide a copy of all notifications to the City and shall make every reasonable effort to do so at least seven days in advance of the distribution to subscribers. If the subscriber notice is not timely provided, the proposed change may not occur until and unless the proper notice is provided. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.450 - Telephone communication service. 
(1)  The Cable Operator shall render efficient telephone communication service, sufficiently staffed by knowledgeable, courteous personnel. 
(2)  Customer Service Response. At a minimum, the Cable Operator shall have on duty a sufficient number of customer service representatives available to handle customer calls during all hours that the business office is open. During times not handled by customer service representatives, each system must have a capable answering service for repair requests or service complaints. Answering machines are not acceptable, except for automated response units that are used to process and route calls to on-duty personnel of the Cable Operator. 
(3)  Telephone System Requirements. The Cable Operator shall at all times provide a telephone system meeting the following requirements: 
(a)  Each Cable Operator shall have a phone system with a sufficient capacity to promptly respond to telephone calls. Telephone numbers for customer service shall be listed in a local telephone directory. All telephone lines for customer service shall be toll free to subscribers within the franchise area. 
(b)  Knowledgeable, qualified customer service representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during all hours that the business office is open. 
(c)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30 seconds. Those systems which utilize automated answering and distributing equipment shall limit the number of routine rings to four or fewer. 
Systems not utilizing automated equipment shall make every effort to answer incoming calls as promptly as the automated systems. Under normal operating conditions, the customer shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the total time that the telephone system is staffed by customer service representatives. These standards shall be met no less than 80 percent of the time measured quarterly. If the City receives complaints indicating a significant problem in any telephone system, the City may require the Cable Operator to meet the above standards not less than 80 percent of the time measured over a 60-day period until such time as the performance is perceived to be satisfactory. 
(d)  The Cable Operator shall, by means of automatic monitoring equipment, track all customer service telephone calls and prepare monthly summaries of all calls according to the criteria listed in subsection (c). Such report shall be delivered to the City annually and, in addition, as requested. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subsection (c) above, in cases of major system outages or major service interruption, the Cable Operator may provide a recorded message informing customers of the problem and probable correction time as long as customers are still able to reach a customer service representative. 
(f)  In cases where the Cable Operator's existing telephone system cannot demonstrate compliance with the standards set forth in subsections (c) or (d), the franchise agreement may specify comparable criteria for the Cable Operator's telephone system and the time frame for compliance with the standards set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.455 - Complaint log. 
    The Cable Operator shall keep a computer log or written record for at least three years of (1) all service calls and complaints which require the dispatch of a service vehicle to respond to the service call or complaint, and (2) all calls regarding outages, regardless of whether a service vehicle was dispatched, together with the disposition of all such calls. This record shall be available for public inspection by the affected subscriber at the local office of the Cable Operator during regular office hours such that each subscriber may examine his or her own records. The log or record shall be available for inspection by the City at any time at the local office of the Cable Operator during regular office hours. Before making a record available for inspection under this section, the Cable Operator may require reasonable advance notice, which shall in no event exceed one working day. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.460 - Subscriber test requests. 
    Upon reasonable request or complaint by subscriber, the Cable Operator shall, at its sole expense, perform such signal level tests as necessary to establish if a signal of requisite quality is being delivered to the subscriber's premises. The test shall be conducted at the subscriber's receiver and at other such locations deemed necessary by the Cable Operator, and a copy of the written test results shall be made available to the subscriber upon request. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.465 - Conditions of service-Subscriber information. 
    The Cable Operator shall send or deliver to all new and reconnected subscribers in writing and to all subscribers at least once a year, in a form easy to read and understand, information concerning the conditions of service, including but not limited to: rates, fees, charges, deposits, refunds of deposits, available levels of service (tiers), payment options, discounts (if any), service call policy, privacy protections and disconnection and reconnection policy. The Cable Operator shall provide a copy of such information to the City prior to its distribution to the Cable Operators subscribers for review and comment. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.470 - Complaints-Subscriber information. 
    Upon connection or reconnection to the system and at least once a year, the Cable Operator shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, printed notice on billing statement, or billing insert, furnish to each subscriber information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints to the Cable Operator or the City, including the name, address and local telephone number of the Cable Operator and the City. The form and content of the complaint notice shall be subject to review and comment by the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.475 - Investigation of complaints. 
(1)  When there have been a significant number of complaints made, or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the City, indicates a problem with the reliability or quality of cable service as required under this Title or in the franchise agreement, the City Council shall have the right and authority to require the Cable Operator to evaluate the performance, operation or administration of the cable system including without limitation matters relating to customer service. The Cable Operator shall fully cooperate with the City in performing such evaluation and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within 30 days after notice. Such report shall include the following information: 
(a)  The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the evaluation; 
(b)  What system component, operation or service was evaluated; 
(c)  The equipment used and procedures employed; 
(d)  The method, if any, by which such complaint or problem could be or has been resolved; and 
(e)  Any other information pertinent to the evaluation which may be required. 
(2)  The City may require that evaluations be supervised, or conducted, at a cost to be paid by the Cable Operator, by an engineer, accountant or other consultant selected by the City and not on the permanent staff of the Cable Operator or the City. The engineer, accountant or other consultant shall sign all records of the evaluation and forward to the City such records with a report interpreting the results of the evaluation and recommending actions to be taken. The City's rights under this section, shall be limited to evaluating specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints, circumstances or other evidence which cause the City to reasonably believe that evaluation is necessary to protect the public against substandard cable service. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.480 - Non-compliance with standards. 
    In the event of repeated and verifiable non-compliance with the customer service standards contained in this Chapter, the City may, in addition to pursuing any other civil or criminal remedy, direct the Cable Operator to add sufficient personnel and/or telephone lines and equipment to ensure compliance with such standards. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.485 - Billing, late fees, disconnection of service and notification of rate changes. 
(1)  Bills for services shall be monthly. Nothing in this section shall prohibit voluntary prepayment of services by subscribers, provided that the Cable Operator shall not be required to offer or accept any discount or other reduction in the amount paid by any subscriber for a voluntary prepayment of services. Bill shall include a listing of the Cable Operator's customer service telephone number in a manner that makes such number significantly more prominent than any other telephone numbers listed on the bill. Bills shall not list the City's telephone number in a manner that causes confusion to the public. All telephone numbers shall be listed on the bill in a form approved by the City. 
(2)  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(3)  In case of a billing dispute, the Cable Operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
(4)  Before itemizing on subscriber bills any fees, taxes, assessments or other items payable to the City the itemization of which is not expressly authorized by state or federal statute or regulation, the Cable Operator shall submit a sample bill to the City for review and comment. In the event that the billing language proposed by the Cable Operator is misleading or incomplete, the Cable Operator shall modify the same as requested by the City or shall include a reasonable explanation as agreed to by the City and the Cable Operator. 
(5)  Charges on a bill shall not be deemed delinquent and a subscriber shall not be subject to a late fee, so long as payment is received from the subscriber within ten days after the end of the service period covered by the bill. 
(6)  A Cable Operator shall only disconnect a subscriber's service for good cause. A Cable Operator shall not disconnect service for non-payment until the Cable Operator has provided the subscriber with notice, provided on or after the due date of the subscriber's bill and separately from that bill or any other standard monthly bill, at least ten days in advance of the disconnection. The notice shall specify the earliest date the disconnection will occur, the total payment required to avoid disconnection and the telephone number and office hours to contact a customer service representative. In no event shall disconnection for nonpayment occur less than 14 days after the end of any billing period for which charges are delinquent. If service is disconnected by the Cable Operator's personnel at or near the drop to the subscriber, such personnel first attempt to visit the subscriber and give the subscriber an opportunity to continue service by paying all accrued charges. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.487 - Credits for outages. 
(1)  Except for loss of service beyond the reasonable control of the Cable Operator, after notification from a subscriber of an individual or system outage and following the time frames set out in Section 5.36.475 for an opportunity to cure, the Cable Operator shall, upon request, credit the subscriber's account on a pro-rata basis one-thirtieth of the subscriber's monthly rate for each day or portion of a day that the system or individual outage continues. In addition, in cases where, within any seven-day period, there have been more than six individual outages, system outages or service interruptions of 15 minute or more, the Cable Operator shall, upon request, credit the subscriber's account for one-fourth of the subscriber's monthly rate. Should an individual or system outage affect a pay-per-view or other similarly priced per-event service, the subscriber shall, upon request, be credited the charges for such service. Credit shall be given under this section only if the subscriber has notified the Cable Operator of the outage within 48 hours of its occurrence and has provided access to the Cable Operator as necessary to correct the problem. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Cable Operator from giving other credits. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.489 - Refund of deposits. 
    The Cable Operator shall refund all subscriber deposits within 30 days of termination of service. Any outstanding balance, including any equipment not returned by the subscriber, may be deducted from the deposit. The refund shall be mailed to the subscriber at no expense, or shall be handled as otherwise agreed to by the subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.491 - Parental control lock. 
    The Cable Operator shall provide subscribers, upon request, with a parental blocking device or digital code that permits inhibiting the video portions of premium channels. The Cable Operator may charge a reasonable rate for such a device. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.493 - Privacy. 
(1)  The Cable Operator shall not sell or otherwise release to any person, without specific written authorization from each individual subscriber, any list which identifies individual subscriber viewing habits or any list which contains the name, address and or telephone numbers of individual subscribers. 
(2)  The Cable Operator shall not place in a residence any equipment capable of being used by the Cable Operator for audio eavesdropping or video surveillance. In addition, the Cable Operator shall not activate any two-way communications capability of the system in a subscriber's residence, or use the system to gather information about individual subscriber viewing habits, without the subscriber's informed written or electronic consent. Notwithstanding the above, the Cable Operator shall have the right to use the system to (i) obtain information necessary to render cable service or any other service provided by the Cable Operator to the subscriber, (ii) verify receipt of cable service for billing purposes or (iii) detect unauthorized reception. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.495 - Landlord tenant. 
(1)  Neither the owner of any residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall ask or demand any payment, service or gratuity in any form as a condition for permitting the installation of Cable service to the dwelling unit occupied by a tenant or resident requesting service. 
(2)  Neither the owner of any residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident, or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable service from a Cable Operator operating under a valid and existing cable franchise issued by the City. 
(3)  No person shall resell, without the express written consent of the Cable Operator and without a franchise from the City, where required, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a Cable Operator operating under a franchise issued by the City. However, the owner of a multiple dwelling unit, under the auspices of a bulk cable service agreement with the Cable Operator, may charge tenants for cable service, so long as such charges do not exceed the charges made by the Cable Operator to the owner, plus a reasonable sum to reimburse the owner for necessary administration and billing. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning appearance and value of premises or the convenience and safety of persons or property. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring a Cable Operator to agree to indemnify the owner, or his agents or representatives, for damages or from liability for damages caused by the installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable system facilities. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.497 - Unauthorized connections and tampering. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall make any authorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable system for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, or sound. Also no person, without the consent of the owner, shall tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.500 - Construction and technical standards. 
5.36.505 - Construction requirements. 
    All construction (including, but not limited to, the initial construction of the cable system and any rebuild, expansion, replacement, repair or maintenance of all or any part of the cable system) shall be performed in compliance with this Article and all other provisions of this Code. At least 90 days prior to initiating any major construction (other than routine maintenance or repair, installation of subscriber drops or minor line extensions), a Cable Operator shall submit a construction plan to the City. The construction plan shall include a description of the work, equipment specifications, existing and proposed locations of all facilities, traffic control plans, resident and business notification plans and a detailed construction schedule. The City may approve, conditionally approve or deny the construction plan. The City may require the posting of construction bonds. Additional construction requirements may be specified in a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.510 - Standards. 
    A Cable Operator shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system consistent with all of the following: 
a.  All ordinances and construction standards of the City. 
b.  National Electrical Safety Code. 
c.  National Electrical Code. 
d.  Rules, regulations and orders of the Federal Communications Commission. 
e.  Rules, regulations and orders of the California Public Utility Commission. 
f.  All other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
    A Cable Operator shall construct, install and maintain its cable system in an orderly and professional manner, using due diligence and materials of good and durable quality. All such work shall be performed in close coordination with other public and private utilities following accepted construction procedures and practices and working through existing committees and organizations. All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in the same manner as electric and telephone lines on the same poles. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
    A Cable Operator shall, at its own cost and expense, install and maintain shielding, filtering and grounding at affected installations with the system to eliminate television interference encountered from overload by amateur radio transmissions which are in compliance with FCC regulations. A Cable Operator shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power to be engaged automatically in the event of a power: failure for 24 hours at all headends serving the City, including without limitation all switching facilities, towers, electronics and heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems and equipment located at such headends and such switching facilities. The Cable Operator shall also maintain on its distribution system alternative power sources (battery back-up) so that both the subscriber and the institutional networks (if any) may be maintained at full power for at least two hours beyond the time when normal power sources serving the cable system have ceased. 
    If the City reasonably believes that the cable system is not in technical compliance with the foregoing standards, the City may require the Cable Operator to conduct its own technical testing of the system, and Cable Operator shall disclose the results of such tests to the City upon their completion. Any deficiencies shall be cured by the Cable Operator promptly and no later than 30 days following completion of testing. The City shall also have the right to observe any system performance tests conducted by the Cable Operator and to obtain copies of the results of such tests. 
    A Cable Operator shall comply with all of the same standards and codes, including but not limited to the pavement of inspection fees, to construct and maintain its system within private rights-of-way as are required by the City's public streets. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.600 - Administration and enforcement. 
5.36.605 - Franchise fees. 
    All Cable Operators shall pay a franchise fee to the City in an amount equal to five percent of the Cable Operator's gross revenues. The Cable Operator shall make franchise fee payments on the first day of each quarter year, or at such other times specified in the franchise agreement. Franchise fee payments shall be submitted together with documentation of the Cable Operator's gross revenues in such form as may be required by the City from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.610 - Compensation relating to non-cable telecommunications services. 
    Except as prohibited by law, all Cable Operators shall pay compensation to the City for use of public property in an amount equal to five percent of the Cable Operator's gross non-cable revenues. Payments shall be submitted to the City on the first day of each quarter of each calendar year together with documentation of the Cable Operator's gross non-cable revenues in such form as may be required by the City from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.615 - Fees on non-cable operator revenues. 
    In consideration of the use of public property, any person other than a Cable Operator who provides Cable Service or any other telecommunications service over a cable system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but which are not received by a Cable Operator shall pay a fee to the City in an amount equal to five percent of that person's gross revenues and gross non-cable revenues. The Cable Operator whose cable system is used by such person shall collect the foregoing fee from such person no later than the tenth day prior to the close of each calendar quarter and shall remit the fee to the City no later than the first day of the following calendar quarter. If the Cable Operator fails to collect or remit all or part of this fee, the Cable Operator shall be directly liable to the City for payment of the uncollected or unremitted fee. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.620 - Audit. 
    Consistent with Section 5.36.630, the City shall have the right to inspect and audit all of the Cable Operator's books and records and those of its affiliates relevant to an accurate determination of the total amount of the Cable Operator's gross revenues and gross non-cable revenues. The Cable Operator shall make such records available to the City within 14 days of the City's request. Such records shall be available for inspection by the City at the Cable Operator's office within the City during normal business hours. Such records shall be retained by the Cable Operator for a period of at least five years. The City will bear the cost of any such audit; provided, however, that if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of three percent or more of the amount due, the Cable Operator shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs relating to the audit. Any additional amount due to the City as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the Cable Operator, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. If the Cable Operator believes the audit report is in error, it may send a written response to the City describing the error in lieu of making the payment. If the City disagrees with the response, it shall notify the Cable Operator in writing, after which the Cable Operator shall pay the additional amount due within 30 days. The City may elect to perform such audit jointly with one or more other government agencies which regulate affiliated systems. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.625 - Late payments. 
    In the event that the Cable Operator does not make any payments required by this Code on or before the date due, a late payment penalty shall accrue at a rate of one and one-half percent per month on the unpaid amount until paid. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.630 - Inspection of records. 
    The Cable Operator shall maintain at its local office, and shall make available for inspection and auditing at that office within seven days after receipt of a written request by the City, complete and accurate books, records, maps, plans and other materials of the Cable Operator which are reasonably related to the City's review of the Cable Operators compliance with this Code and the franchise agreement. To the extent that an affiliate of the Cable Operator aggregates information relating to the cable system together with information about other cable systems, the Cable Operator shall have copies of such records available for inspection and auditing at the local office within seven days after receipt of a written request by the City. The City shall maintain the confidentiality of any of the foregoing records to the extent that they are not public, contain sensitive business information and confidentiality is permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.635 - Location of cable operator's properties. 
(1)  The Cable Operator shall at all times make and keep on file in the office of the Community Development Director current, full and complete plans and records to a scale and form approved by the Community Development Director, showing the exact location of all cable system equipment installed or in use in streets, alleys and public places in the City. 
(2)  The Cable Operator shall file with the Community Development Director, on or before the last day of March of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to a scale designated by the Community Development Director, showing all cable system equipment installed in streets, alleys and public places of the City during the previous year. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.640 - Insurance. 
    The Cable Operator shall at all times during the existence of any franchise issued hereunder maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense to following policies of insurance: 
(1)  A general comprehensive liability insurance policy with minimum liability limits of $2,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage; 
(2)  An automobile liability policy with minimum liability limits of $2,000,000.00 combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage; and 
(3)  Workers' compensation insurance with minimum policy limits as required by State law. 
    All of the foregoing policies (except workers' compensation insurance) shall all name the City, its officers, officials, agents, employees and volunteers as insured, and shall be primary to any insurance maintained by the City. The precise terms of these policies, including but not limited to liability limits, deductibles, acceptable insurers and other terms, shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.645 - Indemnification. 
    The Cable Operator shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and its officers officials, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any and all liability, loss, damage, expense, costs (including without limitation costs and fees of litigation) of every nature arising out of or in connection with the Cable Operator's enjoyment of the franchise hereunder, or its failure to comply with any of its obligations contained in the franchise agreement or this Title, or arising out of the construction, installation, maintenance, operation or removal of its cable system, except such loss or damage which was caused by the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.650 - Letter of credit. 
    Within 30 days after the effective date of a franchise agreement, the Cable Operator shall deposit with the City an irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement in a form and with an institution approved by the City. The Letter of Credit may be drawn upon by the City for the purpose of remedying any noncompliance by the Cable Operator with any provision of this Code or the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.655 - Possessory interest. 
    The granting of a franchise pursuant to this Title may create an interest subject to property taxation pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code section 107 et seq. The Cable Operator shall be solely responsible for payment of any such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.700 - Enforcement of federal rate regulations. 
5.36.705 - Effectiveness. 
    This Chapter shall be effective only if the City has been certified by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") to enforce federal rate regulations. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.710 - Rate increases. 
    Prior to increasing rates for basic service and/or associated equipment at any time, the Cable Operator shall file its proposed rates with the City Clerk together with the form for determination of rate increases as may be issued by the FCC or the City, and any other information required by the City Manager. If the proposed rates are greater than the benchmark rates permitted by FCC regulations, the Cable Operator shall submit a cost-of-service showing pursuant to FCC regulations. Within seven days of filing its proposed rates, but no later than 30 days prior to the effective date of the proposed rates, the Cable Operator shall notify its subscribers of its proposed rates and that written comments may be submitted to the City Clerk by mailing such notice to all subscribers, either separately or in conjunction with bills or other notices sent to subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.715 - Auditor's opinion. 
    All forms and materials submitted by the Cable Operator pursuant to this chapter shall be submitted together with an unqualified opinion of a certified public accountant ("Auditor's Opinion"). The Auditor's Opinion shall contain, at a minimum, the following items: 
(a)  A certification that the data submitted by the Cable Operator truly and accurately reflect the actual costs of regulated equipment and services and other costs reported therein as determined by the Auditor in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, including without limitation, AU section 801 et seq. of the AICPA Professional Standards and any successor sections, and that the financial information contained therein is reported in compliance with FCC rules and regulations implementing the Cable Act of 1992, including without limitation, 47 CPR sections 76.924 and 76.925 and any successor sections; 
(b)  A detailed explanation of the source data examined, tested and utilized by the Auditor in formulating the Auditor's Opinion; 
(c)  A list of documents furnished by the Cable Operator to the Auditor and utilized by the Auditor in formulating the Auditor's Opinion; 
(d)  A detailed explanation of the auditing methodology utilized by the Auditor formulating the Auditor's Opinion; and 
(f)  A detailed explanation of the assumptions utilized by the auditor in formulating the Auditor's Opinion. 
    Upon the request of the City Manager, the Auditor shall provide to the City Manager a copy of the audit working papers utilized in formulating the Auditor's Opinion within five days of such request. These working papers shall be kept confidential to the extent required by federal law and FCC regulations. 
    This section shall not in any way affect the City's authority to review records of the Cable Operator pursuant to Section 5.36.630 above, or any other law, ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.720 - Time for action. 
(a)  Quarterly Rate Adjustments. If the Cable Operator submits its proposed rates pursuant to the quarterly rate adjustment system authorized by the FCC, the provision of this subsection shall apply. The proposed rates shall take effect 30 days after submission of all required information to the City, unless the City disapproves the rate or the City Manager issues an order extending the 30-day period as follows. The City Manager may issue a written order extending this 30-day period for the purpose of requesting or considering additional information or comments for: (a) an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showing if the City Council and City Manager are unable to make a determination within the 30-day period; or (b) an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. The proposed rates shall take effect following such extension unless the Cable Operator has not submitted all required information or unless the City disapproves the proposed rate. Prior to expiration of such extended period, the City Manager may issue a brief written order directing the Cable Operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf such amounts were paid. At any time following expiration of such extended period, the City may disapprove the proposed rate and, if the foregoing accounting order was issued, may order the Cable Operator to refund all amounts previously collected as a result of the disapproved rate. To the extent provided by federal law, a Cable Operator utilizing the quarterly rate adjustment system may increase its rates for basic service to reflect increases in franchise fees or FCC regulatory fees without complying with this subsection. 
(b)  Annual Rate Adjustments. If the Cable Operator submits its proposed rates pursuant to the annual rate adjustment system authorized by the FCC, the provision of this subsection hall apply. The Cable Operator shall submit its proposed rates no later than 90 days prior to the proposed effective date of the rates. Within 45 days of submission, the City may notify the Cable Operator that its submission is facially incomplete, in which case the review period shall be tolled until such time as the City receives all required information. If prior to a determination by the City there is a material change in the Cable Operator's circumstances which affects the rate filing, the Cable Operator may file an amendment. The proposed rates shall take effect the later of 90 days after submission of all required information to the City or 30 days after receipt of any amendment, unless the City disapproves the rate. If the City takes no action during this period, during the subsequent 12-month period the City may nevertheless issue a written decision disapproving the proposed rates and order a refund and a prospective rate reduction. During this 12-month period, if the Cable Operator makes a written inquiry concerning whether the City intends to issue a rate order, the City shall notify the Cable Operator of its intent within 15 days of receipt of the inquiry. 
(c)  Required Channel Additions to Basic Service Tier. If the Cable Operator is required by federal or local law to add channels to the Basic Services Tier and submits a proposed rate adjustment as a result, the proposed rates shall take effect 60 days after receipt of a complete application unless the City rejects the proposed rate as unreasonable. 
(d)  New Equipment. If the Cable Operator submits a proposed rate for a new type of equipment, the proposed rate shall take effect 60 days after receipt of a complete application unless the City rejects the proposed rate as unreasonable. If the Cable Operator's most recent rate filing was based on the system that enables them to file up to once per quarter, the City may order refunds and prospective rate reductions following the expiration of the 60-day period, provided that it issues an accounting order prior to the expiration of that period. If the Cable Operator's most recent rate filing was based on the annual rate system, the City may order refunds and prospective rate reductions following the expiration of the 60-day period in accordance with FCC regulations. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.725 - Determination by City Manager. 
    In cases not involving cost-of-service showings, the City Manager shall consider all written material submitted by the Cable Operator and the public and determine if the proposed rates are within the limits established by the FCC regulations. The Cable Operator shall have the burden of proof to establish that its proposed rates are within the limits established by the FCC regulations. The City Manager may approve or disapprove the proposed rates, allow the proposed rates to take effect by operation of law by taking no action. or refer the matter to the City Council for hearing. The City Manager shall issue a written decision if he or she approves over opposition or disapproves the proposed rates in whole or in part. The City Manager is not required to issue a written decision if he or she approves a proposed rate which has not been opposed by any person or if he or she takes no action, in which event the proposed rate shall take effect upon expiration of the time period prescribed in the Section above. If the City Manager determines that the rates are unreasonable and do not comply with FCC regulations, the City Manager may prescribe reasonable rates as authorized by FCC regulations. If the City Manager determines that the Cable Operator's existing rates exceed the amounts permitted by FCC regulations, the City Manager may order the Cable Operator to refund the amounts overcharged to its subscribers to the extent permitted by the FCC regulations within 90 days of the order. The City Manager shall notify the City Council of any determination made concerning proposed rates. The determination of the City Manager shall be final. Notwithstanding the foregoing, within ten days after the determination by the City Manager or at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, whichever is later, any member of the City Council may call up the proposed rates for consideration by the City Council in accordance with the following Section. The proposed rates shall not take effect until the expiration of this period or, if called up by a Councilmember, pending determination by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.730 - Determination by City Council. 
    In cases involving a cost-of-service showing and in cases which are called up by a Councilmember in accordance with the foregoing Section, a hearing on the proposed rates shall be scheduled before the City Council upon submission of all required materials. The Cable Operator shall have the burden of proof to establish that its proposed rates are within the limits established by the FCC regulations. The City Council shall issue a written decision if it approves over opposition or disapproves the proposed rates in whole or in part. The City Council is not required to issue a written decision if it approves a proposed rate which has not been opposed by any person or if it takes no action, in which event the proposed rate shall take effect upon expiration of the time period prescribed in Section 5.36.720 above. If the City Council determines that the rates are unreasonable and do not comply with FCC regulations, the City Council may prescribe reasonable rates as authorized by FCC regulations. If the City Council determines that the Cable Operator's existing rates exceed the amounts permitted by FCC regulations, the City Council may order the Cable Operator to refund the amounts overcharged to its subscribers to the extent permitted by the FCC regulations within 90 days of such order. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.735 - Appeals. 
    The Cable Operator or any interested person may appeal any decision of the City Councilor the City Manager relating to compliance with Federal rate standards to the FCC in accordance with FCC regulations. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.740 - Complaints concerning premium service rates. 
    Upon receipt of more than one subscriber complaint made within 90 days after the effective date of an increased rate, the City Manager is authorized to file a complaint with the FCC challenging the reasonableness of the Cable Operator's rate for cable programming service, or the reasonableness of the Cable Operator's charges for installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of cable programming service. However, the City Manager shall not file a complaint with respect to cable programming services after March 31, 1999 unless the City is authorized to do so by federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
PART 3. - OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS 

5.36.750 - Prerequisites to operating an open video system. 
    Prior to operating an Open Video System, an Open Video System Operator shall elect to either obtain a cable television franchise pursuant to Part 2 above or to comply with this Part 3. No person or entity shall operate an Open Video System without first (a) submitting a written notice of its election; (b) complying with Article I above, (c) providing the City with a copy of its Federal Communications Commission certification as an Open Video System; and (d) completing negotiations with the City and otherwise complying with the public, educational and governmental access requirements contained in Section 5.36.755 below. If an Open Video System Operator fails to comply with any federal, state or City requirement, it shall immediately cease operations until such compliance occurs. This Part 3 shall not be deemed to authorize an Open Video System Operator to conduct any operations other than the provision of cable services. If an Open Video System Operator provides other telecommunications services, those Services shall comply with all applicable sections of this Code. Constructing or operating an Open Video System shall not be deemed to give any Open Video System Operator a vested right to continue to maintain such a system. In the event that federal law ever permits the City to require an Open Video System Operator to obtain a franchise or license, all Open Video System Operators shall immediately apply for such a franchise or license from the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.755 - Public, educational and governmental access. 
    Prior to operating an Open Video System, an Open Video System Operator shall negotiate with the City concerning public, educational and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities and equipment. These negotiations may include the local Cable Operator(s) if all parties so agree. If the City and the Open Video System Operator are unable to reach agreement, the Open Video System Operator must satisfy the same public, educational and government access obligations as the local Cable Operator(s) by connecting with the Cable Operator's public, educational and governmental access channel feeds and by sharing the Cable Operator's costs relating to such channels. The City Council may adopt a resolution governing the use of such channels and the implementation of the connection of the Open Video System with the cable system. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.760 - Fees. 
    All Open Video System Operators shall pay a fee to the City in an amount equal to five percent of the Open Video System Operator's gross revenues. The Open Video System Operator shall make fee payments quarterly on the first day of each calendar quarter. Fee payments shall be submitted together with documentation of the Open Video System Operator's gross revenues in such form as may be required by the City from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.765 - Compensation relating to non-cable telecommunications services. 
    All Open Video System Operators shall pay compensation to the City for use of public property in an amount equal to five percent of the Open Video System Operator's gross non-cable revenues. Payments shall be submitted to the City on the first day of each quarter of each calendar year together with documentation of the Open Video System Operator's gross non-cable revenues in such form as may be required by the City from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.770 - Fees on non-open video system operator revenues. 
    In consideration of the use of public property, any person other than a Open Video System Operator who provides Cable Service or any other telecommunications service over an Open Video System for which charges are assessed to subscribers but which are not received by an Open Video System Operator shall pay a fee to the City in an amount equal to five percent of that person's gross revenues and gross non-cable revenues. The Open Video System Operator whose Open Video System is used by such person shall collect the foregoing fee from such person no later than the tenth day prior to the close of each calendar quarter and shall remit the fee to the City no later than the first day of the following calendar quarter. If the Open Video System Operator fails to collect or remit all or part of this fee, the Cable Operator shall be directly liable to the City for payment of the uncollected or unremitted fee. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.775 - Audit. 
    Consistent with Section, the City shall have the right to inspect and audit all of the Open Video System Operator's books and records and those of its affiliates relevant to an accurate determination of the total amount of the Open Video System Operator's gross revenues and gross non-cable revenues. The Open Video System Operator shall make such records available to the City within 14 days of the City's request. Such records shall be available for inspection by the City at the Open Video System Operator's office within the City during normal business hours. Such records shall be retained by the Open Video System Operator for a period of at least three years. The City will bear the cost of any such audit; provided, however, that if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of three percent or more of the amount due, the Open Video System Operator shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs relating to the audit. Any additional amount due to the City as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the Open Video System Operator, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. If the Open Video System Operator believes the audit report is in error, it may send a written response to the City describing the error in lien of making the payment. If the City disagrees with the response, it shall notify the Open Video System Operator in writing, after which the Open Video System Operator shall pay the additional amount due within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
5.36.780 - Late payments. 
    In the event that the Open Video System Operator does not make any payments required by this Code on or before the date due, a late payment penalty shall accrue at a rate of one and one-half percent per month on the unpaid amount until paid. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
PART 4. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

5.36.800 - Telephone companies. 
    All telephone companies shall comply with all provisions of Part 1 above. All telephone companies shall obtain a franchise from the City pursuant to Part 6 below unless such companies are exempt from franchising requirements pursuant to state or federal law. A telephone company shall not be deemed exempt from the franchise requirement unless and until it provides documentation of such exemption to the satisfaction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
PART 5. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OPERATORS 

5.36.850 - Wireless Telecommunications System Operators. 
    All Wireless Telecommunications System Operators shall comply with all provisions of Part 1 above. All Wireless Telecommunications System Operators shall obtain a franchise from the City pursuant to Part 6 below unless such Companies are exempt from franchising requirements pursuant to state or federal law. A Wireless Telecommunications System Operator shall not be deemed exempt from the franchise requirement unless and until it provides documentation of such exemption to the satisfaction of the City. 
PART 6. - OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OPERATORS 

5.36.900 - Other Telecommunications System Operators. 
    All Telecommunications System Operators shall comply with all provisions of Part 1 above. All Telecommunications System Operators shall obtain a franchise from the City Pursuant to this Part 6 unless such Companies are exempt from franchising requirements pursuant to state or federal law. A Telecommunications System Operator shall not be deemed exempt from the franchising requirement of Part Article 6 unless and until it provides documentation of such exemption to the satisfaction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 3-19-02) 
Chapter 5.38 - FILMING PERMITS 

5.38.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set out in this Chapter. 
    "Charitable films" shall mean commercials, motion pictures, television, video tapes, or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos. 
    "Motion picture, television, still photograph" shall mean and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials. 
    "News media" shall mean the filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast by reporters, photographers or cameramen. 
(Ord. 681 §1, 1990). 
5.38.020 - Permits and exemptions. 
A.  Permit required. No person shall use any public or private property facility or residence for the purpose of taking commercial motion pictures or television pictures or commercial still photography without first applying for and receiving a permit from the Officer designated by the City. 
Exemptions: 
1.  News Media: The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest. 
2.  The filming or video taping of motion pictures solely for private-family use. 
3.  Charitable Films: Projects which qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. 681 §1, 1990) 
5.38.030 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  Change of Date: Upon the request of the applicant, the issuing authority shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued provided establish limitations are complied with in respect to time and location. 
B.  Rules: The designated City Officer is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the Council, governing the form, time and location of any film activity set forth within the City. He shall also provide for the issuance of permits. The rules and regulations shall be based upon the following criteria: 
1.  The health and safety of all persons; 
2.  Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected area; 
3.  The safety of property within the City; and 
4.  Traffic congestion at particular locations within the City. 
(Ord. 681 §1, 1990) 
5.38.040 - Applications and issuance. 
A.  Issuing Authority: The issuing authority shall be the City Manager or his designee. 
B.  Applications: The following information shall be included in the application: 
1.  The name of the owner, the address and telephone number of the place at which the activity is to be conducted; 
2.  The specific location at such address or place; 
3.  The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire; 
4.  A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity; 
5.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such filming activity. 
6.  The exact number of personnel to be involved; 
7.  Use of any animals or pyrotechnics; and 
8.  The exact amount/type of vehicles/equipment to be involved. 
C.  Use Fees: are required. 
D.  Reimbursement for Personnel: The production company shall reimburse the City for any personnel provided to the company (i.e., police, fire, traffic) for the purpose of assisting the production. 
(Ord. 681 §1, 1990) 
5.38.050 - Fee schedule. 
A.  Application and permit fee: $75.00. 
B.  Use of City personnel and equipment for traffic control, closure of streets, and any other assistance needed. A deposit may be required, based on activity, if actual cost cannot be determined at start of filming: Actual cost. 
(Ord. 681 §1, 1990) 
5.38.060 - Liability provisions. 
A.  Liability Insurance: Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount not exceeding $1,000,000.00 naming the City as a coinsured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage. The City officers and employees shall be named as additional insured. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days' written notice to the City. A copy of the certificate will remain on file. 
B.  Workers' Compensation Insurance: An applicant shall conform to all applicable Federal and State requirements for Workers' Compensation Insurance for all persons operating under a permit. 
C.  Faithful Performance Bond: To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (amount to be determined based on the activity) at the time application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the City, the bond may be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. 681 §1, 1990) 
5.38.070 - Violation. 
    If an applicant violates any provision of this Ordinance or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the City may cancel the permit. Violation of the terms and conditions of the film permit is considered a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 681 §1, 1990) 
Chapter 5.40 - FORTUNE TELLING 

5.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this Chapter to require the licensing and issuance of a permit as a condition for the practice of fortune telling in the City to reduce the risk of fraud and larceny to clients, and to set forth the standards for governing the issuance of the permits, rules and regulations under which such permits shall remain in force, the issuance of a license therefore, and providing a punishment for operation of a fortune telling establishment without a duly issued and valid permit and license. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the definitions respectfully ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  "Fortune telling" shall consist of foretelling any event or events which may occur in the future or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of cards, palmistry, astrology, crystal gazing, numerology, phrenology, clairvoyance, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy, magic or by any supernatural, mystic or occult means; or in locating or divining any treasure, mineral, lost or missing article, or person by such means; or in persuading, inducing or procuring any person to transfer, convey, donate, devise, bequeath, pledge, mortgage or deposit any money or property by such means; or to describe, expound or resolve any matter pertaining to business, finance, romance, bereavement, or good or bad fortune, by means, or pretending, assuming or undertaking to do any of the above mentioned things or to aid or assist any other person in so doing; or to make, sell or give away charms, potions, talismans or magic articles, or anything purporting to be such. 
B.  "Fortune teller" shall mean any person who advertises by sign, circular, handbill, newspaper, periodical, magazine or other means whatsoever the practice of fortune telling and/or occult arts, and shall include any person who advertises as a "psychic" or "spiritual reader" or "spiritual counselor" for the purpose of the practice of fortune telling and/or the occult arts; 
C.  "Fortune telling establishment" shall mean the premises, location or place advertised for or purported to be used for the practice of fortune telling and/or occult arts. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.030 - Permit required. 
A.  No person, association, partnership or corporation shall conduct, operate or advertise for an establishment in which the practice of fortune telling and occult arts is carried on for pay, compensation or gratuity without obtaining and maintaining in effect a permit as required in this Chapter. 
1.  No permittee hereunder shall employ any person who practices fortune telling and/or occult arts, or who offers to or solicits to perform fortune telling and occult arts, or who holds himself/herself out to be a fortune teller if said person does not hold a current, unrevoked permit as required by this Chapter. 
2.  No permit shall be issued to any person who is not 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.040 - Exemptions. 
    This Chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any person who conducts or participates in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, or clairvoyant from any bona fide church or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided further, that the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of said church or religious association; 
B.  Any person solely engaged in the exhibition of fortune telling at a theater hall or public place for the purpose of entertainment and amusement only; 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as exempting any person from the payment of any applicable business license fee which may be required to be paid by the licensing provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.050 - Permit application and renewal: Fees. 
    An application for a permit to practice fortune telling and occult arts shall be made to a duly authorized representative of the Chief of Police under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the Chief of Police. The application to practice fortune telling and occult arts shall be accompanied by an investigation filing fee as provided by resolution establishing fees and charges therefor by the City Council, plus the fee charged by Department of Justice for fingerprint processing. 
    Said fees are not refundable in the event such application is denied. 
    Each permit under this chapter shall expire on June 30 of the current year. An unrevoked permit may be renewed for one year on written application to the Chief of Police, made on or before May 15 of each year, accompanied by the required fees. Said application for renewal shall be made on a form provided by the Chief of Police. 
    The annual renewal application shall be accompanied by a renewal filing fee. Permits issued April, May or June of the current year shall expire June of the following year. 
    Fortune telling permit fees required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.060 - Application contents. 
    Any applicant for a permit under this chapter shall submit the following information under penalty of perjury: 
A.  The full name, present residence and telephone numbers of the applicant; 
B.  Address of the proposed location for the conduct of the profession, art or business; 
C.  Any and all maiden, fictitious or other names ever used by the applicant; 
D.  Prior residence and business addresses used by the applicant during the five year period preceding the date of the application; 
E.  The Social Security number and a California Driver's License or California Identification Card number or other satisfactory government-issued identification number of the applicant; 
F.  The applicant's height, weight, hair and eye color, and all distinguishing marks, scars or tattoos; 
G.  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for a period of five years preceding the date of application; 
H.  The name or names under which the applicant proposes to conduct said activity or practice and the business address of the premises where such practice is to be carried on in connection with a similar or other kind of business; 
I.  The name or names, both true or fictitious, and addresses of any and all persons, associations, partnerships or corporations holding an interest or involvement in said interest or involvement; 
J.  A statement of any and all criminal convictions, except minor traffic offenses not designated as a felony, including the nature thereof, where they occurred and the sentence therefore; 
K.  A list of fortune telling or similar licenses currently or previously held by the applicant and whether any such license had been revoked or suspended and the reason therefore; 
L.  A list of at least three character references unrelated to the applicant by blood or marriage, and known to the applicant for at least five years. The list shall include true and fictitious names and current addresses and telephone numbers of said character references; 
M.  Any additional information as needed by the Chief of Police to complete the investigation. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.070 - Approval by the Chief of Police. 
A.  At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay the fee charged by Department of Justice for fingerprint processing and the permit fee for processing the application and investigation. The Chief of Police or his/her authorized representative, shall conduct and complete an investigation of the statements made in the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police may approve or deny the application. The endorsement "approved" shall constitute a permit for the applicant upon payment of the business tax to the City as required by BMC. 
B.  In the event of such refusal (denial of permit), a copy of the application with reasons shall be sent to the applicant by means of certified mail. The applicant shall have seven calendar days from receipt of the City's certified letter to appeal the decision. In the event the certified letter is returned to the City unsigned, the appeal period shall be deemed to be 14 calendar days from postmark. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.080 - Denial of permit. 
    Upon the Chief of Police's review of the application, the Chief of Police may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information of the application, concealed a material fact or otherwise committed any fraud in the application. 
B.  The applicant has been convicted of a felony involving an offense against private property interest, such conviction being entered within the five years preceding the date of application. Such property offenses include, but the not limited to, larceny, false pretense, fraud, grand theft and embezzlement. 
C.  The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police that the reasons for such denial no longer exist. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.090 - Revocation. 
    The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit upon any grounds for which he/she may have refused the issuance thereof or upon conviction or upon a plea of guilty or non contendere for any violation of this chapter or the operation of the establishment does not comport with the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
A.  To revoke a permit the Chief of Police or his/her authorized representative, shall serve upon the holder thereof, a written notice that said license shall be revoked effective upon receipt of the notice in person, or five days after the mailing of said notice. 
B.  A revoked permit shall be immediately surrendered to the Chief of Police or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.100 - Hours permitted. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep open to the public or to conduct the activity and practices defined in this chapter on any day of the week between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.110 - Inspection. 
    The City's Police Chief, Fire Chief and Building Official and their authorized representatives, shall have the right to enter the fortune telling establishment from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable building, fire or electrical regulations and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.120 - Records. 
    Every person, association, partnership or corporation operating a fortune telling establishment under a permit as herein provided shall keep accurate business records. Said records shall be maintained and open for inspection for a period of three years and shall be kept on the premises of the fortune telling establishment. Failure to keep and maintain said records as provided in this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.130 - Hearing and appeal. 
A.  Prior to the revocation and suspension of any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a hearing shall be held by the Chief of Police. Written notice of the grounds for the hearing as well as its time and place shall be mailed to the permittee seven days in advance of the hearing. Within 24 hours after the conclusion of the hearing the Chief of Police shall mail written notice to the permittee of his decision. 
B.  The decision of the Chief of Police may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.40.130. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.140 - Appeal to the City Council. 
    An appeal may be taken to the City Council by any person aggrieved by an order of the Chief of Police concerning the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. The right of appeal is subject to the conditions and procedures set forth in this section: 
A.  Procedures-Time Limitations. An appeal to the City Council shall be made by filing a petition in triplicate with the City Clerk not later than 14 days from the decision of the Chief of Police or the mailing thereof, whichever is later. The petition shall set forth the grounds of appeal and the reasons why such appeal should be granted. Upon receipt of the petition, the City Clerk shall immediately forward a copy to the Chief of Police and within ten days following the filing of appeal the petition shall be placed on the agenda of the City Council. If the City Council will not have held a meeting within the aforesaid ten-day period, then the petition shall be received by the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Upon receipt of the petition, the City Council shall set the matter for hearing and give the appellant notice of a time and place for the hearing. The notice shall be given in person or by mail not later than ten days prior to the hearing. The hearing shall be held not later than 30 days following receipt of the petition by the City Council. 
B.  Action by City Council. In considering and ruling upon the appeal of the petitioner, the City Council shall judge the merits of the appeal based upon those grounds set forth in Sections 5.40.090 and 05.40.130 of this chapter. The City Council may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify any decision, determination, or requirement of the Chief of Police and may make such decisions or determinations or impose such conditions as the facts warrant, and may order that a permit be granted, suspended, or revoked in accordance with their ruling. The decisions of the City Council shall be final. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. 
C.  Stay or Order. The filing of an appeal to the City Council stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from until determination of the appeal as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.150 - Display of permit and ordinance. 
    Every person to whom or for whom a permit shall have been granted shall display the permit and shall post and continually keep posted a copy of the ordinance adopting this chapter in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises where fortune telling is performed. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.160 - Sale or transfer. 
    Upon sale or transfer of a fortune telling establishment, the permit and license therefore shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
5.40.170 - Civil remedies and criminal penalties. 
    In the event of a violation of this Chapter: 
A.  In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17.200 et seq. or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040; or 
B.  The City Attorney may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this Chapter; or 
C.  A violation of any provision of this Chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor punishable under Section 1.24.110 of this Code or pursuant to applicable state law; or 
(Ord. 1026, 10/2012) 
Chapter 5.44 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

5.44.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to require the licensing and issuance of a permit as a condition for the conduct of massage services and massage establishments in the City, and to set forth the standards for governing the issuance of the permits, rules and regulations under which such permits shall remain in force, the issuance of a license therefor, and providing a punishment for operation of a massage establishment or rendering of massage services without a duly issued and valid permit and license. 
(Ord. 438 §1, 1972) 
5.44.020 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
1.  "City Health Officer" means the Health Officer of the county or his authorized representative. 
2.  "Massage" means a method of exerting pressure on or friction against, stroking or kneading the body by manual or mechanical means. 
3.  "Massage establishment" means any establishment wherein massage is given, engaged in or carried on or permitted to be given, engaged in or carried on and any business of giving baths of any kind, nature or sort whatsoever where the body is rubbed or there is any manipulation of the body or similar procedures given. 
4.  "Masseur" means any person who engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. Masseur shall also include masseuse, as the use of the masculine gender shall include in all case the feminine gender as well. 
5.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or association. 
B.  The definitions set out in subsection A of this section shall not include hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria, persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state, or persons working under the direction of any such persons in any such establishment. 
(Ord. 438 §2, 1972) 
5.44.030 - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises in the City, the operation of a massage establishment as defined in this chapter without first having obtained a permit from the Police Department issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 438 §3, 1972) 
5.44.040 - Filing and fee provisions. 
    Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application with the Chief of Police upon a form provided by the Chief of Police, which application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as provided by resolution establishing fees and charges therefor by the City Council. 
(Ord. 438 §4, 1972) 
5.44.050 - Application for permit for massage establishment. 
    The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of massage to be administered, the proposed place of business and facilities therefor, the name and address of each applicant, and in addition to the foregoing, the applicant for a permit shall furnish the following information: 
A.  The social security number of the applicant, 
B.  The two previous business and residence addresses immediately prior to the present or proposed business address of the applicant, 
C.  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years, 
D.  Written statements of at least three bona fide residents of the City that the applicant is of good moral character, 
E.  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and sex, 
F.  Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches, 
G.  Business occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, 
H.  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person in previously operating in this City or another City or state under license has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of applicant subsequent to such action or suspension or revocation, 
I.  All criminal convictions and the reasons therefor; 
J.  A certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has within 30 days immediately prior thereto been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease, 
K.  The applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage technicians is taught, the term "state approved school" means and includes any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage which has been certified by the State of California Department of Education, Bureau of School Approvals. The Chief of Police shall have the right to confirm the fact that the applicant has actually attended classes in a state approved school; 
L.  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
M.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to deny to the Chief of Police the right to take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant nor shall anything contained in this chapter be construed to deny the right of the Chief of Police to confirm the physical description of the applicant; 
N.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of Incorporation. The names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each stock holder owning more than ten percent of the capital stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership or association, the application shall set forth the name or residence addresses of each of the partners and/or associates including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. A corporation, partnership or association shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of subsection K of this section if the managing director or partner or managing employee of the business has the required diploma or certificate of graduation. 
(Ord. 438 §5, 1972) 
5.44.060 - Masseur permit. 
    Any person who engages in the practice of massage as defined in this chapter shall file an application with the Chief of Police upon a form provided by the Chief of Police and shall pay an investigation fee as provided in the resolution establishing fees and charges located in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 438 §6, 1972) 
5.44.070 - Application form for masseur. 
    The application for a masseur permit shall contain the following: 
A.  Name and residence address; 
B.  Social security number and driver's license number; 
C.  Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, if any, date of birth, and sex; 
D.  Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches; 
E.  Written evidence that the applicant is over the age of 18 years (copy of birth certificate); 
F.  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
G.  Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this section has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which the conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, and then sentence imposed as a result of such conviction; 
H.  The Chief of Police shall have the right to take fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant with the right of the Chief of Police to confirm the information submitted; 
I.  The applicant must have a diploma or certificate of graduation from a state approved school wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught. The term "state approved school" means and includes any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage which has been certified by the State of California, Department of Education, Bureau of School Approvals. The Chief of Police shall have a right to confirm the fact that the applicant has actually attended classes in a state approved school. 
J.  Every application for a permit shall be verified by the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. 438 §7, 1972) 
5.44.080 - Facilities necessary. 
    No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection conducted pursuant to Section 5.44.090 reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
A.  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, saunas, steam baths and showers shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code of the City; 
B.  Lighting shall be provided which is not less than the minimum required by the Uniform Building Code of the City. In addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron; 
C.  Ventilation shall be provided which is not less than the minimum required by the Uniform Building Code of the City; 
D.  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided; 
E.  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times; 
F.  Closed cabinets shall be provided which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen; 
G.  In any establishment in which massage services are rendered only to members of the same sex at any one time, such persons of the same sex may be placed in a single separate room or the operators of the massage establishment may elect to place, such persons of the same' sex in separate enclosed rooms or booths having adequate ventilation to an area outside the room or booth while massage services are being performed; 
H.  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker, and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one wash basin shall be provided by every massage establishment; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate massage room or rooms/ separate dressing and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
I.  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bath tubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities of the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use; 
J.  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment or each patron receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted; 
K.  A minimum of one separate wash basin shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees of any such establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be permanently installed dispensers. 
(Ord. 438 §8, 1972) 
5.44.090 - License applicant investigation. 
    The Chief of Police, upon receiving an application for a massage establishment permit, shall refer the application to the City Building Inspector, the City Fire Department and the City Planning Department, which department shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted as a massage establishment and shall make separate written recommendations to the Chief of Police concerning compliance with the respective requirements within 14 days after receipt of the aforementioned approval. 
(Ord. 438 §9 1972) 
5.44.100 - Approval by City Health Officer. 
    The Chief of Police shall also submit a copy of the application to the City Health Officer, who shall thereupon conduct an investigation into the personal health and health history of the applicant, and shall require proof that the applicant is free from all communicable diseases. The applicant shall also furnish an acceptable report of a chest X-ray showing freedom from tuberculosis. The Health Officer may also, in his discretion, order a physical examination of any person engaged in the massage practice. Before any license or permit shall issue under this chapter, the Health Officer shall first sign his approval to the application therefor and return the form to the Chief of Police. Should the Health Officer fail to approve the license or permit application, he shall, with the return application form, set forth fully in writing his reason therefor based on the following grounds: 
A.  That the applicant has communicable or venereal disease; or 
B.  That the applicant's personal health history would make him poor risk in the massage practice; or 
C.  That the premises fail to meet the sanitation standards required by this chapter; or 
D.  That the applicant is currently in violation of any or some health regulation contained in the ordinance codified in this chapter or other ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. 438 §10, 1972) 
5.44.110 - Time within which to grant or deny permit. 
A.  Within 30 days after the filing of an application for a permit, the City Clerk shall review the application together with the reports and the recommendations of the Police Chief, Fire Chief, City Planning Commission and Health Officer and shall grant the permit or shall notify the applicant that he proposes to deny the application. Notice thereof shall be in writing and sent by mail postage prepaid to the applicant's mailing address as set forth in the application. In the event of denial, the applicant may appeal to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  For the purpose of permitting the applicant to correct minor defects, on request of the applicant and his assurance that the matters objected to will be corrected, the City Clerk may extend the time within which he is otherwise required to act on the permit application for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. 438 § 11, 1972) 
5.44.120 - Application fee. 
    At the time of filing an application for a permit or renewal thereof, the applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the following: 
A.  For each initial permit, the sum of $100.00 plus $25.00 for each person other than an individual applicant to be employed by the massage establishment; 
B.  For each renewal permit, the sum of $50.00 plus $25.00 for each person other than an individual applicant to be employed by the massage establishment; 
C.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall constitute a waiver of the requirements of Division I of this title requiring the issuance and possession of a business license; 
D.  Subject to revocation or suspension, the permit shall expire on that date set forth as the expiration date on the permittee's business license issued pursuant to Division I of this title. The permit may be renewed annually upon application accompanied by the renewal fee. Applications for renewal shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  All permits issued under this chapter are nontransferable; however, a change of location of a massage establishment may be permitted provided all ordinances and regulations of the City are complied with and provided a change of location fee of $50.00 is paid to the City. 
(Ord. 438 §12, 1972) 
5.44.130 - Issuance of permit. 
    The Chief of Police shall issue a massage establishment and/or masseur permit if all of the provisions of this chapter have been met, unless he finds: 
A.  That the operations as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable ordinances and laws including but not limited to the City's building, health, zoning and fire ordinances or regulations adopted by the City Health Officer; 
B.  That the applicant and/or any other person who will be directly engaged in the management, operation or employ as a masseur in the operation of the applicant's establishment or otherwise, has been convicted of: 
1.  An offense involving conduct which requires registration pursuant to Section 290 of the Penal Code of the state, 
2.  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that constitutes a felony, 
3.  An offense involving sexual misconduct with children, 
4.  An offense as defined under Sections 311 through 311.7, 647(a), 647(b), 647a, 647b, 314, 315, 316, or 318 of the Penal Code of the state; 
C.  If it reasonably appears that the location of the business after review of the reports required in Section 5.44.090 is not a suitable place in which to conduct or maintain such business or calling, or the applicant requesting such permit does not want the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. 438 §13, 1972) 
5.44.140 - Masseur permit required. 
    No operator of a massage establishment as defined in this chapter shall employ any masseur on the premises unless and until such person has been granted a masseur permit by the Chief of Police as provided in this chapter. The operator of such establishment must maintain a register of all persons so employed and their permit number, which register shall be available for inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 438 §14, 1972) 
5.44.150 - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
    Any permit issued for a massage establishment or any masseur permit may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police after a hearing conducted pursuant to the next succeeding section on any of the following grounds: 
A.  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  Failure or refusal to permit any duly authorized officer of the City to inspect the premises or the operations therein; 
C.  Immoral conduct or activities at the permittee's place of business; 
D.  Operation, management or maintenance of permittee's place of business without regard for public health or the health of patrons or customers or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene; 
E.  Conviction of any crime requiring registration under Section 290 of the Penal Code of the state; 
F.  Violation of Sections 311 through 311.7, 647(a), 647 (b), 647a, 647b, 650 1/2, 314, 315, 316 or 318 of the Penal Code of the state. 
(Ord. 438 §15, 1972) 
5.44.160 - Hearing and appeal. 
A.  Prior to the revocation and suspension of any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a hearing shall be held by the Chief of Police. Written notice of the grounds for the hearing as well as its time and place shall be mailed to the permittee seven days in advance of the hearing. Within 24 hours after the conclusion of the hearing the Chief of Police shall mail written notice to the permittee of his decision. 
B.  The decision of the Chief of Police may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.44.170. 
(Ord. 438 §16, 1972) 
5.44.170 - Appeal to the City Council. 
    An appeal may be taken to the City Council by any person aggrieved by an order of the Chief of Police concerning the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. The right of appeal is subject to the conditions and procedures set forth in this section: 
A.  Procedures-Time Limitations. An appeal to the City Council shall be made by filing a petition in triplicate with the City Clerk not later than ten days from the decision of the Chief of Police or the mailing thereof, whichever is later. The petition shall set forth the grounds of appeal and the reasons why such appeal should be granted. Upon receipt of the petition, the City Clerk shall immediately forward a copy to the Chief of Police and within ten days following the filing of appeal the petition shall be placed on the agenda of the City Council. If the City Council will not have held a meeting within the aforesaid ten-day period, then the petition shall be received by the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Upon receipt of the petition, the City Council shall set the matter for hearing and give the appellant notice of a time and place for the hearing. The notice shall be given in person or by mail not later than ten days prior to the hearing. The hearing shall be held not later than 30 days following receipt of the petition by the City Council. 
B.  Action by City Council. In considering and ruling upon the appeal of the petitioner, the City Council shall judge the merits of the appeal based upon those grounds set forth in Sections 5.44.130 and 5.44.150 of this chapter. The City Council may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify any decision, determination, or requirement of the Chief of Police and may make such decisions or determinations or impose such conditions as the facts warrant, and may order that a permit be granted, suspended, or revoked in accordance with their ruling. The decisions of the City Council shall be final. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. 
C.  Stay or Order. The filing of an appeal to the City Council stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from until determination of the appeal as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 438 §17, 1972) 
5.44.180 - Display of permit and ordinance. 
    Every person to whom or for whom a permit shall have been granted shall display the permit and shall post and continually keep posted a copy of the ordinance adopting this chapter in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises where the massage, bath or treatment is given. 
(Ord. 438 §18, 1972) 
5.44.190 - Sale or transfer. 
    Upon sale or transfer of a massage establishment, the permit and license therefor shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 438 §19, 1972) 
5.44.200 - Name and place of business. 
A.  No person granted a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any name or conduct his business under any designation not specified in his permit. 
B.  Permittees shall notify the Police Department of any changes in name or address of home or business. In case of any change of location or extension of the place of the business, inspection thereof shall be made as required in this chapter before use of the same for the purpose of the business and an amended permit within 30 days shall be issued, if indicated, in order to show clearly the address or place of such new location or extension. No fee shall be charged either for such inspection or for such amended permit. 
(Ord. 438 §20, 1972) 
5.44.210 - Daily register. 
    Every person who engages in or conducts a massage establishment as defined in this chapter shall keep a daily register, approved in form by the Police Department, of all patrons, the hour of patron's arrival, the room or cubicle assigned to the patron, if any, and masseur who massaged the patron. The daily register shall at all times during business hours be subject to inspection by the Health Officer and by the Police Department and shall be kept on file for one year. 
(Ord. 438 §21, 1972) 
5.44.220 - Inspections. 
    The Police Department and the Health Officer shall from time to time make an inspection of each massage establishment in the City for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 438 §22, 1972) 
5.44.230 - Unlawful conduct. 
    It is unlawful for any person to massage any other person, or give or administer any bath or baths, or to give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this chapter which would violate the provisions of Section 5.44.150. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of the permit granted under this chapter. 
(Ord. 438 §23, 1972) 
5.44.240 - Employees. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the permit for the massage establishment or the employer of any such persons purporting to act as masseurs, to insure that each person employed as ~ masseur shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter. It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. 438 §24, 1972) 
5.44.250 - Applicability to existing business. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to persons now engaged in the business regulated in this chapter. Existing businesses of the kind referred to in this chapter shall conform with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 438 §25, 1972) 
5.44.260 - Time limit for filing application for permit. 
    Persons now engaged in the business referred to in this chapter and in Section 5.44.250, as an operator of a massage establishment shall file for the permit required by Section 5.44.030 within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; failure to do so shall make continued operation of the place of business a violation of Section 5.44.280. 
(Ord. 438 §26, 1972) 
5.44.270 - Rules and regulations. 
    The Chief of Police may make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations in connection with enforcement functions not in conflict with, but to carry out, the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 438 §27, 1972) 
5.44.280 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this chapter, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee, or operator, or whether acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment or room who does or practices any of the other things or acts mentioned in this chapter without first obtaining a permit and paying for a license to do so from the City or violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge or in control of a massage establishment who knowingly employs a person performing as a masseur as defined in this chapter who is not in possession of a valid permit or who allows such an employee to perform, operate, or practice within such a place of business is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction such person shall be punished by the imposition of a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Revocation of a license or permit shall not be a defense against prosecution. 
(Ord. 438 §28, 1972) 
Chapter 5.48 - WRECKING YARDS AND JUNKYARDS 

5.48.010 - Permit-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to conduct the business of wrecking automobiles or other equipment or the business of dealing in junk, without first obtaining a permit from the City Council. 
(Ord. 220 §1, 1944) 
5.48.020 - Permit-Application. 
    The application for a permit to operate such business shall be made in writing to the City Council in such form as the City Council shall direct or require, and which application among other things shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that he will conform with and abide by all regulations and requirements for the conducting of the business that the City Council may impose or promulgate for the conducting and operation of that type of business, including the erection and maintenance of a solid fence not less than six feet high around the premises on which such business is conducted sufficient to keep the wrecked automobiles and junk from the view of the public and neighbors, and upon the violation of the agreement that the permit may be revoked. 
(Ord. 220 §2, 1944) 
5.48.030 - Permit-Conditions for revocation. 
    The City Council may impose in any permit issued conditions for the manner of conducting the business, and promote regulations and requirements from time to time, which, if violated by any permittee, shall be sufficient ground for revocation of such permit. 
(Ord. 220 §3, 1944) 
5.48.040 - Enclosure within building or fence required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct an auto wrecking business or junk business in the City, except enclosed in a building, unless the premises are surrounded by a solid fence not less than six feet high sufficient to keep the wrecked automobiles and junk of the business from view of the public and neighbors. 
(Ord. 220 §4, 1944) 
5.48.050 - Hearing-Notice-Proceedings. 
    It the event that the holder of the permit conducting either of the businesses conducts or carries on such business in an unlawful manner, such permit shall be revoked after hearing before the City Council. Notice of hearing shall be served on the permittee by registered mail at the address shown in the permit, which notice shall set forth the date and place where such hearing shall be held before the council, and upon such hearing if the council finds that the holder of such permit has violated any law or regulation, such permit shall be revoked. 
(Ord. 220 §5, 1944) 
5.48.060 - Refusal to issue permit under certain conditions. 
    The council may refuse to issue a permit to any applicant if it finds that the issuance of such permit will be detrimental to the public interest, health or safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 220 §6, 1944) 
5.48.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    The violation of any provision of this Chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by fine not exceeding $250.00, or imprisonment not to exceed three months or both for each day such violation occurs. 
(Ord. 220, §7, 1944) 
Chapter 5.51 - ROTATIONAL NON-CONSENSUAL TOWING SERVICES 

5.51.010 - Purpose. 
(A)  The purpose of this chapter is to establish towing regulations to govern the provisions of non-consensual towing services to the City's Police Department, consistent with state and federal laws, as well as the public health, safety and welfare. A further purpose is to insure that the best possible towing operators are selected to participate in the City's rotational tow program to assist the Police Department in conducting efficient police investigations and provide the citizens of Beaumont with prompt, safe and comprehensive towing services. 
(B)  These regulations are not intended to govern situations where towing has been requested by vehicle owners or private property owners, except as may be permitted by law. Instead, these regulations, along with the rules and specifications to be promulgated by the Police Chief in conjunction with this chapter, are intended to provide a fair and objective method of selecting towing operators from among qualified towing companies to insure that selected towing operators and tow drivers provide the Police Department and the public with prompt, safe, reliable and responsive towing services using quality towing technology and vehicle towing and storage safety. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context of a particular provision otherwise requires, the definitions provided in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
(A)  "Authorized towing contractor" shall mean a towing company that provides non-consensual towing service to the City pursuant to a towing service agreement. 
(B)  "Business license" shall mean a license issued by the City's Finance Department upon payment of a tax by an authorized towing contractor selected to provide nonconsensual towing services to the City's Police Department pursuant to this chapter. 
(C)  "City" shall mean the City of Beaumont. 
(D)  "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City of Beaumont or his or her designee. 
(E)  "Non-consensual towing service" shall mean towing services lawfully ordered or requested by an employee of the City's Police Department or other City department who is duly authorized by law to remove, impound or store vehicles. 
(F)  "Police Chief" shall mean the Chief of Police of the City of Beaumont or his or her designee. 
(G)  "Police Department" shall mean the Beaumont Police Department. 
(H)  "Rotation list" shall mean the City's list of authorized towing contractors that have executed a towing service agreement with the City and may be called upon by the Police Department to provide non-consensual towing service, as needed, on a rotational, call-by-call basis. 
(I)  "Rules and specifications" shall mean the City's Rules and Specifications for Towing Services and Vehicle Storage Facilities promulgated by the Police Chief, as further described in Section 5.51.040. 
(J)  "Tow driver" shall mean the driver of a tow vehicle used for providing non-consensual towing services to the City. 
(K)  "Tow vehicle" shall mean a motor vehicle owned by an authorized towing contractor, which has been altered or designed or equipped for and exclusively used in the business of towing vehicles by means of a crane, tow bar, tow line, dolly or a roll-back carrier or is otherwise used to render emergency assistance to disabled and other vehicles. 
(L)  "Towing company" shall mean a company that provides towing services and the owner(s) and/or managing employee(s) of said company. 
(M)  "Towing service" shall mean roadside assistance, as well as the removal, towing, storing, or related services for a vehicle. Towing service shall include the removal, transport, and disposal all debris and fluids, including oil and gasoline, in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations concerning hazardous materials. 
(N)  "Towing service agreement" shall mean the agreement described in Section 5.51.080 that each authorized towing contractor selected to provide non-consensual towing services to the City is required to execute pursuant to this chapter. 
(O)  "Vehicle storage facility" shall mean a garage, parking lot, storage lot, or any type of facility where vehicles are stored. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.030 - Non-consensual towing without City contract-Prohibited. 
    No person, including, without limitation, a towing company shall perform or provide non-consensual towing services in the City unless the person has entered into a towing service agreement with the City to perform or provide such services. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.040 - Rules and specifications. 
    The Police Chief shall promulgate written rules and specifications for non-consensual towing services, authorized towing contractors, tow drivers and vehicle storage facilities. The rules and specifications may be modified from time to time as deemed appropriate by the Police Chief. The rules and specifications shall include reasonable provisions respecting the character, extent, quality and standards governing non-consensual towing services and vehicle storage facilities that are provided and used by the authorized towing contractors. The rules and specifications may also require the payment of fees in an amount established by resolution of the City Council to cover the City's costs associated with the implementation of this chapter, including, without limitation, the review of proposals submitted by towing companies, background checks and fingerprinting, inspection of a towing company's vehicles, equipment and facilities and audits of a towing company's records. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.050 - Selection of number of authorized towing contractors. 
(A)  Timing. At least every five years, the Police Chief shall determine the number of authorized towing contractors needed to provide non-consensual towing services to the City. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the Police Chief may review the number of authorized towing contractors needed to provide non-consensual towing services to the City more frequently than every five years and may make a determination that fewer or additional authorized towing contractors are needed. 
(B)  Criteria. The Police Chief's determination shall be based upon the appropriate number of authorized towing contractors that may be required by the public convenience and necessity and for the efficient operation of the Police Department. In determining the required number of authorized towing contractors, the Police Chief shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The operational needs of the Police Department; 
(2)  The population of the City; 
(3)  The current land area of the City; 
(4)  The number of current authorized towing contractors and their average response times; 
(5)  The administrative burdens created by the number of authorized towing contractors to be included on the rotation list; and 
(6)  Other relevant, objective factors as determined by the Police Chief. 
(C)  Determination by Police Chief. The Police Chief's determination shall be made in writing and shall include the number of authorized towing contractors to be selected and a brief statement as to reasons for the Police Chief's determination. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the Police Chief may also determine that the current number of authorized towing contractors is sufficient to serve the City for an additional period of time to be determined by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief determines that the current number of authorized towing contractors is sufficient or that fewer authorized towing contractors are needed, the Police Chief is not required to complete the request for proposal process set forth in Section 5.51.060 and may extend the existing towing service agreements of all or some of the current authorized towing contractors. 
(D)  Notice. The Police Chief's written determination shall be attached to the rules and specifications and shall be posted for a period of ten days in the same manner that City meeting agendas are posted. 
(E)  Appeal to City Manager. Within ten calendar days of such determination and posting, any interested person may submit a letter to the City Clerk requesting that the City Manager review the Police Chief's determination regarding the number of authorized towing contractors to be selected. The letter shall include information demonstrating why the public convenience and necessity require selecting additional or fewer authorized towing contractors, and shall be based upon the factors contained in division (B) above. Within 30 calendar days of receipt of the letter, the matter shall be set for an appeal hearing before the City Manager. The City Manager, in his sole discretion, may refer such appeal hearing and decision to an impartial hearing officer, provided the hearing officer follows all provisions of this chapter for the conduct of the hearing. All existing authorized towing contractors shall be notified by letter at least five days prior to any such hearing. No change in the number of authorized towing contractors shall be implemented until the City Manager or hearing officer have heard the appeal and rendered a decision. The decision of the City Manager or hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be final. 
(F)  Appeal Criteria. In determining whether to uphold the Police Chief's determination, the City Manager or hearing officer shall consider the factors contained in division (A) above. 
(G)  Change in Numbers at Other Times. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Police Chief, City Manager or hearing officer from determining at any time that the public convenience and necessity require the selection of additional authorized towing contractors or the extension of existing towing service agreements between the City and current authorized towing contractors, upon finding that circumstances and conditions exist that necessitate the selection of additional authorized towing contractors or the extension of existing towing service agreements for the efficient operations of the Police Department. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.060 - Selection of authorized towing contractors. 
(A)  Request for Proposals. Unless a determination has been made pursuant to Section 5.51.050(C) that the current number of authorized towing contractors is sufficient or that fewer authorized towing contractors are needed and thus the towing service agreements with some or all of the existing authorized towing contractors are extended, once the Police Chief, or the City Manager or hearing officer in the case of an appeal, has determined the appropriate number of authorized towing contractors needed to provide non-consensual towing services to the City, the Police Chief shall prepare and advertise a request for proposals for qualified towing companies to perform and provide non-consensual towing services to the City. The content of the request for proposals, the process for selecting qualified towing companies and the process for awarding a towing service agreement to qualified towing companies shall be set forth in the rules and specifications. The Police Chief may select one or more qualified towing companies as authorized towing contractors in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rules and specifications. 
(B)  Appeal to City Manager. The Police Chief's decision with respect to the selection of one or more authorized towing contractors may be appealed in writing to the City Manager within ten calendar days of the decision. The appeal shall contain a statement of the reasons for the appeal. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the City Manager shall review the statement of reasons contained in the appeal and hold an appeal hearing to determine whether the Police Chief's decision comports with all requirements for selection contained in the rules and specifications. The City Manager, in his sole discretion, may refer such appeal hearing and decision to an impartial hearing officer, provided the hearing officer follows all provisions of this chapter for the conduct of such hearing. All existing authorized towing contractors shall be notified by letter at least five days prior to any such hearing. No selection of authorized towing contractors shall be implemented until the City Manager or hearing officer have heard the appeal and rendered a decision. The City Manager or hearing officer shall render a written decision within ten calendar days of the receipt of an appeal. The City Manager's or hearing officer's decision shall be in writing and shall be final. 
(C)  Commencement of Services. All towing companies selected to be authorized towing contractors shall assume such duties on January 1 of the year following the year in which they are selected, or as otherwise determined by the Police Chief and set forth in the towing service agreement. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.070 - Rotation list. 
    All authorized towing contractors shall abide by the towing rotation policy section of the rules and specifications. The rotation list may be amended from time to time as part of the Police Chief's promulgation or modification of the rules and specifications. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.080 - Execution of towing service agreement. 
(A)  Form of Agreement; Execution. Any towing company selected to be an authorized towing contractor shall enter into a towing service agreement with the City. The towing service agreement shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and shall be attached to any request for proposals issued pursuant to Section 5.51.060. Each authorized towing contractor shall execute the towing service agreement, in the form approved by the City Attorney within 30 calendar days after selection as an authorized towing contractor. By submitting a proposal, each towing company shall be deemed to have agreed to execute the towing service agreement in the form attached to the request for proposals. The Police Chief is authorized to execute towing service agreements on behalf of the City. 
(B)  Terms of Agreement. The towing service agreement shall incorporate the terms and conditions of this chapter and the rules and specifications, and shall include, without limitation, at least the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum requirements and performance standards for tow vehicles and other equipment, vehicle storage facilities, tow drivers and other personnel, and non-consensual towing services. 
(2)  Procedures for handling and protecting vehicles in the authorized towing contractor's care, custody or control. 
(3)  Conditions for releasing vehicles. 
(4)  A provision requiring the authorized towing contractor to defend, indemnify, and hold the City harmless of any liability arising from the alleged acts, errors or omissions of the authorized towing contractor in connection with the non-consensual towing services or the towing service agreement. 
(5)  Minimum insurance coverages and amounts, satisfactory to the City's risk manager. 
(6)  The term of the agreement and grounds for its suspension, termination or cancellation. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter or in the rules and specifications, the Police Chief shall have the right to terminate any authorized towing contractor at any time and without cause by giving written notice before the effective date of such termination. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.090 - Authority for City to provide its own non-consensual towing services and vehicle storage facilities. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict or prohibit the City from conducting or providing its own non-consensual towing service or maintaining its own vehicle storage facilities, either in lieu of, or in addition to, any non-consensual towing services provided by an authorized towing contractor pursuant to this chapter, the rules and specifications or a towing service agreement. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
5.51.100 - Penalties. 
    Any person, including, but not limited to, any authorized towing contractor, tow driver or towing company who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, any authorized towing contractor or tow driver that violates any provision of the rules and specifications shall be subject to the suspension and termination provisions contained in the towing services agreement and/or the rules and specifications. 
( Ord. No. 1078, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 5.52 - PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS 

5.52.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Private patrol operator" , or "operator of a private patrol service" , is a person who agrees to furnish, or furnishes a watchman, guard, patrolperson or other person to protect persons or property, or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation, or concealment of any goods, wares, merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers or property of any kind; or performs the service of a watchman, guard, patrolman, or other person, for any of these purposes. 
B.  "Security guard" or "security officer" is an employee of a private patrol operator, or an employee of a lawful business who performs the functions as described in Subdivision A above, on or about the premises owned or controlled by the customer of the private patrol operator or by the guard's employer or in the company of persons being protected. 
C.  "Street patrolperson" is a security guard or security officer employed by a private patrol operator who performs the functions described in subdivision A above, by street patrol service utilizing foot patrol, motor patrol, or other means of transportation in public areas, streets or public thoroughfares in order to serve multiple customers. 
(Ord. 946) 
5.52.020 - Mandatory registration. 
    Every private patrol operator or operator of private patrol service within the City shall register with the City Police Department. Such registration shall include full information as to the identity of the private patrol operator and the identity of each security guard, security officer and/or street patrolpersons employed by such operator. The City reserves the right to refuse registration to any person of bad moral character. In addition to such registration, private patrol operators and their employees shall file a copy of their state identification card(s) with the Police Department. 
(Ord. 946) 
5.52.030 - Permitted uniforms, badges and vehicle markings. 
A.  Uniform. Private patrol operators and employees thereof shall restrict the colors and markings of their uniforms to be distinctly different from those of City Police and Fire Personnel, Riverside County Sheriff Department and Fire Personnel, and California Highway Patrol personnel. Thus, for example, dark blue, black, or tan and green are not permitted colors and markings. The use of the word "Police" on any uniform item, by any private patrol operator is prohibited. 
B.  Badges and Patches. Badges or cap pieces and shoulder patches worn or displayed by private patrol operator and their employees shall not resemble that of Police or Fire personnel in any manner including, without limitation, shields, whether oval or eagle, and stars. Shoulder patches, cap pieces, and badges shall include the word "Private" in distinctive white lettering on a contrasting background. The use of the word "Police" on any badge or patch is prohibited. 
C.  Vehicles. All automobiles operated by private patrol operators and their employees shall not resemble that of a City Police vehicle as specified in the California Vehicle Code. Color schemes shall not include black or white variations. Private vehicles shall clearly display the word "Private" in not less than four-inch tall capital letters on all sides of each vehicle. Nor shall such vehicles be equipped with any after-market lighting device other than rear flashing amber lights; strobe lights and wig-wags are not permitted although spotlights may be used. The use of the word "Police" on any vehicle is prohibited. 
(Ord. 946) 
5.52.040 - Violations; enforcement. 
A.  Infraction. Any person engaging in business as a private patrol operator who is not licensed by the State of California is guilty of an infraction and is punishable by a fine of $1,000.00. No portion of the fine may be suspended by Court unless as a condition of that suspension the defendant is required to submit proof of a current valid license for the profession of private patrol operator which was the basis for his or her conviction. 
B.  Administrative Action. In the event any provision of this chapter is violated, the Chief of Police may file a complaint with the Director of Consumer Affairs of the State of California for the purpose of seeking a suspension or revocation of the private patrol operator's license. 
(Ord. 946) 
5.52.050 - Business license required. 
    In addition to the license required by the State of California, every private patrol operator shall annually obtain a business license from the City. 
(Ord. 946) 
Chapter 5.60 - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

5.60.010 - Legislative purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate adult oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor the effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 12-8-98) 
5.60.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
    "Adult-oriented businesses" means anyone of the following: 
(1)  Adult arcade. The term "adult arcade" as used in this Chapter, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassette, slides or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more, being shown at any given time, of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area. 
(2)  Adult bookstore. The term "adult bookstore" as used in this Chapter, is an establishment that has 30 percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, records, or other forms visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult cabaret. The term "adult cabaret" as used in this Chapter, means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (i) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (ii) which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude; and/or (iii) shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more, being shown at any given time, of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult hotel/motel. The term "adult hotel/motel" as used in this Chapter, means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, (i) provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, film, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and (ii) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period; or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater. The term" adult motion picture theater" as used in this Chapter, is a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes slides, or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and 30 percent or more, being shown at any given time, of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult theater. The term "adult theater" as used in this Chapter, means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
(7)  Modeling studio. The term "modeling studio" as used in this Chapter, means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio" does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. "Modeling studio" further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available "specified sexual activities". 
    "Adult-oriented business operator." Adult-oriented business operator (hereinafter "operator") means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof. 
    "Adult material." The term "adult material" as used in this Chapter means books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, records, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. 
    "Applicant." A person who is required to file an application for a permit under this Chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business. 
    "Bar." For the purposes of this Chapter, a bar is defined as any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
    "Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon." As used in this Chapter, the term "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal. App. 3-151 (1981). 
    "Figure model." "Figure model" means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted. 
    "Health Officer." The Health Officer of the City of Beaumont or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    "Nudity or state of nudity." "Nudity or state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or human female genitals, public area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the male genitals in a discernible turgid state. 
    "Operate an adult-oriented business." As used in this Chapter "operate an adult-oriented business" means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities within an adult-oriented business. 
    "Permittee." "Permittee" means the person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued. 
    "Person." Any individual, officer, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, limited liability partnership, limited liability corporation or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
    "Police Chief." The Police Chief of the City of Beaumont, or the authorized representative thereof. 
    "Regularly features." The term "regularly features" with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of two or more occasions within a 3D-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct. 
    "Semi-nude." Means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, public region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    "Specified anatomical areas." As used herein, "specified anatomical areas" shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or public region; (ii) buttocks; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
(3)  Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subdivisions (1) or (2) above. 
    "Specified sexual activities." As used herein, "specified sexual activities" shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subdivision (1) through (3) of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 12-8-98) 
5.60.030 - Adult oriented business permits required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon the premises of the City of Beaumont, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person rust obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the City of Beaumont as herein required. (adult-oriented business regulatory permit) 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business unless the person rust obtains and continues in full force and effect a permit from the City of Beaumont as herein required. (adult-oriented business performer permit) 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 12-8-98) 
5.60.040 - Application and permits. 
(a)  Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit Required. 
(1)  Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult-oriented business in the City of Beaumont shall file an application with the Police Chief upon a form provided by the City of Beaumont and shall pay a non-refundable filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time. 
(b)  Applications for Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit. 
(1)  Adult-oriented business regulatory permits are not transferrable, except in accordance with Section 5.60.040(e). Therefore, all applications shall include the following information: 
(A)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age. 
(B)  If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any. 
(C)  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten percent or greater interest in the business shall sign the application. 
(3)  If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of fictitious name. 
(4)  A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult-oriented business site. 
(5)  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed. 
(6)  The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by Section 5.60.040(f) to obtain an adult-oriented business performer license (for ongoing reporting requirements see Section. 
(7)  A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(8)  A certificate and straight line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to the application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and; (i) the property line of any other adult-oriented business within 500 feet of any public entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a permit is requested; and (ii) the property lines of any church, school, park, residential zone or use within 500 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business. 
Oriented business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 17.85.050(a). 
[(c)  Reserved. ] 
(d)  Permit Denial Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit. The Police Chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult oriented business regulatory permit is required do not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire, and safety laws of the City and the State of California, or with the location or development and performance standards and requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit. 
(3)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(4)  The required application fee has not been paid. 
(5)  The adult-oriented business does not comply with the zoning ordinance, location standards, Section 17.85.030. 
Each adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided herein for action upon application. 
(e)  Transfer of Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permits. 
(1)  A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the permit. 
(2)  A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business regulatory permit to another person unless the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the Police Chief stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the Police Chief in accordance with Sections 5.60.040(a) and 5.60.040(b), accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, and the Police Chief determines in accordance with Section 5.60.040(c) that the transferees would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit. 
(3)  No permit may be transferred when the Police Chief has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked. 
(4)  Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this Section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(f)  Adult-Oriented Business Performer Permit Required. 
(1)  No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business, without a valid adult-oriented business performer permit issued by the City. All persons who have been issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit required by Section 5.60.040(a), with the names of all performers required to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit, within 30 days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business regulatory permit. 
(2)  The Police Chief shall grant, deny and renew adult-oriented business performer permits. 
(3)  The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the Police Chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with the Police Chief. 
(4)  The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
(A)  The applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant; 
(B)  Age, date and place of birth; 
(C)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(D)  Present address and telephone number; 
(E)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of: 
(i)  Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b), and 647(D) of the California Penal Code as those Sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered. 
(ii)  The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California. 
(F)  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing, or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution. 
(G)  State driver's license or identification number; 
(H)  Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(I)  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(J)  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to the be renewed. 
(5)  The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
(6)  Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the Police Chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application. 
(7)  If the Police Chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the Police Chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than ten days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten days, of the time for the Police Chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
(g)  Investigation and Action on Application for an Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit. 
(1)  Within 30 days after receipt of the properly completed application, the Police Chief shall grant or deny the application and notify the applicant as follows: 
(A)  The Police Chief shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
(B)  If the application is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
(C)  If the application is granted, the Police Chief shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business performer permit. 
(D)  The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage, prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application. 
(2)  The Police Chief shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection (4) of this Section. 
(3)  If the Police Chief grants the application or if the Police Chief neither grants nor denies the application within five days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 5.60.040(f)(7) the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the license was sought. 
(4)  The Police Chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
(A)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application; 
(B)  The applicant is under 18; 
(C)  The adult-oriented business performer permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by State or City law. 
(D)  The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute. 
(E)  The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in Section 5.60.040(t)(4)(e) or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the State of California. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the application. 
(5)  Each adult-oriented business Performed permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for permits. 
(h)  Suspension or Revocation of Adult-Oriented Business Performer Permit. An adult oriented business permit or adult-oriented business performer permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Section: 
(1)  On determining that grounds for permit revocations exist, the Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Code Sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters on support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Police Chief, but at a minimum shall include the following; 
(2)  All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this Section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience appealed in accordance with Section; 
(3)  A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business: 
(A)  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City. This offense shall result in automatic suspension or revocation of permit. 
(B)  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, officer, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented business, or in the case of an adult-oriented business performed, the permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult-oriented business: 
(i)  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation. 
(ii)  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur. 
(iii)  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code. 
(iv)  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Section 315, 316, or 318 or Subdivision b of Section 647 of the California Penal Code. 
(v)  Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Section 311 through 313.4. 
(vi)  Any conduct prohibited by this Chapter. 
(C)  Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate City official. 
(4)  After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this Section, if the Police Chief finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the Police Chief shall impose one of the following: 
(A)  A warning; 
(B)  Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months; 
(C)  Revocation of the permit; 
(D)  Second warning within 12-month period shall result in a suspension of the permit; second suspension within a 12-month period shall result in revocation of the permit. 
(i)  Appeal of Denial, Suspension or Revocation. After denial of an application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit or an adult-oriented business performed permit, or after denial of renewal of a permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or person to whom the permit was granted may seek review of such administrative action by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Title 17, Chapter 17.70, Section 17.70.005 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The City shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review, if sought by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 12-8-98) 
5.60.050 - Facilities and employees. 
(a)  Adult-Oriented Business Development and Performance Standards. 
(1)  Maximum occupancy load, fire exit, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the Fire Department and building regulations and standards adopted by the City. 
(2)  No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any location outside the building area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other openings. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. 
(3)  All off-street parking area and premise entries of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to two hours past closing time of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking area and/or walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagrams of the premises. 
(4)  The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. 
(5)  Except for those businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business shall be open for business only between the hours or 8:00 a.m. and midnight on any particular day. 
(6)  The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the City Manager or designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. Violations of this requirement shall enforced by Section 5.60.040(h)(4). 
(7)  All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except rest rooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times. 
(8)  Any adult-oriented business which is also an "adult arcade," shall comply with the following provisions: 
(A)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Each managers station shall be manned at all times. Rest rooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(B)  The view area specified in subsection (E) shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(C)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
(D)  The walls or partitions between rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booth or rooms. 
(E)  Customers, patrons, or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or to remain in the common area of such business, other than the rest rooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths. 
(F)  The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, usine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner and operator's license to conduct the adult-oriented business. Inspection shall be completed by the City Manager or his designee. 
(9)  All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained at any point at ground level: 
Area Foot-candles Bookstores and other retail establishments 20 Theaters and cabarets 5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles) Arcades 10 Motels/hotels 20 (in public areas) Modeling studios 20  
(10)  The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for females, and female patrons shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any adult material. Rest rooms shall not contain televisions monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide rest room facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
(11)  The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission: 
(A)  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. 
(B)  The adult-oriented business shall provide separate gender dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use. "Entertainer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business. 
(C)  The adult-oriented business shall provide an building entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the public entrance/exit used by patrons. 
(D)  The adult-oriented business shall provide access which is completely separated from the patrons for entertainers between the stage and dressing rooms. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing rooms and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
(E)  No entertainers, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patrons and no patrons shall have physical contact with any entertainers either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business. 
(F)  Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection. In addition, the stage shall be separated from all areas occupied by patrons by a plastic or safety glass partition with a minimum height of six feet, to effectively preclude physical contact between the performer(s) and patrons. 
(G)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(H)  No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business (as that term is defined herein) shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, public area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered. Employees other than performers, as well as performers when not engaged in a performance subject to the limitations provided for herein, shall at all times be fully clothed. 
(12)  Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
(A)  Adult-oriented businesses featuring entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty for each additional 35 persons or portion thereof. 
(B)  Security guards for other adult-oriented business may be required if it is determined by the Police Chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in Section from occurring on the premises. 
(C)  Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance with the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identified as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. The foregoing applicable requirements of this Section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of a permit issued pursuant to these regulations. 
(b)  Register and Permit Number Employees. 
(1)  Every permittee of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or Health Officer of the City. 
(c)  Display of Permit and Identification Cards. 
(1)  The permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter for such adult-oriented business shall be displayed at all times, during business hours, in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business. 
(2)  The Police Chief shall provide each adult-oriented business Performer required to have a permit pursuant to this Chapter, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such performer. 
(3)  An adult-oriented business Performer shall have such card on public display and available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult-oriented businesses. 
(d)  Employment of and Services Rendered under the Age of 18 Years Prohibited. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires such permit, to any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult-oriented business, any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(3)  Violations of this requirement shall enforced by Section 5.60.040(h). 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 12-8-98) 
5.60.060 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Inspection. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Planning Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his/her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this Section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspections of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  Regulations Nonexclusive. The provisions of this Chapter regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City. 
(c)  Employment of Persons Without Permits Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomic areas or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult oriented business performer permit to perform such entertainment. 
(d)  Time Limit for Filing Application for Permit. All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued for the operation of an adult-oriented business and all persons required by this Chapter to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit, must apply for and obtain such a permit within 90 days of the effective date of this Chapter. Failure to do so and continued performance depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business after such time without a permit shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
(e)  Temporary Permit; Judicial Review. In the event an application to establish and operate an adult-oriented business is denied, the applicant shall be entitled to obtain from the Police Chief, upon written request therefor, a temporary permit for a period of 90 days following the date of denial. Such permit shall be conditionally issued for the sole purpose of permitting the temporary establishment of the applicant's proposed business, while the applicant seeks prompt judicial review of the denial. In the event the applicant fails or refuses to seek judicial review within the 90-day period, the temporary permit shall thereupon expire without further notice and the applicant shall cease all operations thereunder. In the event the applicant promptly seeks judicial review, the temporary permit shall be automatically extended in increments of 90 days until judicial review is final. In the event the denial is upheld, the temporary permit shall expire without further notice and the applicant shall cease all operations thereunder. The issuance of a temporary permit shall not constitute or be deemed a compensable vested right. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 12-8-98) 
Chapter 5.61 - GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT SALES LICENSE 

5.61.010 - License required. 
    Beginning on July 1, 2007, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, display for sale, or otherwise make available for sale within the City of Beaumont, any graffiti implement, as that device is defined in Chapter 9.34 of the Beaumont Municipal Code, unless that person then holds a valid annual graffiti implement sales license issued pursuant to Chapter 9.34. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1, 2-20-07) 
Chapter 5.62 - PROHIBITION OF COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY AND REGULATION OF PERSONAL MARIJUANA USE AND CULTIVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1107, § 4, adopted May 21, 2019 , amended Ch. 5.62 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.62, §§ 5.62.010-5.62.050, pertained to prohibition and regulation of personal marijuana use and cultivation and commercial marijuana activity, and derived from Ord. No. 1090, § 5, adopted August 15, 2017 . 

5.62.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to: (1) regulate indoor personal cultivation of marijuana to the fullest extent permitted by State law; (2) completely prohibit outdoor cultivation of marijuana; and (3) completely prohibit commercial marijuana activity-whether medical or recreational within the City of Beaumont, to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 4, 5-21-2019 ) 
5.62.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Marijuana" shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Marijuana" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Marijuana" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, "marijuana" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 81000 of the Food and Agriculture Code or Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code. "Marijuana" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
B.  "Commercial marijuana activity" includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, and/or sale of marijuana and/or marijuana products. Commercial marijuana activity does not include: 
(1)  The activity of a qualified patient or primary caregiver as provided in Business and Professions Code Section 26033; or 
(2)  A person 21 years of age or older who, in strict accordance with State law and/or regulations, as may be amended from time to time: 
(i)  possesses, processes, transports, purchases, obtains, or gives away to persons 21 years of age or older without any compensation whatsoever, no more than 28.5 grams of marijuana not in the form of concentrated cannabis; or 
(ii)  possesses, processes, transports, purchases, obtains, or gives away to persons 21 years of age or older without any compensation whatsoever, not more than eight grams of marijuana in the form of concentrated cannabis, including as contained in marijuana products; or 
(iii)  possesses, plants, cultivates, harvests, dries, or processes not more than six living marijuana plants and possess the marijuana produced by those plants; or 
(iv)  smokes or ingests marijuana or marijuana products; or 
(v)  possesses, transports, purchases, obtains, uses, manufactures, or gives away marijuana accessories to persons 21 years of age or older without any compensation whatsoever. 
C.  "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana, whether within a structure completely or partially enclosed, or outdoors. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, collective, cooperative, dispensary, club, society, or other organization or group acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. The term individual shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer, salesperson, primary caregiver or qualified patient. 
E.  "Private residence" means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or any other similar residential dwelling serving as an individual's primary residence. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 4, 5-21-2019 ) 
5.62.030 - Personal use and cultivation. 
A.  For purposes of this subsection, personal use, possession, process, purchase, transport, and/or dissemination of marijuana shall be considered prohibited and unlawful in all areas of the City to the fullest extent such prohibition is permissible under State law. 
B.  Outdoor Cultivation. No person may plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants outdoors in any zoning district of the City. No permit or any other license or entitlement for use, nor any business license, shall be approved or issued for the opening, establishment, maintenance or operation of any such use or activity. In the event of a determination by the California Attorney General that nonmedical use of marijuana is lawful in the State of California under federal law, outdoor cultivation of marijuana shall be prohibited and/or regulated to the fullest extent permitted by State law. 
C.  Indoor Cultivation. No person, including a qualified patient or primary caregiver, may plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants except for personal use inside a private residence or accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence, and only in strict accordance with State law and/or regulations, and the City Code, as may be amended from time to time. This provision shall not be construed to authorize, regulate, permit, license, or otherwise allow indoor cultivation for commercial use or purposes; such activity is expressly prohibited in all zones throughout the City. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 4, 5-21-2019 ) 
5.62.040 - Commercial marijuana activity. 
    The opening, establishment, maintenance or operation of any business for the purpose of conducting commercial marijuana activity, whether for medical or recreational use, is prohibited in all zones throughout the City. No permit or any other license or entitlement for use, nor any business license, shall be approved or issued for the establishment, maintenance, or operation of any business engaged in commercial marijuana activity. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 4, 5-21-2019 ) 
5.62.050 - Violation and enforcement. 
1.  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this Chapter, the City Code, or State or City law is declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the City either pursuant to Chapter 8.32 of the Beaumont Municipal Code or any other available civil and/or criminal remedy, including but not limited to a restraining order, temporary and permanent injunctive relief, and other relief set forth in this Chapter, City Code and/or State Law. 
2.  Any person found to be in violation of or in non-compliance with any of the requirements of this Chapter or applicable provisions of the Beaumont Municipal Code shall be subject to any enforcement remedies available under the law and/or the Beaumont Municipal Code including, but not limited to, Chapter 1.17 and Chapter 8.32. 
3.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any provisions or part hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day per violation or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. No civil action shall prevent criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, City Code and/or State law. 
4.  In lieu of issuing a misdemeanor citation, the City may reduce the penalty to an infraction or issue an administrative citation, and/or assess an administrative fine up to the maximum amount(s) permitted by law and the Code. 
5.  Each violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate violation and each violation may be charged as a separate count in the event of administrative or criminal enforcement action. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 4, 5-21-2019 ) 
Chapter 5.64 - COMMERCIAL PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS 

5.64.010 - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases not specifically defined in this section shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
    "Itinerant merchant" means any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, or merchandise within the City, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building structure, motor vehicle, tent, public rooms in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street alley, or other place within the City, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, or merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided that any person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this Chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer. 
    "Mobile unit" means any vehicle, truck, trailer, cart, pushcart, wagon, bicycle, dray, conveyance or structure on wheels, not firmly fixed to a permanent foundation, which is not required to have a license to operate issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
    "Motor vehicle" means any automobile, truck, trailer or other conveyance requiring a license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
    "Peddler," for purposes of this Chapter, means any person traveling by foot, motor vehicle, mobile unit or any other type of conveyance from place to place conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, foods, farm products, or provisions, or personal property of any nature whatsoever, and hawking or offering and exposing the same for sale, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for the same or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer or solicit or taking or attempting to take orders for the same for sale from a motor vehicle or mobile unit. 
    "Peddling" means the act of being a peddler. 
    "Permittee" means the holder of a peddler or itinerant merchant permit. 
    "Person" means any natural person, corporation, association, co-partnership, or any other organization however organized. 
    "Solicitor," for purposes of this Chapter, means any person who, for commercial purposes or causes, travels either by foot, motor vehicle, mobile unit or any other type of conveyance, from place to place taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, foods, farm products, or provisions, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, or whose activities may, in any way, result in such sale or the furnishing of such services, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sale or not. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.020 - Applicability of Chapter. 
A.  Exemptions. 
1.  There shall be exempted from the prohibitions of this Chapter the activities of solicitors and peddlers selling and soliciting sales of newspapers from sidewalks abutting on public streets, except that no such solicitor or peddler shall offer newspapers for sale to passing motorists unless from a location adjacent to a clear, 20-foot zone of curbside where private motor vehicles may legally stop for the loading and unloading of passengers. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, a peddler or solicitor may not sell or solicit sales of newspapers in a place or manner which would unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic. 
2.  Peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter when participating in an event subject and pursuant to a special events permit, street closure permit, or any other permit specifically authorizing such activity, issued by the City. 
3.  Garage or yard sales on private property shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, except that the provisions of Section 5.08.110 shall apply to any such activities. 
B.  Compliance by Existing Licensees. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any and all currently-permitted and/or licensed commercial peddlers, solicitors, and itinerant merchants by the City, who shall apply for, and obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter within 90 days of its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.030 - Peddling and soliciting on certain premises prohibited. 
    No peddler or solicitor nor any person pretending to be a peddler or solicitor, whether otherwise regulated by this Chapter or not, shall ring the bell or knock at any building whereon there is printed or affixed or otherwise displayed to public view any sign containing any or all of the following prohibitions: "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or "No Agents," or which otherwise purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on such premises; provided that this prohibition shall not apply when a peddler or solicitor has an appointment with the occupants of such building. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.040 - Peddler, solicitor and itinerant merchant permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in the business or activities of peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant within the City except pursuant to and in strict compliance with a valid permit issued by the Chief of Police or his designee as provided in this Chapter. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permittee to allow or tolerate any person who does not also have a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit to work for or under the direction of, or on behalf of, or as an agent of the permittee. The requirements for a permit under this Chapter shall be in addition to requirements of Title 5 of this Code relating to business licenses. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.050 - Permit procedures. 
A.  Permit-Application. Every application for a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit under this Chapter shall be made on a form provided by the Chief of Police or his designee, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, mailing address, home address, and telephone number of applicant. 
2.  Presentation of a California driver's license, if any, or other photographic identification issued by a state or United States federal agency establishing the applicant's age as 18 or older. 
3.  Two recent portrait photographs that clearly and accurately depict the applicant's current facial features. 
4.  The name under which the peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business or activity will be conducted, the address and telephone number of such business, and the name of the business owner. 
5.  A description of the goods, wares, merchandise, products, or any other thing or representation of value on consignment which will be the subject of the applicant's peddling or itinerant merchant business or activity. 
6.  A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia, and any other distinguishing characteristics of any motor vehicle or mobile unit to be used in the applicant's business or activities, including the license plate state and number for any motor vehicle. 
7.  The permit history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether the applicant has operated under any other business name or has ever had any similar license or permit revoked or suspended or has been convicted of a violation of this Chapter, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension, revocation or conviction. 
8.  The applicant's consent to a fingerprint check by the Chief of Police or his designee. 
9.  A statement as to whether or not applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than traffic violations, within the immediately preceding ten years, and the nature of each such offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
10.  A health permit, if required by the County of Riverside, issued by the County Health Department. 
11.  Evidence of motor vehicle insurance. 
12.  A permit fee in an amount established by the City Council. 
B.  Permit-Term. Any peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.060 - Issuance of permit. 
    The Chief of Police or his designee shall grant the peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit within ten days after receiving the completed application if he or she finds that all of the following requirements have been met: 
A.  The required fees have been paid. 
B.  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application. 
D.  The applicant has not had a similar permit or license denied or revoked by the City within one year prior to the date of the application. 
E.  The applicant has not been convicted, during the three-year period immediately preceding the issuance of the permit, of any offenses involving moral turpitude or dishonesty, including but not limited to: 
1.  Burglary [Cal. Penal Code § 459]. 
2.  Robbery [Cal. Penal Code § 211]. 
3.  Theft [Cal. Penal Code § 484]. 
4.  Fraud or misrepresentation [Cal. Penal Code §§ 531, 532]. 
5.  Receiving, possession or sale of stolen goods [Cal. Penal Code § 496]. 
6.  Any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code in conjunction with, or while conducting, a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business or activity. 
F.  The applicant has obtained any other applicable City or county permits, including any City or county health permit required for the preparation and sale of food products. 
G.  The applicant has obtained a valid City business license and paid the appropriate business license fee. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.070 - Denial of permit. 
    If the Chief of Police or his designee finds that all the requirements of Section 5.64.060 have not been met, he or she shall deny the application for the peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit. Written notification of denial of the permit application, setting forth the grounds for denial, shall be served on the applicant by personal delivery or by first class and certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the applicant at his or her mailing address as set forth in the permit application. Notice of denial of the application shall be deemed to have been served on the date it is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her mailing address as set forth in the permit application, regardless whether the certified mail receipt is returned to the City signed or unsigned. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.080 - Revocation of permit. 
    Any peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police for good cause shown including but not limited to any of the following reasons: 
A.  Falsification of any information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based. 
B.  Failure of the permittee or any employees or agents of the permittee to comply with the regulations set forth in this Chapter. 
C.  The permittee's conviction at any time of any offense involving moral turpitude or dishonesty, including but not limited to any of the following: 
1.  Burglary [Cal. Penal Code § 459]. 
2.  Robbery [Cal. Penal Code § 211]. 
3.  Theft [Cal. Penal Code § 484]. 
4.  Fraud or misrepresentation [Cal. Penal Code §§ 531,532]. 
5.  Receiving, possession or sale of stolen goods [Cal. Penal Code § 496]. 
6.  Any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code in conjunction with, or while conducting, a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business or activity. 
D.  Written notification of revocation of the permit, setting forth the grounds for the revocation, shall be served on the permittee by personal delivery or by first class and certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permittee at his or her mailing address as set forth in the permit application. Notice of revocation of the permit shall be deemed to have been served on the date it is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her mailing address as set forth in the permit application, regardless whether the certified mail receipt is returned to the City signed or unsigned. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.090 - Police Chiefs power to order cessation of business. 
    Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to order the immediate cessation of peddling, soliciting or itinerant merchant activities upon revocation of a permit under this section if he or she deems it reasonably necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety or welfare. Prior to an action to require the immediate cessation of any such business, or within 24 hours following such action, the Chief of Police shall issue a written notice to the permittee setting forth in detail the basis for such action. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.100 - Appeal of permit denial, revocation or suspension. 
A.  Any applicant for a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit, or a permittee, shall have the right to appeal from a decision by the Chief of Police to deny a permit application or to revoke a permit, by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for such appeal, within 15 days after the decision has been served on the applicant or permittee. Such appeal shall be heard by the City Manager or by an administrative hearing officer designated by or at the request of the City Manager, upon not less than 15 days' written notice to the appellant. The City Manager or the designated administrative hearing officer shall consider all relevant evidence at the hearing, continue the hearing for good cause, and require such legal briefing as may be required to address any issues raised by the appeal. Within a reasonable time, but not more than 30 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager or the designated administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision affirming, denying or modifying the decision from which the appeal was taken, supported by factual findings and determinations referenced by supporting evidence. The decision of the City Manager or designated administrative hearing officer shall be final. The written decision shall be served on the appellant as provided in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6(b), with a copy submitted to the City Clerk. The written decision shall include a notice to the appellant that the decision is subject to judicial review according to the provisions and time limits set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. Except as provided in Section 5.64.090, if a timely appeal is filed, any revocation shall be stayed pending the decision of the City Manager. Otherwise, the revocation shall become effective immediately upon expiration of the period for filing an appeal. 
B.  No person whose permit is finally denied or revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following such final action. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.110 - Peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permittee responsibility. 
    The act or omission of any peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permittee's partner, owner, associate, director, manager, officer, agent or employee shall be deemed for all purposes under this Chapter to be the act or omission of the peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permittee regulated by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.120 - Peddling or soliciting from fixed location prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business from a fixed location in or on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, right-of-way, City plaza, or other public property unless permitted in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.130 - Conditions of peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit. 
A.  Each peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant permit issued by the Chief of Police or his designee shall be subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Chapter, and any additional conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the Chief of Police for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  The provisions of this Chapter shall constitute operating regulations conditioning each and every permit hereunder. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business or activity in violation of these provisions. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, no peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant shall operate or conduct his or her business or activity in a place or manner which would unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic in or on any street, alley or sidewalk, or which would unreasonably obstruct vehicular sight distances. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.140 - Hours of operation. 
    No person shall engage in a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business or activity upon any private place, or any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place in the City between the hours of 9:00 p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever comes first, and 8:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.150 - ID display requirements. 
A.  Each person who is engaged in a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business or activity shall, at all times while so engaged, wear in plain sight on his or her person an identification (ID) card, provided by the Chief of Police or his designee, containing such information, including a suitable photograph, as the Chief of Police or his designee may require. The ID card shall be worn on the person's outermost garment, with the picture facing outward. 
B.  Each person who is engaged in a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business or activity shall, at all times while so engaged, have affixed in a conspicuous place on each motor vehicle or mobile unit being used in such business or activity, an identifying placard or other identifying emblem, to be provided by the Chief of Police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.160 - Garbage disposal. 
    No peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant shall discard or deposit, or cause or allow to be discarded or deposited by any customer or person solicited, any garbage, sewage or any other waste materials or products onto any public or private property or into any public or private storm drain system. All motor vehicles and mobile units being used in a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business or activity shall be equipped with trash receptacles large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such motor vehicle or mobile unit. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.170 - Noise requirements. 
    Any person engaged in a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant business shall comply with all applicable noise regulations. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.180 - Parking and stopping restrictions-Motor vehicle-based and mobile unit peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle-based or mobile unit peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant to: 
1.  Permit any motor vehicle or mobile unit from which his or her business is being conducted to remain standing or stopped, for purposes of conducting said business, at any place on a public street, sidewalk, parking lot, right-of-way, or other public place, or within 500 feet thereof, for a total period of time exceeding 15 minutes within any two-hour period. 
2.  Make any stop, for the purpose of making or soliciting any sale upon any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place, within 500 feet, measured along the traveled way of any public street or streets, of any school property. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle-based or mobile unit peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant to conduct his or her business or activity from any motor vehicle or mobile unit upon any public street except from or at the side of such motor vehicle which is nearest to the curb of such street. 
C.  No motor vehicle-based or mobile unit peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant shall stop to conduct his or her business or activity from a motor vehicle or mobile unit within 200 feet of another motor vehicle-based or mobile unit peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant who has already stopped to conduct business. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.190 - Interstate commerce. 
    None of the fees provided for by this Chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a fee is believed by a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant to place an undue burden on interstate commerce, he or she may apply to the City Manager, before or up to six months following payment of the fee, for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable, or unfair as to such commerce. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting evidence, show his or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business, and other information as required by the City Manager to determine the extent of the burden on interstate commerce. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.200 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.210 - Seizure of goods. 
    Upon the citation or arrest of any person for violation of Section 5.64.040 of this Chapter, the City may seize and impound all perishable and nonperishable goods in the possession of the unlicensed peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant. "Goods" means any consumable items, foods, beverages, merchandise or wares, being offered for sale. "Perishable" means any item or items that spoil, perish or decay rapidly; or are likely to spoil, perish or decay rapidly if not refrigerated, including but not limited to food, beverages and flowers. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
5.64.220 - Procedure for release of perishable goods. 
A.  Following citation or arrest pursuant to Section 5.64.040 of this Chapter, the unlicensed peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant shall sign a declaration, which shall declare, under penalty of perjury, the name and contact information of the rightful owner of the seized goods. 
B.  The City shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the rightful owner of any seized perishable goods, if other than the peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant arrested or cited, in order to provide that owner with an opportunity to retrieve the goods within 24 hours. The rightful owner, as set forth in the declaration described in subsection A. of this section, must present valid identification to the City before the City will release any seized goods. 
C.  If the unlicensed peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant claims to be the rightful owner of the seized perishable goods, such peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant must present valid identification to the City, and must sign the declaration described in subsection A. of this section declaring himself or herself to be the rightful owner. In such case, the City shall provide such peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant the opportunity to either: 
1.  Contact, with one phone call (which one phone call shall be in addition to any other phone calls permitted by law to an arrestee), another individual to pick up the seized perishable goods within 24 hours; or 
2.  Sign a release allowing the City to immediately dispose of or donate any seized perishable goods if the goods cannot be picked up within 24 hours. 
D.  Prior to releasing, disposing or donating any perishable goods seized pursuant to Section 5.64.210 of this Chapter, the City shall inspect, and take photographs and any necessary samples of such goods to maintain as evidence. 
E.  Any perishable goods not retrieved within 24 hours shall be immediately donated or discarded by the City, with no liability to the City for such action. 
F.  Nothing contained in this Chapter shall limit the authority of the City to cite the owner of the seized goods for violations of this Code. 
G.  The Police Chief may adopt reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Chapter, in order to implement this section. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 2, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 5.68 - TOBACCO RETAILERS 

5.68.010 - Preamble. 
    Prior to the adoption of this Chapter, the City Council reviewed the following statistics: 
a.  Minors obtain cigarettes and other tobacco products at alarming rates. Each year, an estimated 924,000,000 packs of cigarettes are consumed by minors 12 to 17 years of age, yielding the tobacco industry $480,000,000.00 in profits from underage smokers nationwide. In Riverside County, 10,000 teens light up for the first time and purchase five million packs of cigarettes a year. 
b.  In a 2004 California youth-buying survey, 12 percent of retailers surveyed unlawfully sold tobacco product to minors. 
c.  The rate of tobacco sales to minors in Riverside County is one of the highest in the State at 44 percent. 
d.  Eighty-eight percent of adults who have ever smoked tried their first cigarette by the age of 18, and the average age at which smokers try their first cigarette is 141/2. 
e.  A requirement for a tobacco retailer license will not unduly burden legitimate business activities of retailers who sell or distribute cigarettes or other tobacco products to adults. It will, however, allow the County to regulate the operation of lawful businesses to discourage violations of federal, state, and local tobacco-related laws. 
f.  Sixty-five percent of California's key opinion leaders surveyed support implementation of tobacco-licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 1, 12-19-06) 
5.68.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    Riverside County has a substantial interest in promoting compliance with federal, state, and local laws intended to regulate tobacco sales and use; in discouraging the illegal purchase of tobacco products by minors; in promoting compliance with laws prohibiting sales of cigarettes and tobacco products to minors; and finally, and most importantly, in protecting children from being lured into illegal activity through the misconduct of adults. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage responsible tobacco retailing and to discourage violations of tobacco-related laws, especially those that prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors, but not to expand or reduce the degree to which the acts regulated by federal or state law are criminally proscribed or to alter the penalty provided therefor. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 2, 12-19-06) 
5.68.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
    "Arm's length transaction" shall mean a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for the primary purpose of avoiding the effect of the violations of this Chapter is presumed not to be an arm's length transaction. 
    "Department" shall mean the County Health Officer or his or her designee. 
    "Person" shall mean any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
    "Proprietor" shall mean a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share, ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business. 
    "Self-service display" shall mean the open display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
    "Smoking" shall mean possessing a lighted tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind), the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind). 
    "Tobacco paraphernalia" shall mean cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
    "Tobacco product" shall mean (1) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bid is, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body but does not include any product specifically approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product dependence. 
    "Tobacco retailer" shall mean any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia; "tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 3, 12-19-06) 
5.68.040 - Tobacco license prerequisite; application process. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this Chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer's license shall constitute a public nuisance. 
b.  A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer license, including, for example, a revoked license: 
1.  Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia from public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute an "offer for sale" for the purposes of subsection f. of this section. 
2.  Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that would lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at the tobacco retailer's location. 
c.  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right other than the right to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the County identified on the face of the license. For example, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supercede, or apply in lieu of any other provision of applicable law, including, without limitation, any condition or limitation on smoking in enclosed places of employment made applicable to business establishments by California Labor Code section 6404.5. 
d.  Application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed of the laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. A license that is issued in error or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.68.100 of this Chapter. 
e.  In addition to any other penalty under this Chapter a person found to have engaged in tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailers license shall be ineligible to apply for or be issued a tobacco retailing license according to the following: 
1.  After a first violation for a person within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the person as a proprietor until 30 days have passed from the date of last violation. 
2.  After a second violation for a person within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the person as a proprietor until 90 days have passed from the date of last violation. 
3.  After three or more violations for a person within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the person as a proprietor until five years have passed from the date of last violation. 
4.  Each day that a person engages in tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailers license shall constitute a separate violation. 
f.  Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this Chapter are subject to seizure and forfeiture. Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be destroyed. 
g.  All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the department and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor. 
2.  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought. 
3.  The name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all license related communications and notices (the "authorized address"). If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subparagraph 2 above. 
4.  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the California Board of Equalization. 
5.  Whether or not any proprietor is a person who has been determined to have violated this Chapter or has been a proprietor at a location that has been determined to have violated this Chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations. 
6.  Such other information as the Department deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 4, 12-19-06) 
5.68.050 - License issuance; standards. 
a.  No license may issue to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on foot and tobacco retailing from vehicles are prohibited. 
b.  Upon the receipt of an application for a tobacco retailer's license and the license fee, the Department shall issue a license unless substantial record evidence demonstrates that one of the following bases for denial exists: 
1.  The application is incomplete or inaccurate. 
2.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which a prohibition on issuing licenses is in effect pursuant to Section 5.68.100.b. of this Chapter. However, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the County with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm's length transaction. 
3.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor for which a prohibition on issuing licenses is in effect pursuant to Section 5.68.100.b. of this Chapter. 
4.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to Section 5.68.050.a. of this Chapter, that is unlawful pursuant to any other County ordinance, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other local, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 5, 12-19-06) 
5.68.060 - Licenses nontransferable. 
a.  A tobacco retailer's license is nontransferable. If the information required in the license application pursuant to [Section] 5.68.040.g.1, 2, or 3 changes, a new tobacco retailer's license is required before the business may continue to act as a tobacco retailer. For example, if a Proprietor to whom a license has been issued changes business location, that proprietor must apply for a new license prior to acting as a tobacco retailer at the new location. Or, if the business is sold, the new owner must apply for a license for that location before acting as a tobacco retailer. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, violations accumulated against a location or business shall continue to be counted against the location or business unless the location or business has been transferred to a new proprietor and the new proprietor provides the County with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 6, 12-19-06) 
5.68.070 - Fees for license. 
a.  A tobacco retailer license is invalid unless the appropriate fee has been paid in full and the term of the license has not expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's license no later than 30 days prior to expiration of the term. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 7, 12-19-06) 
5.68.080 - Other requirements and prohibitions. 
a.  Display of License. Each license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly and readily visible location at the licensed location. 
b.  Positive Identification Required. No person shall engage in tobacco retailing without first examining the identification of the purchaser, if the purchaser reasonably appears under the age of 27 years old, and confirming that the proposed sale is to a purchaser who is at least the minimum age in state law for being sold the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. 
c.  Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person shall engage in tobacco retailing if the person is younger than the minimum age in state law for being sold or for possessing any tobacco product. 
d.  Self-Service Displays Prohibited. No person shall display tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia by means of a self-service display or to engage in tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display. A tobacco retailer who chooses to display tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a locked cabinet, case or similar structure must post a clear and conspicuous sign on or within five feet of the display stating that the cabinet, case or structure is locked at all times. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 8, 12-19-06) 
5.68.090 - License violation. 
a.  Violation of Tobacco-Related Laws. It shall be a violation of a tobacco retailer's license for a licensee, including his or her agent or employee, to violate any of the following laws: 
1.  Any local, state, or federal tobacco-related law. 
2.  Local, state, or federal sign laws. 
3.  Local, state, or federal laws restricting the age of purchase for any product. 
b.  License Compliance Monitoring. 
1.  Compliance with this Chapter shall be monitored by the Department. Any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this Chapter. 
2.  The Department shall check the compliance of each tobacco retailer at least three times per 12-month period. The Department may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found to be in compliance a fewer number of times so that the Department may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found in violation a greater number of times. 
3.  Compliance checks shall determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with tobacco laws regulating youth access to tobacco. When appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other tobacco-related laws. 
4.  The County shall not enforce any tobacco-related minimum-age law against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "youth decoy") if the potential violation occurs when: 
i.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official; or 
ii.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the County Department of Health and Human Services or funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the California Department of Health Services. 
c.  No Contest Plea. A plea of "no contest" or its equivalent by a tobacco retailer for a violation of any law designated in subsection (a) above shall operate as an admission that this chapter has been violated for the purposes of license revocation. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 9, 12-19-06) 
5.68.100 - Revocation of license. 
a.  Revocation of License for Violation. 
1.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked if the County Hearing Officer finds, after notice to the licensee and opportunity to be heard, that the licensee, including his or her agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this Chapter (hereinafter "license violation"). 
2.  No attorney may take part in the defense of a license revocation proceeding unless the attorney's participation meets any exception for attorneys appearing in small claims court under California Code of Civil Procedure section 116.530. This prohibition shall not apply if the County elects to be represented by an attorney in the proceeding and notice of the election is included in the notice given pursuant to subsection 1. above. 
3.  For a first or second alleged license violation within any 60-month period, the County Counsel may engage in settlement negotiations and may enter into a settlement agreement with a tobacco retailer alleged to have violated this Chapter without approval from the Board of Supervisors. Settlements shall not be confidential and shall contain the following minimum terms: 
i.  After an alleged first license violation at a location within any 60-month period: 
a.  An agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for at least one day; 
b.  A settlement payment to the County of at least $1,000.00; and 
c.  An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the violation will be counted when considering what penalty will be assessed for any future violations. 
ii.  After an alleged second license violation at a location within any 60-month period: 
a.  an agreement to stop acting as a tobacco retailer for at least ten days; 
b.  a settlement payment to the County of at least $5,000.00; and 
c.  an admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the violation will be counted when considering what penalty will be assessed for any future violations. 
b.  New License After Revocation for Violation. 
1.  After a first license violation at a location within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the location until ten days have passed from the date of the last revocation or violation, whichever is later. 
2.  After a second license violation at a location within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the location until 30 days have passed from the date of the last revocation or violation, whichever is later. 
3.  After of a third license violation at a location within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the location until 90 days have passed from the date of the last revocation or violation, whichever is later. 
4.  After four or more license violations at a location within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the location until five years have passed from the date of the last revocation or violation, whichever is later. 
c.  Expiration of License. A tobacco retailer's license that is not timely renewed pursuant to Section 5.68.070(a) shall expire at the end of its term. To reinstate a license that has expired due to the failure to timely pay the renewal fee, the proprietor must: 
1.  Submit the renewal fee plus a reinstatement fee of ten percent of the renewal fee. 
2.  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor has not sold any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia during any period that the license was expired. 
d.  Revocation of License Issued in Error. A tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked if the Department finds, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under Section 5.68.050(b) existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license issued. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for a license. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 10, 12-19-06) 
5.68.110 - Enforcement. 
    The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
a.  Whenever evidence of a violation of this Chapter is obtained in part through the participation of a Person under the age of 18 years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this ordinance and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
b.  Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the District Attorney or County Counsel, punishable by: 
1.  A fine not less than $250.00 and not exceeding $1,000.00 for a first violation in any 60-month period; or 
2.  A fine not less than $1,500.00 and not exceeding $2,500.00 for a second violation in any 60-month period; or 
3.  A fine not less than $3,000.00 and not exceeding $10,000.00 for a third or subsequent violation in any 60-month period. 
c.  Violations of this Chapter may, in the discretion of the District Attorney or County Counsel, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors. 
d.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a violation. 
e.  Violations of this Chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
f.  In addition to other remedies provided by this Chapter or by other law, any violation of this Chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the County Counsel, including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 906, § 11, 12-19-06) 
Chapter 5.70 - DELIVERY OF MARIJUANA[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1107, § 5, adopted May 21, 2019 , amended Ch. 5.70 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.70, §§ 5.70.010-5.70.050, pertained to mobile marijuana dispensaries and delivery, and derived from Ord. No. 1090, § 6, adopted August 15, 2017 . 

5.70.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows: 
    "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer of a business engaged in commercial marijuana activity (as defined in City Code Section 5.62.020). "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by a retailer, or independently licensed under State law, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana product. 
    "Delivery employee " means an individual employed by a licensed retailer or licensed microbusiness authorized to engage in retail sales who delivers marijuana goods from the licensed retailer or licensed microbusiness premises to a customer at a physical address. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, collective, cooperative, dispensary, club, society, or other organization or group acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. The term individual shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer, salesperson, primary caregiver or qualified patient. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 5, 5-21-2019 ) 
5.70.020 - Delivery of marijuana. 
    Delivery of marijuana within the City shall be allowed only to the extent permissible under State law, and in strict compliance therewith, including maintaining, prior to operation, an applicable State license/permit therefore. Any delivery conducted not in strict compliance with State law and/or regulations and any applicable City or local law is prohibited. This provision does not permit any fixed storefront or non-storefront retail business to operate within and maintain a physical location within the City; such retail commercial marijuana activity is expressly prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 5, 5-21-2019 ) 
5.70.030 - Business license required. 
    Notwithstanding Municipal Code Section 5.62.040, marijuana delivery shall only be permitted within the City upon the application, approval and issuance of a City business license as provided in Chapter 5.04, et seq. of the Beaumont Municipal Code. A City business license is a revocable privilege, which shall be subject to revocation/suspension upon a violation of any provision of this Chapter and/or State law/regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 5, 5-21-2019 ) 
5.70.040 - Violations. 
1.  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this Chapter, the City Code, or State or City law is declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the City either pursuant to Chapter 8.32 of the Beaumont Municipal Code or any other available civil and/or criminal remedy, including but not limited to a restraining order, temporary and permanent injunctive relief, and other relief set forth in this Chapter, City Code and/or State Law. 
2.  Any person found to be in violation of or in non-compliance with any of the requirements of this Chapter or applicable provisions of the Beaumont Municipal Code shall be subject to any enforcement remedies available under the law and/or the Beaumont Municipal Code including, but not limited to, Chapter 1.17 and Chapter 8.32. 
3.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any provisions or part hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day per violation or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. No civil action shall prevent criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, City Code and/or State law. 
4.  In lieu of issuing a misdemeanor citation, the City may reduce the penalty to an infraction or issue an administrative citation, and/or assess an administrative fine up to the maximum amount(s) permitted by law and the Code. 
5.  Each violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate violation and each violation may be charged as a separate count in the event of administrative or criminal enforcement action. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 5, 5-21-2019 ) 
5.70.050 - Prohibition of delivery. 
    It is the intent of the City Council to prohibit all commercial marijuana activity within the City. In the event the State enacts any law or regulation permitting a local jurisdiction to completely prohibit the delivery of marijuana, Sections 5.70.020 and 5.70.030 shall be null and void, and all commercial marijuana activity, including delivery, shall be prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 1107, § 5, 5-21-2019 ) 
TITLE 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapter 6.02 - REGULATIONS GENERALLY 

6.02.005 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of Title 6 of the Beaumont Municipal Code, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings: 
a.  "Abused" means any animal which is mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased; deprived of water, food or shelter; kept under unsanitary conditions; abandoned; or trained for fighting or attacking other animals or human beings. 
b.  "Adoption" refers to the process of taking guardianship of and responsibility for a pet that a previous owner has abandoned or otherwise abdicated responsibility for. 
c.  "Altered" means a male animal that has been neutered or a female animal that has been spayed. Also referred to as a sterile animal. 
d.  "Animal rescuer" means any individual possessing a rescue permit from the Department, who routinely obtains a dog or cat from the rightful owner of said animal, or any animal from an animal shelter that has been retained in accordance with this Title. 
e.  "Animal rescue operation" means any building, structure, enclosure or premises run by an Animal Rescuer, whether or not a valid nonprofit corporation formed pursuant to the provisions of the California Corporations Code for the prevention of cruelty to animals, which meets all requirements and standards referred to in Chapter 6 of this Title. 
f.  "Animal Services Officer" means any person or entity designated under this Chapter as the Animal Services Officer for the City, including, but not limited to, any City employee designated to enforce the animal control regulations of this Chapter. 
g.  "Apiary" means a place where bee colonies are kept. 
h.  "Assistance dog" refers to any dog as defined in Section 30508(a) of the California Food and Agriculture Code. 
i.  "At large" means any dog which is off the premises of its owner, custodian or caretaker and which is not under physical restraint by a leash of a size and material appropriate to the size and temperament of the dog and which is held by a person capable of restraining such dog, or is not otherwise physically restrained by some other device or instrumentality, except that such device or instrumentality shall not include voice control, eye control or signal control of the dog by any person, device or instrumentality. Also refers to any dog which is on the premises of its owner, custodian or caretaker which is not being maintained by physical restraint, fence, kennel, voice command, or in such a way that the animal may not leave the property of the owner; or that persons, without permission, may not wander into the confined area of the dog without intentional trespass. 
j.  "Bee" means any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera species. 
k.  "Cattery" refers to any building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon, or within which, five or more cats, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained. 
l.  "City" is the City of Beaumont 
m.  "Class I kennel" refers to any building, structure, enclosure, or premises whereupon, or within which, five to ten dogs, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained. A Class I kennel shall not include a sentry dog kennel or an animal rescue operation that meets the definition and requirements set forth in this Title. 
n.  "Class II kennel" refers to any building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon, or within which, 11 to 25 dogs, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained. 
o.  "Class III kennel" refers to any building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon, or within which, 26 to 40 dogs, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained. 
p.  "Class IV kennel" refers to any building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon, or within which, 41 or more dogs, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained. 
q.  "Colony" means a hive and its equipment and appurtenances including bees, comb, pollen, and brood. 
r.  "Custodian" means any person who intentionally provides care or sustenance for any animal, including but not limited to a dog or cat, on behalf of another, or represents the interests of the owner. 
s.  "Department" refers to the City of Beaumont Animal Services Department. 
t.  "Domestic animals" refers to small and/or non-dangerous wild animals such as dogs, cats, rodents, birds, non-poisonous snakes, rabbits and similar species that do not constitute a public nuisance. 
u.  "Enclosure" means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and suitable to humanely confine an animal with adequate exercise area, and posted with an appropriate warning sign, in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner of the animal. The enclosure shall be designed in order to prevent the animal from escaping. The animal shall be housed pursuant to Section 597t of the California Penal Code. 
v.  "Exigent circumstances" refers to circumstances in which the officer, in his/her reasonable judgment, determines that a life threatening or serious injury may occur if immediate action is not taken, i.e., animal may die if not immediately transported to a veterinarian, or animal may bite and seriously injure a human or animal if not immediately impounded, or animal may die if officer does not immediately enter property and rescue, etc. 
w.  "Exotic animal" is defined as any animal which is not normally domesticated in the United States including, but not limited to, any lion, tiger, bear, non-human primate (monkey, chimpanzee, etc.), wolf, coyote, cougar, bobcat, ocelot, wildcat, skunk, boa, python, reptile, amphibian, bird, or venomous snake, irrespective of its actual or asserted state of docility, tameness or domesticity. 
x.  "Hearing Officer" means the person appointed by the Chief of Police to serve as the hearing officer under this Title. 
y.  "Hybrid animal" means any animal which is part wild animal and is capable of transmitting rabies, except livestock hybrids, and for which no rabies prophylaxis is recognized or authorized by the State of California. 
z.  "Impounded" means having been received into the custody of any animal control center, Animal Services Officer, animal control vehicle, or peace officer duly authorized by the "City" to receive such animal. 
aa.  "Incapable of breeding" means any dog or cat which has been examined by a California licensed veterinarian and determined to not be capable of reproducing. A certificate of sterility, signed by the veterinarian must be provided upon demand." 
bb.  "Large animals" means any livestock including, but not limited to, horses, donkeys, mules, pigs, and other equine cattle and cows. 
cc.  "Owner" means any person who intentionally provides care or sustenance for any animal, including but not limited to a dog or cat, for any period exceeding a total of 30 days. 
dd.  "Person" means any individual, firm, business, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, profit or non-profit association, club, or organization. 
ee.  "Public entity" means any state, or any political subdivision, municipal corporation profit or non-profit or agency thereof. 
ff.  "Sentry dog" refers to any dog trained to work without supervision in a fenced facility and to deter or detain unauthorized persons found within the facility. The term "guard dog" shall also mean "sentry dog". 
gg.  "Sentry dog kennel" means any building structure, enclosure, or premises whereupon, or within which, five or more guard or sentry dogs are kept or maintained. 
hh.  "Tract" means a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership. 
ii.  "Unaltered and unspayed" means a dog or cat, four months of age or older, that has not been spayed or neutered. A condition that exists in an animal which permits the producing of offspring. 
jj.  "Underdeveloped property" means any idle land that is not improved or actually in the process of being improved with structures or improvements intended for human use occupancy. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively as a street or highway or property used for commercial agricultural purposes. 
kk.  "Unlicensed" means any animal for which no valid license is currently in force. 
ll.  "Vaccination" means an inoculation against rabies of any dog or cat, four months of age or older, with any vaccine prescribed for that purpose by the California Department of Health Services. 
mm.  "Veterinarian" means a person holding a currently valid license to practice veterinary medicine issued by the state of California pursuant to Chapter 11 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
nn.  "Vicious dog/vicious cat" means any dog or cat which has bitten a person or animal without provocation or direction or which has a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation or direction. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1; Ord. 1020, 06/05/12) 
6.02.010 - Fees by resolution. 
    All fees authorized in this title shall be established, and may be amended from time-to-time, by resolution. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.020 - Reserved. 
6.02.030 - Provisions supplementary to other laws. 
    The provisions of this Title shall be in addition to all other laws, or the provisions in other Titles of the City governing or regulating the keeping of animals and livestock in the City and not a limitation thereof. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.040 - Reserved. 
6.02.050 - Interference with enforcement. 
    No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist an Animal Services Officer while engaged in the performance of the duties prescribed in this Title. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.060 - Entry upon private property. 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by law, all persons whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this Title. are hereby empowered to enter upon private property, where any dog, cat, or animal is kept or reasonably believed to be kept, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such animal is being kept in violation of any provision of this Title, other Title governing animals, or California State law relating to the regulation, care and/or keeping of animals. 
    Notwithstanding any provision in this Title relating to entry upon private property for any purpose under this Title, no such entry may be conducted: (a) without the express or implied consent of the property owner or the person having lawful possession thereof, or (b) unless an inspection warrant has been issued and the entry is conducted in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1812.50 through 1812.56, inclusive, or (c) except as may otherwise be expressly or impliedly permitted by law. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.070 - Animal keeping requirements. 
    Any property where animals are kept shall comply with all the requirements of this Title, Title 8, and Title 17, in addition to any other applicable codes relating to the keeping of animals. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.080 - Mandatory spay and neutering. 
    No person shall own, keep, or harbor an unaltered dog or cat in violation of this Section. An owner or custodian of an unaltered dog must have the dog spayed or neutered, or provide a certificate of sterility, or obtain an unaltered dog license in accordance with this Title. An owner or custodian of an unaltered cat must have the animal spayed or neutered, or provide a certificate of sterility. 
    Penalties issued for failure to spay or neuter a dog or cat shall be enforced as set forth below: 
a.  An administrative citation, infraction, or other such authorized penalty may be issued to an owner or custodian of an unaltered dog or cat for a violation of this section only when the owner or custodian is concurrently cited for another violation under state or local law pertaining to the obligations of a person owning or possessing a dog or cat. Examples of such state law or local violations include, but are not limited to, the following: failure to possess a current canine rabies vaccination of the subject dog; dog or cat at large; failure to license a dog; leash law violations; kennel or cattery permit violations; tethering violations; unhealthy or unsanitary conditions; failure to provide adequate care for the subject dog or cat in violation of the Penal Code; rabies quarantine violations for the subject dog; operating a business without a license and/or lack of State Tax ID Number; fighting dog activity in violation of Penal Code section 597.5; animals left unattended in motor vehicles; potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animals; and noisy animals. 
b.  Should the owner or custodian of an unaltered dog or cat be found in violation of a state or local law, as stated above, in subsection (1), the owner or custodian shall be required to spay or neuter the unaltered animal in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.090 - Mandatory spay and neutering-Exemptions. 
    This section shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  A dog with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death if spayed or neutered, due to age or infirmity. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of this fact from a California licensed veterinarian. If the dog is able to be safely spayed or neutered at a later date, that date must be stated in the written confirmation; should this date be later than 30 days, the owner or custodian must apply for an unaltered dog license. 
b.  A cat with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death if spayed or neutered, due to age or infirmity. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of this fact from a California licensed veterinarian. If the cat is able to be safely spayed or neutered at a later date; that date must be stated in the written confirmation. 
c.  Animals owned by City-licensed dog or cat breeders. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.100 - Mandatory micro-chipping of dogs. 
    All dogs over the age of four months must be implanted with an identifying microchip. The owner or custodian is required to provide the microchip number to the Department, and shall notify the Department of any change of ownership of the dog or cat, or any change of address or telephone number. Nothing in this section supersedes, eliminates, or alters the requirements of any other licensing requirements of this Title. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.105 - Mandatory micro-chipping of cats. 
    All cats who have been found at-large and have been transported to a shelter for redemption shall be implanted with an identifying micro-chip prior to release. The owner or custodian is required to provide the microchip number to the Department, and shall notify the Department of any change of ownership of the dog or cat, or any change of address or telephone number. Nothing in this section supersedes, eliminates, or alters the requirements of any other licensing requirements of this Title. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.110 - Mandatory micro-chipping of dogs and cats-Exemptions. 
    The mandatory microchipping requirements shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  A dog or cat with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily injury, if implanted with the microchip identification, due to the health conditions of the animal. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of that fact from a California licensed veterinarian. If the dog or cat is able to be safely implanted with an identifying microchip at a later date, the date must be stated in the written confirmation. 
b.  A dog or cat which would be impaired of its athletic ability or performance if implanted with the microchip identification. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of that fact from a California licensed veterinarian. If the dog or cat is able to be safely implanted with an identifying microchip at a later date, the date must be stated in the written confirmation. 
c.  A dog or cat that is kenneled or trained in the City, but is owned by an individual that does not reside in the City. The owner or custodian must keep and maintain the animal in accordance with the applicable laws of the jurisdiction in which the owner or custodian of the animal permanently resides, including but not limited to the applicable licensing and rabies vaccination requirements of that jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.120 - Transfer or sales of dogs, cats or other animals-Requirements. 
    An owner or custodian who offers any dog, cat or other animal, over the age of four months, for sale, trade, or adoption must provide the microchip identification number and the valid license number where applicable with the offer of sale, trade or adoption. The license and microchip numbers must appear on a document transferring the animal to the new owner. The owner or custodian shall also advise the Department of the name and address of the new owner or custodian in accordance with this Title. An owner or custodian who offers any dog, cat, or other animal, over the age of four months, for sale, trade, or adoption and fails to provide the Department with the name and address of the new owner is in violation of this Title and shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
    When a puppy or kitten under the age of four months implanted with microchip identification is sold or otherwise transferred to another person, the owner or custodian shall advise the Department of the name and address of the new owner or custodian, and the microchip number of the puppy or kitten within ten days after the transfer. If it is discovered that an owner or custodian has failed to provide the Department with the name and address of the new owner and the microchip number of the puppy or kitten, the owner or custodian shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this Title. 
    Additionally, any person who within the City, or any business entity or other organization located in or doing business in the City which, advertises or offers in any manner, puppies or dogs for sale, trade, barter or to be given away for free, must display in such advertisements, announcement or flyer the following information: 
a.  The license number and name of the licensing agency of each of the mother animals any of whose offspring are so offered (in the case of puppies under four months of age). 
b.  The license number and name of licensing agency of each of the dogs (in the case of dogs four months or more of age). 
c.  The kennel and/or rescue permit number and name of the permitting agency of the owner of each of the mother animals any of whose offspring are so offered (in the case of puppies under four months of age). 
d.  The kennel permit and/or rescue number and name of the permitting agency of the owner of each of the dogs so offered (in the case of dogs four months or more of age). 
    This Section shall not apply to public animal shelters or nonprofit humane societies which are in compliance with Food and Agricultural Code Sections 30503 and 31751, nor shall it apply to persons who relinquish animals to such shelters or societies. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.130 - Transfer, sale, and breeding of unaltered dog or cat. 
    An owner or custodian who offers any unaltered dog for sale, trade, or adoption must include a valid unaltered dog license number with the offer of sale, trade or adoption, or otherwise state and establish compliance with this section. The unaltered license and microchip numbers must appear on a document transferring the animal to the new owner. An owner or custodian of an unaltered cat must notify the Department of the name and address of the transferee within ten days after the transfer. The microchip numbers must appear on a document transferring the animal to the new owner. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.140 - Transfer or sales of animals on public property prohibited. 
    No person shall, in the City, transfer, offer for sale, or sell any animal, cat, kitten, dog or puppy on any public street, public sidewalk or public park. This prohibition does not apply to animal shelters or authorized organizations who conduct adoptions within the City. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.142 - Transfer or sale of animals at a swap meet prohibited. 
A.  Prohibition. No person shall, in the City, transfer, offer for sale, or sell any animal, reptile, fish, bird, including, without limitation, dogs, puppies, cats, kittens, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, mice, parakeets, snakes and frogs, at a swap meet conducted on public or private property. 
B.  Penalty for Violation. In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating this Section shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17, or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be an appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 1039, 11-19-13) 
6.02.150 - Animals in vehicles. 
    No person shall leave an animal in an unattended vehicle without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures which adversely affect the animal's health and welfare. If after a search of the area the owner cannot be found, the Animal Services Officer/Police Officer feels the animal's health is in danger, the animal may be removed from the vehicle and transported to a veterinarian for treatment per Chapter 6.08 of this Title. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.02.160 - Roosters, peacocks and flocks prohibited. 
    Except as provided in this Section, no person, either as owner, agent or employee, shall keep any roosters, peacocks, or flocks of five or more pigeons, doves, ducks or other birds or fowl, domestic or otherwise within the City of Beaumont. The keeping of such birds and other fowl is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
    Roosters, peacocks, birds or other fowl shall be permitted on parcels of one acre or larger in the Rural-Residential (R-R) Zone, provided that the number of roosters or peacocks shall not exceed one per acre, and the number of other types of birds or fowl shall not exceed five per acre. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.170 - Wild animal and mammals, poisonous snakes and other reptiles. 
    A non-domestic animal which is wild and potentially dangerous in its natural state and as defined in Section 1406 of the Fish and Game Code of the state, shall not be kept or maintained within the City without complying with all requirements as set forth in this and any other Titles of the City, in addition to the following: 
A.  Such person desiring to keep or maintain a wild animal, poisonous snake or reptile shall first obtain a permit from the State pursuant to Section 1450 of the Fish and Game Code of the State and shall meet any and all conditions required by the permit. 
B.  In addition thereto, the possessor shall obtain public liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 in which the City shall be named an additional insured. 
C.  The wild animal, snake or reptile may be transported through the City if it is confined in such a manner as to pose no threat, injury or harm to persons in this City. The animal must at all times be properly caged or tethered. In addition the person shall comply with all requirements as set forth in the Fish and Game Code of the State. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.180 - Abandonment. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly abandon any animal within the City. Any person violating this Section shall bear full costs and expenses incurred by the City in the care of said abandoned animal and the person shall reimburse to the City all costs therefore as determined by the Animal Services Officer. Abandonment shall include the owner's failure to redeem animals seized or impounded after proper notification of the seizure or impoundment has been issued. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.190 - Duties and powers of officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the Animal Services Officer to enforce all of the provisions of this Title, and other local and State laws relating to the regulation, care and/or keeping of animals. Animal Services Officers shall be empowered to: 
a.  Receive, take up and impound any dog or other animal found running at large in violation of this Title, any other Title or of any law of the State of California. 
b.  Issue a warning notice for, citation for, or investigate any violation of any provisions of any City Title or California law regarding the care or keeping of animals. 
c.  Investigate whether a dog is licensed in compliance with the requirements of this Title. 
d.  Seize or impound any animal as authorized by this Title or any other laws. When the animal to be taken or seized is located inside a private residence or in its curtilage, judicial order directing seizure of the animal shall, absent exigent circumstances, be obtained prior to seizure. 
e.  Regularly and adequately feed, water and otherwise care for any animals impounded under the provisions of this Title or any other law, or to provide for such feeding and/or watering and care. 
f.  Humanely provide emergency care, or destroy as needed, sick or injured animals. Any Animal Services Officer may arrest a person without warrant whenever he/she has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed an infraction or misdemeanor in his/her presence, or a felony which is in violation of this Title or any other laws governing animals or regulating the care and/or keeping of animals. In any case in which a person arrested, does not demand to be taken before a magistrate: 1) regarding any infraction, such officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written Notice to Appear and shall release the person on his/her promise to appear, as prescribed by Sec. 853.5 of the California Penal Code; 2) regarding a misdemeanor, such officer or employee may prepare a written Notice to Appear and may release the person on his/her written promise to appear, as prescribed by California Penal Code Section 853.6. Nothing in this Title shall prevent the Animal Services Officer from acting, when he/she deems it appropriate to do so, under the applicable provisions of California Penal Code, Section 597, et seq. 
The City Council may enter into a written agreement or agreements with any veterinarian, organized humane society, association, person, corporation or organization which will undertake to carry out the provisions of this Title and maintain and operate a shelter, and which will license, take up, impound and dispose of animals. Any such veterinarian or society or association which shall enter into such an agreement shall carry out all of the provisions of this Title in the manner herein prescribed. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.200 - Transport of injured animals to veterinarian. 
    Any peace officer, humane society officer, or Animal Services Officer shall convey all injured cats and dogs found without their owners in a public place directly to a veterinarian known by the officer to be a veterinarian who ordinarily treats dogs and cats for a determination of whether the animal shall be immediately and humanely destroyed or shall be hospitalized under proper care and given emergency treatment. If the animal is treated and recovers from its injuries, the animal will be put up for adoption after the prescribed period of time and no owner is found. If an owner for the animal is found they will be liable to all cost incurred for the care and treatment of the animal. The costs for the care and treatment of the animal will be required to be paid prior to the animal being returned to the owner. No veterinarian shall be criminally or civilly liable for any decision which he or she makes or for services which he or she provides pursuant to this section. An Animal Services Officer who takes possession of an animal pursuant to this section shall keep records of the whereabouts of the animal for a 72-hour period from the time of possession, and those records shall be available for inspection by the public upon request. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.210 - Recoupment of enforcement costs. 
    The City is hereby authorized to recoup all administrative costs reasonably related to the enforcement of this Title, including costs of staff time. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.220 - Waiver of fees. 
    At the discretion of the Animal Services Officer, the impoundment fees recoverable under this Title may be waived by the Animal Services Officer based upon indigent circumstances of the owner of the impounded animal that are verified by the Department of Animal Services, so long as the animal is being kept and maintained in accordance with all other provisions of this Title or any other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.02.230 - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Title or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the provisions of this Title which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Title are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
Chapter 6.04 - DOGS AND CATS-GENERAL PROVISIONS 

6.04.010 - Running at large. 
    No dog shall run at large in the City. No person owning or having the control or custody of any dog shall permit or allow such dog to run at large within the City. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.04.020 - Capture of dogs running at large. 
    In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be lawful for any person to capture, in a humane manner, any dog running at large in violation of this Title and to promptly deliver such dog to the Animal Services Officer who shall impound such dog. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.04.030 - Control of and unaltered cats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, harbors, or keeps any unaltered cat four months of age or older within the City to allow or permit such unaltered cat to be or remain outdoors within the City. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.04.040 - Cat trapping. 
    It is unlawful for any person to set or maintain an operating trap for a cat unless a sign is posted on the property stating that such a trap is in use on the property. The sign shall be clearly visible from the road serving the property on which the trap is set or maintained and shall remain posted and visible at all times while the trap is in use. Trapping shall not continue for more than ten days in a 30-day period. If a person maintains a trap should trap a lactating female cat, the person shall immediately release the cat thereby eliminating the chance of removing a cat that may be nursing kittens. This section shall not apply when the trap is being used for rabies control as determined by the Animal Services Officer. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.04.050 - Permitting animal to make nuisance prohibited. 
    No person shall permit or allow an animal to make a nuisance on any public property or any private property without consent of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.04.060 - Permitting animal to make nuisance prohibited-Exemptions. 
    Persons with defective sight, while relying on a dog specifically trained as a service dog, shall be exempt from this section. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.04.070 - Entering, swimming in ditches, canals and pools. 
    No person shall allow or permit any dog belonging to, or under the control of such person to enter, swim or remain in any drainage ditch within the City, or in any settling tank, ditch, canal or reservoir within the City, or any public swimming pool within the City. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.04.080 - Barking dog noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog or dogs under his or her charge, care, custody or control to emit any excessive noise after an Enforcement Officer has issued a written notice advising the owner or custodian of the alleged noise and the procedures as set forth below have been followed. For purposes of this section, the term "excessive noise" shall mean noise which is unreasonably annoying, disturbing, offensive, or which unreasonably interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of one or more persons occupying property in the community or neighborhood, within reasonable proximity to the property where the dog or dogs are kept. The noise must be continuously audible for ten minutes or intermittently audible for 30 minutes within a three-hour period. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any commercial animal establishment permitted by zoning law where located. Enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be as follows: 
A.  First Complaint. 
1.  Upon receiving a written complaint involving a whining, barking, howling, or similar dog noise, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a written notice to the owner or person having charge, care, or custody (hereinafter in this Section referred to as the owner) of the dog or dogs advising that person of the noise complaint and requesting immediate abatement of any excessive noise. 
2.  Complaints to the Enforcement Officer must include the name, address and telephone number of the complainant(s) as well as the address of the dog owner and a description of the noise. 
B.  Second Complaint. If, within 15 days from the issuance of the written notice pursuant to (a) above, a second complaint is received from the complainant along with a written complaint from an additional complainant residing in a separate residence within reasonable proximity to the dog(s), the Enforcement Officer shall, by written notice, require the complainant or complainants and the owner of the dog or dogs to appear at a meeting by the Enforcement Officer to discuss possible ways and means to resolve the problem. The Enforcement Officer may proceed with a meeting based on a second complaint from only one complainant if the Officer determines that the noise affects that complainant. If the problem remains unresolved, the owner shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this Section, and in the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, the Enforcement Officer may: 
1.  Seize and impound the dog(s) if the Enforcement Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of the animal(s) or the health and safety of others and provide the owner with an opportunity for a post-seizure hearing as provided in Section 6.08.050; or 
2.  Where the need for immediate seizure is not present, the Enforcement Officer shall provide the owner with an opportunity for a hearing prior to any seizure in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.08.060, or 
3.  Issue to the owner an Administrative Citation pursuant to Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or an Infraction Citation pursuant to Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 1012, February 21, 2012) 
6.04.090 - Guard or sentry dog-Signage requirements. 
    Any person or business using the services of a guard or sentry dog shall keep posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the premises, a sign having letters at least three inches in height reading "Guard Dog or "Sentry Dog." 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.04.100 - Traps and barking control devices-Rental fees. 
    The Department shall make available for residents cat traps and barking control devices for rental for a fee and term as set by resolution. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
Chapter 6.05 - DISPOSAL OF DOG AND HORSE FECES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 

6.05.010 - Duty to dispose of dog and horse feces on public and private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody of any dog and/or horse: 
A.  To permit or allow the dog and/or horse to defecate upon public property including, but not limited to, any sidewalk, street, park, public right-of-way or other public area within the City unless the owner or the person having control or custody of the dog and/or horse immediately removes the feces and properly disposes the container of the feces in a sanitary manner; or 
B.  To permit or allow the dog and/or horse to defecate upon private property neither owned nor occupied by said person unless the owner or the person having control or custody of the animal immediately removes the feces and properly disposes the container of the feces in a sanitary manner; or 
C.  To allow a dog or horse on public or private property without carrying at all times a suitable container or instrument for the removal and disposal of feces. 
(Ord. 1004, 11-2-2011) 
6.05.020 - Method of disposal. 
    Any person owning or having control or custody of a dog and/or horse shall have on or near his or her person a tool or device, such as a plastic bag, or any other disposal vessel that can be used to fully clean up and contain the feces, without exposing the feces to said person or the public, until it can be disposed of in a trash can or other appropriate receptacle. Such a tool, device or other disposable vessel shall be produced and shown to anyone authorized to enforce this Chapter, upon request. 
(Ord. 1004, 11-2-2011) 
6.05.030 - Exemptions. 
    Disabled persons accompanied by service dogs and persons using service dogs engaged in emergency and rescue operations, are exempt from the requirements of this Chapter, as are persons using horses while performing public safety functions and operations. 
6.05.040 - Penalty for violation. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 1004, 11-2-2011) 
Chapter 6.06 - ANIMAL LICENSES 

6.06.010 - Dog license required. 
    No person within the City owning, possessing, controlling, harboring, or keeping any dog over four months of age shall fail, refuse or neglect to procure a dog license tag for each dog, from the Animal Services Officer or his authorized agent. 
    The owner shall state at the time application is made, and upon standard printed forms of application provided for such purpose, his/her name and address, the name, breed, color, age, and sex of each dog for which application is made, and the grounds for exemption from fees, if applicable. 
    When a person moves into the City from another community who owns a dog which is currently vaccinated against rabies and for which dog a license was issued by such other community, such license shall be deemed valid for a period of one year from the date such person moves into the City or on the date of expiration of the license issued by such other community, whichever is earlier. 
    The owner shall notify the City within 30 days of moving into the City, and a City license shall be issued for the remainder of the license period as indicated, at no cost. If an application for a license from the Animal Services Officer is made more than 30 days after such license is required, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the applicable license fee, a late fee. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.020 - Optional licensing for cats. 
    An owner of a cat may be issued a license and tag for such cat upon presentation to the Animal Services Officer of a certificate of vaccination signed by a veterinarian certifying that such a cat has been vaccinated, and upon the payment of a license fee. Said license shall be valid for the period of immunity indicated in the certificate of vaccination. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.030 - Issuance of tags and certificates. 
    A metallic tag and license certificate with corresponding number shall be furnished by the Animal Services Officer upon compliance with all applicable requirements and payment of the appropriate fee. The Animal Services Officer shall keep a record of the owner or person making payment of the license fee and to whom a certificate and tag has been issued, and the number and date of the certificate and the tag. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.040 - Transfer of license prohibited. 
    No license or license tag issued to one dog shall be transferred to another dog. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.050 - Tag-Replacement. 
    If a valid license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate thereof may be procured from the Animal Services Officer upon submission to the Animal Services Officer of a statement signed by the owner of the dog containing the date and circumstances of such loss or destruction and the payment of a fee. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.060 - Display of license required. 
    A valid license shall be displayed upon the dog's collar pursuant to Section 30951(b) of the California Food and Agriculture Code. 
    Upon request of the Animal Services Officer, any owner of a dog which a license is required under the provisions of this Title shall present to the Animal Services Officer a currently valid certificate of rabies vaccination or license tag. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.070 - Tag-Removal prohibited. 
    No person shall remove from any dog any collar, harness, or other device to which is attached a registration tag for the current license year, or remove the tag there from without the express written permission of the Animal Services Officer. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.080 - Use of unauthorized license, tags, or other documents prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of a stolen, counterfeit or unauthorized license, tag, certificate or any other document or thing for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Title. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.090 - Term of license. 
    The term of each license issued shall terminate as of the termination date of the subject dog's most recent anti-rabies vaccination, and shall be renewed within 30 days after such period terminates, except that where the current vaccination for the dog which is the subject of the license shall expire prior to the expiration date of the license being applied for, the Animal Services Officer may upon request of the owner or custodian of such dog, backdate such license so that its expiration date occurs concurrent with or prior to the expiration date of the vaccination; provided, however, that where such backdating is performed, there shall be no reduction or discount of the license fee applicable to the license applied for, and such license shall be renewed within 30 days after the date of its expiration. 
    "Lifetime" license shall only refer to the waiver of licensing fees. Certificates of vaccinations as required by this Title shall be the determining factor if a license is valid as defined in this Title. 
    If an application for a license is made more than 30 days after the date a dog license is required under this Title, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the applicable license fee, a late fee. 
    Whenever a dog validly licensed under this Title shall have died more than three months before the expiration date of the license, the owner of such dog may return the license tag to the Animal Services Officer, accompanied by a statement signed by a veterinarian or a declaration signed under penalty of perjury by the owner, indicating that such dog is dead and specifying the date of death. In such event, the license shall be canceled and a pro-rata credit of the license fee by full calendar quarters of the original license period remaining after the death of the dog may be applied during said remaining period to the license fee for another dog acquired by the same owner. 
    The fees for a "lifetime" license shall be issued a pro-rata credit during only the first year of issuance. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.100 - Fees; fee exemptions. 
    All license fees due and payable hereunder shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the City Council. No fee shall be charged for: 
a.  No fee shall be required for a license for any "assistance dog" as defined in California Food and Agriculture Code, Section 30805(a), if such dog is in the possession and under the control of, in the case of a guide dog, a blind person, or in the case of a signal dog, a deaf or hearing-impaired person, or in the case of a service dog, a physically disabled person, or where such dog is in the possession and under the control of a bona fide organization having as its primary purpose the furnishing and training of guide dogs for the blind, signal dogs for the deaf or hearing-impaired, or service dogs for the physically disabled. However this provision does not remove the owner's responsibility to vaccinate said dogs against rabies and attach a current license tag to the dog's collar. Whenever a person applies for an assistance dog identification tag, the person shall sign an affidavit as defined in California Food and Agriculture Code, Section 30805(b). 
b.  No fee shall be required for a license for any dog owned by a public entity. 
c.  Any dog owned by, or in the care of, any person who is a nonresident or who is traveling through the City, or who is temporarily sojourning therein, provided the dog is kept within the City for less than 30 days. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.110 - Anti-rabies vaccination required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep any dog, four months of age or older, within the incorporated area of the City, for a period longer than 30 days, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Any person in the City who owns, harbors or keeps any dog over four months of age for a period longer than 30 days shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies as provided herein, by a veterinarian of his choice and such vaccination shall be renewed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the State of California. 
    Each veterinarian after vaccinating any dog shall sign a certificate of vaccination in triplicate in the form required by the Animal Services Officer. The veterinarian shall keep one copy, shall give one copy to the owner of the vaccinated dog and shall send one copy to the Department within 30 of vaccination. 
    The Animal Services Officer shall issue a license only upon presentation of a certificate of vaccination indicating therein that the date of expiration of the vaccination immunity is not earlier than the date of expiration of the license being issued or renewed, and upon payment of the applicable license fee as specified in this Title; provided, however, that where the vaccinated dog is between the ages of four months and 12 months, the period of vaccination immunity required for licensing shall be as specified by State law. 
    In the event a dog has a short-term illness, is pregnant, or suffers from a long-term debilitating illness which in the opinion of a veterinarian contraindicates vaccination for rabies, such dog shall not be required to undergo vaccination during the period of such illness or pregnancy where a request for vaccination deferral has been approved by the Animal Services Officer. Such request shall specify the duration of the requested deferral, the reason for the requested deferral, and shall be signed by a veterinarian. The Animal Services Officer shall issue a license for such dog upon approval of the request for vaccination deferral and payment for the applicable license fee. The owner or person having custody of such dog shall confine and shall keep such dog confined, for the duration of the deferral. Within fourteen (14) days after the expiration of the deferral, the owner or person having custody of such dog shall present to the Animal Services Officer a certificate of vaccination in accordance with the provisions of this Title. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.06.120 - Transfer of ownership. 
    Upon transfer of ownership of any dog validly licensed under this Title, the new owner shall notify the Animal Services Officer of such transfer within 30 days of such transfer, on a form prescribed by the Animal Services Officer, accompanied by a transfer fee. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.06.130 - Denial or revocation of license for unaltered dogs. 
    The Department may deny or revoke an unaltered dog license for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The owner, custodian, applicant or licensee is not in compliance with all of the requirements of this section; 
b.  The Department has received at least three complaints, verified by the Department, that the owner, custodian, applicant, or licensee has allowed a dog to be stray or run at large or has otherwise been found to be neglectful of his or her or other animals; 
c.  The owner, custodian, applicant, or licensee has been previously cited for violating a state law, other City or municipal provisions relating to the care and control of animals; 
d.  The unaltered dog has been adjudicated by a court or an agency of appropriate jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious, or to be nuisance within the meaning of the City of Beaumont Titles or under state law; 
e.  An unaltered dog license held by the applicant has been revoked; 
f.  The license application is discovered to contain a material misrepresentation or omission of fact. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.06.140 - Re-application for unaltered dog license. 
    When an unaltered dog license is denied, the applicant may re-apply for a license upon changed circumstances and a showing that the requirements of this Title have been met. The Department shall refund one-half of the license fees when the application is denied. The applicant shall pay the full fee upon re-application. 
    When an unaltered dog license is revoked, the owner or custodian of the dog may apply for a new license after a 30-day waiting period upon showing that the requirements of this Title have been met. No part of an unaltered dog license fee is refundable when a license is revoked and the applicant shall pay the full fee upon reapplication. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.06.150 - Appeal of denial or revocation of unaltered dog license. 
    The Department shall mail to the owner, custodian, licensee, or applicant a written notice of its intent to deny or revoke the license for an unaltered dog which includes the reason(s) for the denial or revocation. The owner, custodian, licensee or applicant may request a hearing to appeal the denial or revocation. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 6.22 of this Title. If the dog is moved before or during the appeal process, the owner, custodian, licensee, or applicant shall provide the Department with information as to the dog's whereabouts, including the current owner or custodian's name, address, and telephone number. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
Chapter 6.08 - SEIZURE OR IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS 

6.08.010 - Seizure or impoundment of animals. 
A.  Emergency Seizure or Impoundment: When the Animal Services Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of an animal, or the health or safety of others, the Officer shall immediately seize the animal and comply with the procedure established in Section 6.08.050. 
B.  Non-Emergency Seizure: In all other cases, the officer shall comply with the provisions of Section 6.08.060. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.08.020 - Capture of animals running at-large-Private persons. 
    In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be lawful for any person to take up, in a humane manner, any animal running at-large in violation of this Title and to promptly deliver such animal to the Animal Services Department. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.08.030 - Notice of impoundment-Requirements. 
    In the event that there is attached to any impounded animal a current license tag of the City, or if the animal has a micro-chip inserted, it shall be the duty of the Animal Services Officer to give notice of the impoundment of such animal to the owner or person claiming to own such animal, or to the person to whom such tag shall have been issued, or micro-chip registered as shown by the records of the City. This notice shall be accomplished within three business days after impoundment, and given by mailing, postage pre-paid, stating the fact that the animal has been impounded and the manner in which the animal may be redeemed. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.08.040 - Length of confinement. 
    The Animal Services Officer shall cause for the confinement of the animal as required by this Title for the period of time as required by statute. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.08.050 - Post-seizure/impound hearing. 
    Whenever an Animal Services Officer seizes, impounds, or receives an animal based on a reasonable belief that prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of others, the officer shall, prior to the commencement of any enforcement proceedings, provide the owner or keeper of the animal, if known or ascertained after reasonable investigation, with the opportunity for a post-seizure hearing as hereinafter provided to determine the validity of the seizure or impoundment, or both. 
A.  The Animal Services Department shall cause a notice to be affixed to a conspicuous place where the animal was situated or personally deliver a notice of the seizure or impoundment, or both, to the owner or keeper within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays. The notice shall include all of the following: 
1.  The name, business address, and telephone number of the officer providing the notice; 
2.  A description of the animal(s) seized, including any identification upon the animal(s); 
3.  The authority and purpose for the seizure, or impoundment, including the time, place and circumstances under which the animal was seized; 
4.  A statement that, in order to receive a post-seizure hearing, the owner of person authorized to keep the animal, or his or her agent, shall request the hearing by signing and returning an enclosed declaration of ownership or right to keep the animal to the animal control officer within ten days, including weekends and holidays, of the date of the notice. The declaration may be returned by personal delivery or mail; 
5.  A statement that the cost of caring for and treating any animal properly seized under this section is a lien on the animal and that the animal shall not be returned to the owner until the charges are paid, and that failure to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall result in liability for this cost. 
B.  The post-seizure hearing shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 6.22 of this Title. 
C.  Failure of the owner or keeper, or of his or her agent, to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, or to attend a scheduled hearing, shall result in forfeiture of any right to a post-seizure hearing or right to challenge his or her liability for costs incurred. 
D.  The City shall be responsible for the costs incurred for caring and treating the animal(s), if it is determined in the post-seizure hearing that the seizing officer did not have reasonable grounds to believe prompt seizure of the animal(s), was required to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of others. If it is determined the seizure was justified, the owner or keeper shall be personally liable to the City for the cost of the seizure and care of the animal(s), and the animal(s) shall not be returned to its owner until the charges are paid and the City or hearing officer has determined that the animal(s) is physically fit or the owner demonstrates to the City's or the hearing officer's satisfaction that the owner can and will provide the necessary care. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.08.060 - Hearing prior to seizure of animal(s). 
    Where the need for immediate seizure is not present and prior to the commencement of any criminal proceedings, the Animal Services Officer shall provide the owner or keeper of the animal(s), if known or ascertained after reasonable investigation, with the opportunity for a hearing prior to any seizure or impoundment of the animal(s). The owner shall produce the animal(s) at the time of the hearing unless, prior to the hearing, the owner has made arrangements with the Animal Services Officer to view the animal(s) upon request of the Animal Services Officer, or unless the owner can provide verification that the animal was humanely destroyed. It is a violation of this Section if such person willfully fails to produce the animal or provide the verification. 
A.  The Animal Services Officer shall cause a notice to be affixed to a conspicuous place where the animal(s) was situated or personally deliver a notice stating the grounds for believing the animal(s) should be seized. The notice shall include all of the following: 
1.  The name, business address, and telephone number of the Officer providing the notice; 
2.  A description of the animal(s) to be seized, including any identification upon the animal(s); 
3.  The authority and purpose for the possible seizure or impoundment; 
4.  A statement that, in order to receive a hearing prior to any seizure, the owner or person authorized to keep the animal(s), or his or her agent, shall request the hearing by signing and returning the enclosed declaration of ownership or right to keep the animal(s) to the officer providing the notice within two days, excluding weekends and holidays, of the date of the notice; 
5.  A statement that the cost of caring for and treating any animal properly seized is a lien on the animal, that any animal seized shall not be returned to the owner until the charges are paid, and that failure to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, or to attend a scheduled hearing shall result in a conclusive determination that the animal(s) may properly be seized and that the owner shall be liable for the charges. 
B.  The pre-seizure hearing shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 6.22 of this Title. 
C.  Failure of the owner or keeper, or his or her agent, to request a hearing within the prescribed time period or to attend a scheduled hearing, shall result in a forfeiture of any right to a pre seizure hearing or right to challenge his or her liability for costs incurred to this chapter. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.08.070 - Cost of seizure and care-Owner liable. 
    If any animal is properly seized or impounded under this chapter, the owner or keeper shall be personally liable to the seizing/impounding agency for the cost of the seizure/impoundment and care of the animal(s). Furthermore, if the charges for the seizure or impoundment, and any other charges permitted under this chapter are not paid within 14 days of the seizure, or, if the owner, within 14 days of notice of availability of the animal(s) to be returned, fails to pay charges permitted under this chapter and take possession of the animal(s), the animal(s) shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be disposed of by the Impounding Officer. The cost of caring for and treating any animal properly seized under this chapter shall constitute a lien on the animal and the animal shall not be returned to its owner until the charges are paid, unless the hearing officer determines that the seizure was unjustified. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.08.080 - Noncompliance with order to provide veterinary care. 
    If the animal requires veterinary care and the seizing agency is not assured, within 14 days of the seizure of the animal(s), that the owner will provide the necessary care, the animal(s) shall not be returned to its owner and shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be disposed of by the impounding Officer. A veterinarian or properly trained Animal Services Officer may humanely destroy an impounded animal without regard to the prescribed holding period when it has been determined that the animal has incurred severe injuries or is incurably ill or crippled. A veterinarian or properly trained Animal Services Officer may also immediately humanely destroy an impounded animal afflicted with a serious contagious disease unless the owner or his or her agent immediately authorizes treatment of the animal(s) by a veterinarian at the expense of the owner or agent. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.08.090 - Return to owner-Conditions. 
    No animal properly seized under this chapter shall be returned to its owner until, in the determination of the seizing agency or hearing officer, the animal is physically fit or the owner can demonstrate to the seizing agency's or hearing officer's satisfaction that the owner can and will provide the necessary care, and that the owner has complied with all requirements of this and any other Titles in this Code. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.08.100 - Authority of the Hearing Officer. 
    All hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6.22 of this Title. In the event a sufficient quantum of evidence presented at the hearing supports a determination for seizure, impoundment and/or termination of the owner's rights of the animal(s), the hearing officer as a part of his decision may order, but is not limited to ordering, that one or more of the following actions be undertaken: 
1.  That the owner's and/or custodian's rights in and to the dog, cat or other animal(s) is terminated; 
2.  That the owner or custodian of the dog, cat or other animal(s) shall remove the animal(s) from the premises by a specified date; 
3.  That animal control personnel, after a specified date, shall impound the animal(s). 
4.  That animal control personnel shall sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of, the animal(s) with the owner or custodian of the animal(s) being responsible to reimburse the City or agency as designated by the City for all costs and expenses including, but not limited to, board, care, veterinary services, and costs of disposal. If the animal(s) are sold, the proceeds from the sale shall go to the City or agency designated by the City. 
    A decision upholding seizure or impoundment shall become effective upon issuance. A decision terminating an owner's rights in the animal(s) shall become effective 30 days from the date the decision is mailed unless a stay of execution is granted. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
Chapter 6.10 - POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS 

6.10.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings: 
a.  Potentially dangerous dog means any of the following: 
(1)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
(2)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe injury than as defined in subparagraph B below. 
(3)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior 36-month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
b.  Severe injury means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.10.020 - Applicability. 
    This chapter does not apply to licensed kennels, humane society shelters, animal control facilities, or veterinarians; or any dogs while utilized by any police department or any law enforcement officer in the performance of police work. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.10.030 - Procedure for declaring a dog potentially dangerous. 
a.  If the Animal Services Officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous, the Officer shall prepare and serve a Notice of Hearing on the owner or keeper of such dog. 
b.  The Notice of Hearing shall be served on the owner or keeper of the dog, by personal service or by first-class mail with return receipt requested. 
c.  Any and all complaints received from a member of the public which serves as an evidentiary basis for the Animal Services Officer's finding of probable cause shall be signed by the complainant and served concurrently with the Notice of Hearing. 
d.  The hearing shall be held pursuant to Chapter 6.22 of this Title. The hearing officer may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the dog is potentially dangerous and may make such orders as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such orders may include, but are not limited to, those conditions set forth in Section 6.12.070 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1035, 5-7-13) 
6.10.040 - Pre-hearing seizure and impoundment of dog. 
    If upon investigation it is determined by the Animal Services Officer that probable cause exists to believe the dog in question poses an immediate threat to public safety, then the Animal Services Officer may seize and impound the dog pending the hearings to be held pursuant to this Chapter. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be liable to the City of Beaumont where the dog is impounded for the costs and expenses of keeping the dog, if the dog is later adjudicated potentially dangerous. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.10.050 - When a dog may not be declared potentially dangerous. 
    No dog may be declared potentially dangerous if the following conditions exist: 
a.  If any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time of the injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
b.  If the dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. 
c.  If an injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which at the time of the injury or damage was sustained was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog. 
d.  If the injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
Chapter 6.12 - VICIOUS ANIMALS 

6.12.010 - Purpose. 
    The keeping of an animal defined as vicious shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The procedure for abatement set forth in this Chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the City from enforcing other City Titles or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law including, but not limited to, California Civil Code Section 3062.5. Further, this Chapter shall not preempt or preclude a person from filing a private lawsuit seeking to abate as a private nuisance an animal that is vicious. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.020 - Vicious dog defined. 
    "Vicious dog" means any of the following: 
A.  Any dog seized under Section 599aa of the Penal Code and upon sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the Penal Code. 
B.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being. 
C.  Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in Section 31602 or is maintained in violation of Section 31602 or is maintained in violation of Section 31641, 31642, or 31643 of the Food and Agricultural Code. 
D.  "Enclosure" means a fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and which is suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper of the dog. The enclosure shall be designed in order to prevent the animal from escaping. The animal shall be housed pursuant to Section 597t of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.030 - Inspection. 
    Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this Chapter, or whenever an Animal Services Officer has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this Chapter or other applicable law, an Animal Services Officer is authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon the Animal Services Officer by this Code or other applicable law; provided that: 
A.  If such property is occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining the reasons therefore. If such entry is refused, the Animal Services Officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the property, including an inspection warrant. 
B.  If such property is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property and request entry, explaining the reasons therefore. If such entry cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence, the Animal Services Officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the property, including an inspection warrant. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if an Animal Services Officer has probable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the life or safety of the animal, other animals, or the public, he/she shall have the right immediately to enter and inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property be occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property be occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefore and purpose of the inspection. 
D.  No person shall interfere with, hinder, fail or refuse, after proper demand has been made upon him or her as provided in Subsection C of this Section, to permit any Animal Services Officer to make any inspection provided by Subsection C of this Section. Any person violating this Section may be charged with a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.040 - Animals at large. 
A.  A person who owns or is in charge of or controls or who possesses an animal who permits, allows, or causes the animal to run, stray, be uncontrolled or in any manner be in, upon, or at large upon a public street, sidewalk, park or other public property or in or upon the premises or private property of another person shall be guilty as provided in Subsection B of Section 6.12.080 of this Chapter if such animal bites, attacks or causes injury to any human being or other animal. 
B.  Any person who convicted of violating Subsection A of this Section shall not own, possess, control or have custody of any animal of the type, species, group or family which caused the bite, attack or injury for a period of three years after the date of conviction. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.050 - Temporary impoundment or confinement. 
A.  The Animal Services Officer shall have the power to summarily and immediately impound an animal where there is evidence that the animal is an immediate danger to public safety pending: 
1.  Any court proceeding; or 
2.  A hearing to be held pursuant to Chapter 6.22 of this Title. The owner of the animal shall be liable for the costs and expenses of impounding and keeping the animal if the animal is later determined to be vicious. 
B.  Failure to surrender to the Animal Services Officer upon demand an animal which is subject to being impounded pursuant to this Section shall be penalized as provided in Subsection B of Section 6.12.080. 
C.  An animal impounded pursuant to the authority of this Section shall be returned to the owner as provided by Section 6.12.060 of this Chapter, or when the animal is no longer required as evidence, or if a notice of a hearing pursuant to Section 6.12.050 of this Chapter to declare the animal a vicious animal has not been served on the owner or custodian within 15 working days after the impoundment. 
D.  In lieu of impounding and if not contrary to public safety, the Animal Services Officer may permit the animal to be confined at the owner's expense in an Animal Services Officer-approved kennel or veterinary facility or at the owner's residence provided the owner: 
1.  Shall not remove the animal from the kennel, veterinary facility, or residence without the prior written approval of the Animal Services Officer; and 
2.  Shall make the animal available for observation and inspection by the Animal Services Officer or members of law enforcement or their authorized representatives. The Animal Services Officer shall dictate to the owner the exact way the animal is to be restrained while awaiting the hearing. 
E.  The Animal Services Officer may have an animal that has been impounded or confined permanently identified by means of photo identification prior to release from impoundment or confinement. 
F.  If there is no reasonable method available to determine ownership of the animal, then the animal may be considered a stray. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1; Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.060 - Hearing procedures. 
A.  Petition. If the animal services officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that an animal is vicious, the Animal Services Officer shall petition the Chief of Police for a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the animal should be declared vicious. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.22 of this Title. 
B.  Determinations of Vicious Animals-Evidence. In making a determination that an animal is or is not vicious, evidence of the following shall be considered: 
1.  Any previous history of the animal attacking, biting or causing injury to a human being or other domestic animal; 
2.  The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of victims involved; 
3.  The place where the bite, attack or injury occurred; 
4.  The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack or injury; 
5.  The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed; 
6.  Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics of being trained for fighting or attack or other evidence to show such training or fighting; 
7.  Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings or other domestic animals; 
8.  Whether the animal can be effectively trained or retrained to change its temperament or behavior; 
9.  The manner in which the animal had been maintained or cared for by its owner; 
10.  Any other relevant evidence concerning the maintenance or care of the animal; and; 
11.  Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner or the Animal Services Officer, to protect the public safety in the future if the animal is permitted to remain in the City. 
C.  Vicious Animal Declared. After the hearing, the hearing officer may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the animal is vicious and may make other orders authorized by this Chapter and other law. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.070 - Vicious animals-Disposition. 
A.  The owner of an animal which has bitten any person or a domestic animal, or has otherwise been determined, after a hearing, to be vicious, may be required as a condition of the release of the animal from confinement or impoundment, in addition to paying all costs of any impoundment, to comply with the written disposition of the hearing officer which contains any or all of the following conditions requiring the owner: 
1.  Registration. To immediately register the animal that is found to be vicious with the Animal Services Officer, to comply with the Animal Services Officers requirements for vicious animals (including, but not limited to, requiring the animal to wear a visible, vicious animal tag), and to keep such animal properly vaccinated at all times. The owner shall pay a fee to keep or maintain one vicious animal for a 12-month term and an additional fee for each additional vicious animal. The fee shall be paid for each 12-month term. Should the animal die in any four month term, the owner shall notify the Animal Services Officer of the death within two working days of the death. The owner shall provide proof of the death to the satisfaction of the Animal Services Officer. The amount of the fees shall be established from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council. 
2.  Confinement. To keep the animal securely confined on its premises in a locked enclosure approved by the hearing officer or the Animal Services Officer from which the animal cannot escape and into which children cannot trespass. Such a kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine the animal must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the side of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures erected to house an animal must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City. All such structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated, and kept in a cleaned sanitary condition. 
3.  Confinement While on Leash. To keep the animal securely muzzled, restrained by a substantial leash of appropriate length and under the control of a responsible person 18 years of age or older who is physically capable of restraining the animal when the animal is not contained in a locked, secure enclosure. 
4.  Spay or Neuter the Animal. To have the animal spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian and to present proof to the Animal Services Officer. 
5.  Insurance. To provide and maintain financial responsibility for injuries to the public by obtaining and showing proof of liability insurance in the form and amount deemed to be acceptable by the hearing officer in light of all the circumstances. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless 30 days written notice is first given to the Animal Services Officer and the City Clerk's office. 
6.  Notification. To immediately inform any City, county, postmaster and utility company meter reader and anyone-else that lawfully comes onto the property, of the animal's dangerousness and to inform the Animal Services Officer and/or the hearing officer if the animal is moved to another location inside or outside the City limits as provided in Section 6.06.150 of this Chapter. 
7.  Signs. To display in a prominent place on the premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog" or "Beware of Animal" in letters at least three inches high. 
8.  Identification. To have a registration number assigned to such animal tattooed by a licensed veterinarian on the animal's inner thigh or inserted by a licensed veterinarian under the animal's skin by means of an electronic identification device. The manner and method of identification to be used hereunder shall be determined by the hearing officer. For the purposes of this Section, "tattoo" shall be defined as any permanent numbering of an animal by means of indelible or permanent ink. 
9.  Inspection. To consent and agree to the entry upon the premises to any Animal Services Officer for the purpose of inspecting the animal and/or premises. 
10.  Payment of Costs. To make reasonable payment of one-half of the costs incurred by the City and the Animal Services Officer in the hearing process, not to exceed $1,000.00. 
11.  Other. To take any other steps deemed reasonably necessary to prevent injuries to the public. The owner of the animal shall comply with the conditions imposed by the hearing officer within the time limit specified in Section 6.12.070 of this Chapter. 
B.  No vicious animal shall be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure. 
C.  If, following the hearing, the subject animal is found to be vicious and such a threat to public safety that even if reasonable conditions were imposed to release the animal to the owner it would create a significant threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, such animal may be destroyed. Such remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies at law or in equity and shall not limit or restrict such other remedies, including, but not limited to, Section 6.12.080(A), which authorizes the hearing officer to order an animal destroyed for violation of this Chapter or failure to meet a condition imposed by the hearing officer. 
D.  Any decisions made by the hearing officer shall be final. 
E.  If, after notice, the owner of an impounded animal fails to appear or be represented at the required hearing, then the animal may be considered abandoned. If the subject animal does not appear to be validly licensed and no owner can be found, and if the animal has been determined to be vicious, then the animal may be considered abandoned and may be handled in the same manner as any other unclaimed stray animal. 
F.  If such an unlicensed animal has not been determined to be vicious, it shall be returned to the owner, subject to the issuance of a citation for failure to obtain a license. A non-vicious stray animal will be handled as any other stray animal. 
G.  In such cases where an impounded licensed animal is found to be vicious, the animal may be released subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this Section. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.080 - Transfer and training of vicious animals. 
A.  Sale or Transfer within City. No person shall sell, transfer or in any other way dispose of an animal deemed vicious under this Chapter to any person within the City, including, but not limited to, temporary housing in privately-owned and commercial kennels unless the recipient person resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the owner of such animal. 
B.  Sale or Transfer Outside City. The owner of an animal that has been deemed vicious under this Chapter may sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of such animal or the offspring thereof to persons who do not reside within the City, provided the owner first notifies the hearing officer and the Animal Services Officer of the proposed sale or transfer. Such notice shall be given not less than 15 days in advance of the sale or transfer and shall specify the name and address of the recipient person. Upon receipt of such notice, the hearing officer or the Animal Services Officer may notify the governmental jurisdiction in which the recipient person is located or resides. Failure to comply with these notification provisions shall be grounds for immediate impoundment of the animal by the Animal Services Officer. 
C.  Sale or Transfer Into City. It is unlawful for a person to possess, own or control any animal for the purpose of either temporary or permanent care in the City limits that has been deemed by another governmental jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous, vicious, or a threat to the safety of human beings or domestic animals. The Animal Services Officer may order the person having possession, ownership or control of the animal to remove the animal immediately from the City. Should such person fail to comply with the Animal Services Officer's order, the Animal Services Officer may summarily and immediately impound the animal. The owner of the animal shall be liable for the costs and expenses of impounding and keeping the animal. Such impounded animals may then be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  Fight Training and Animal Abuse Prohibited. It is unlawful to use, train, keep, harbor, own or in any way possess or transport through the City an animal for the purpose of animal fight exhibitions. Scars and wounds are rebuttal evidence of participation in animal fight exhibitions or training. "Fight training" is defined to include, but not limited to: 
1.  The use or possession of treadmills for fight training; 
2.  Actions designed to torment, badger or bait any animal for purpose of encouraging said animal for fight exhibitions; 
3.  The use of weights on the animal for fight training; 
4.  The use of other animals for blood sport training; 
5.  Any other activity, the primary purpose of which is the training of animals for animal fight exhibitions. It is further unlawful for anyone to knowingly abuse any animal within the City limits. 
E.  Rewards. Subject to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of this Code, the City is authorized to offer rewards not exceeding $250.00 to any person providing information leading to the arrest of any person for violations of prohibitions against the training of an animal for fight exhibitions. The City Council may authorize said rewards by resolution upon the request of the City Manager, Animal Services Officer or the Mayor. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.090 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Failure to Comply. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal deemed vicious under this Chapter to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this Chapter. Any animal found to be the subject of a violation of this Chapter or of any condition imposed by the hearing officer pursuant to Section 6.12.060 of this Chapter shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply will result in the destruction of the animal. No such animal however, may be destroyed until the owner of the animal has received written notice from the hearing officer that the animal will be destroyed unless, within 14 days from the date of the notice: 
1.  The owner has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the hearing officer that the owner has fully complied with the requirements and conditions set forth in this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the conditions imposed by the hearing officer pursuant to Section 6.12.060 of this Chapter; or 
2.  The owner has filed in a court of competent jurisdiction a petition that seeks to stay destruction of the animal and has served a copy of such petition upon the hearing officer. The notice from the hearing officer shall be served upon the owner either personally or by prepaid first-class mail. If, after 14 days from the date of such notice, the owner has not complied with the provisions of Subdivisions 1 or 2 of this Subsection, the hearing officer may, without further notice or process, have the animal destroyed. 
B.  Violation-Penalties. In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.100 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.06.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.06.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.06.010. Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Payment of any penalty herein shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for correcting the violation 
C.  Ownership of Vicious Animals. The owner of an animal determined to be vicious under this Chapter shall be prohibited from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any other animal of the type, species, group or family to which the violation applies for a period of three years from the date of violation when it is found after the hearing conducted pursuant to Section 6.12.070 of this Chapter that ownership or possession of such animal by that person would create a significant threat to public health, safety or welfare. 
D.  Enforcement. Any provision of this Chapter may be enforced by the Police Department, Fire Department, the Animal Services Officer or any authorized designee of the City Manager. Complaints of any violations of this Chapter which are subject to penalties under this Section may be presented to the District Attorney's office or to the City Attorney for prosecution. 
E.  Nuisance Abatement Lien. The costs of abating a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter may be recovered from the owner of the animal causing the public nuisance. If the owner fails to pay such costs within 30 days from the date of invoice or within an extended period of time agreed to in writing by the hearing officer, the costs may be collected by a nuisance abatement lien, as provided by Section 38773.1 of the California Government Code. Notice of the lien shall be given to the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained prior to recordation of the lien and in the manner specified in said Section 38773.1. 
F.  Penalties and Remedies Cumulative. The penalties and remedies specified herein shall not be exclusive but shall be cumulative with all other remedies at law or in equity. The City may, in its discretion, elect to pursue anyone or more of the penalties or remedies provided for herein or at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
6.12.100 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions contained in this Chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any dog while utilized by any police department or any law enforcement officer in the performance of police work; 
B.  Any animal shelter owned, operated or maintained by the Animal Services Officer; or 
C.  Any humane society shelter, animal control facility or veterinarian 
(Ord. 1005, 10-18-11) 
Chapter 6.14 - RABID ANIMALS 

6.14.010 - Destruction of rabid dog or animal. 
    If it appears to the Animal Services Officer, upon examination, that any dog or other animal has rabies, he/she shall cause such animal to be destroyed forthwith. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.14.020 - Suspect animal-Confinement and treatment. 
A.  Officers or persons capturing a dog or other animal which is suspected of being afflicted with rabies may separately confine such dog or other animal in some safe place and report the capture to the chief of police or his representative and submit such a dog or other animal to the chief of police or his representative for examination. 
B.  The Animal Services Officer, when called upon, shall examine or have examined every such animal and ascertain whether such animal is infected with rabies. 
C.  Owners of animals impounded for quarantine at a City or county facility shall be charged a daily quarantine fee in addition to the regular daily boarding fee. 
D.  Animal Services Officers investigating and authorizing a home quarantine shall collect a fee from the owner or custodian of the animal in an amount established from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.14.030 - Quarantine of rabid animals. 
A.  Whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person, the owner or person having custody or possession of such biting dog or other animal shall, upon order of the Animal Services Officer, quarantine it and keep confined for a period not to exceed 14 days, and shall allow the Animal Services Officer to make an inspection or examination of such dog or other animal at any time during such period; provided, that upon request of the owner, who shall assume any charges therefore, any dog or other animal with a valid vaccination may be confined by a licensed veterinary for observation, and a written release from such veterinary shall be required. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog has rabies to allow such dog to be taken off his premises or beyond the City limits without the written permission of the Animal Services Officer. Every owner or other person having custody or control of the dog or other animal knowing the same is rabid shall immediately notify the Animal Services Officer or a police officer who shall make the determination to remove the dog or animal from the premises, leave it, or destroy it. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.14.040 - Animals bitten by rabid animals-Confinement by owners. 
    Whenever any animal has been bitten by another animal having or suspected of having rabies, the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal so bitten shall immediately notify the Animal Services Officer and shall restrain or confine such animal so as to make it impossible for such animal to bite any other animal or person. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.14.050 - Animals bitten by rabid animals-Quarantine by animal services officer. 
    The Animal Services Officer shall have the power to quarantine any animal bitten or suspected of having been bitten by a rabid animal. Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or has been in intimate contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal shall be quarantined in a place and manner approved by the Animal Services Officer, for a period of up to six months or destroyed, with the exception that the following alternatives are permitted in the case of dogs and cats as follows: 
A.  If a dog over one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies within eight months but not less than 30 days with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by the Animal Services Officer for a maximum immunity duration of at least eight months, the dog may be revaccinated immediately (within 48 hours) in a manner prescribed by the Animal Services Officer and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer for a period of 30 days following revaccination. 
B.  If a dog under one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies within four months but not less than 30 days with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by the Animal Services Officer, the dog may be revaccinated immediately (within 48 hours) in a manner prescribed by the Animal Services Officer and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer for a period of 30 days. 
    All costs of quarantine shall be paid for by the owner. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.14.060 - Immunization for dogs over four months. 
    All dogs over four months of age shall be immunized against rabies in the manner set forth in Sections 6.14.070 through 6.14.090. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.14.070 - Immunization method. 
    Immunization or vaccination with the canine rabies vaccine, one injection or other approved method may be performed by any duly qualified, licensed physician or veterinarian. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.14.080 - Certificate of rabies vaccination-Issuance. 
    The person vaccinating each dog described in Section 6.16.070 shall issue a certificate of rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.14.090 - Certificate of rabies vaccination-Prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    At the time of issuing the license required under Section 6.06.010 for all dogs in the City, the license collector or other proper official shall require the applicant for such a license to produce a certificate of rabies vaccination. The validity of such rabies certificate must extend through the license period. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.14.100 - Failure to quarantine. 
    Failure to comply with quarantine requirements or failure to produce an animal for quarantine shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. Persons who violate a home quarantine, fail to produce an animal for quarantine upon demand, or in any other way interfere with rabies investigation, shall, in the discretion of the Animal Services Officer, be administratively cited under Section 1.17.100 et seq., or shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, pursuant to Section 041710 of the California Health and Safety Code and Section 9701 of the California Food and Agriculture Code, which is punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed one year, or by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00 per day of violation, or both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
Chapter 6.16 - KENNELS, CATTERIES AND ANIMAL RESCUE FACILITIES 

6.16.010 - Commercial kennel/cattery license required. 
    In addition to a business license as required, every person engaged in the business of operating or maintaining a Class I kennel, Class II kennel, Class III kennel, Class IV kennel, sentry dog kennel, or cattery shall obtain an appropriate license from the Animal Services Department. Such license shall be valid for a period of either one or two years from the date of issuance. Said license shall be renewed within 30 days after the date of expiration. Where a kennel license has been issued and is in effect, the dogs contained in such kennel shall be exempt from the requirements of individual license tags as required by this Title. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.16.020 - Application requirements. 
    An application for a kennel or cattery license shall be filed with the Animal Services Officer on a form prescribed by him/her not later than ten days after obtaining written verification from the City planning department that the operation of the kennel or cattery is in compliance with the applicable zoning regulations. Said application form, when completed, shall contain such information as may reasonably be required by the Animal Services Officer for the purposes of enforcement of this Title, including but not limited to the current home telephone number of the caretaker of the subject kennel or cattery and another current telephone number for emergency use or messages when such caretaker is absent from the subject kennel or cattery. Where a kennel or cattery is sought to be operated upon leased or rented premises, a letter of consent from the owner of the premises to the effect that the kennel or cattery may be maintained and operated on such premises shall be submitted to the Animal Services Officer at the time the application for the kennel or cattery license is submitted. 
    After receipt of a kennel or cattery license application, the Animal Services Officer shall make an inspection of the premises of the kennel or cattery for which a license is requested. No kennel or cattery license shall be issued, nor shall any such license be renewed, unless and until the kennel or cattery, in the opinion of the Animal Services Officer, satisfies the applicable laws and regulations of the State of California, the applicable Titles of the City and any other applicable conditions as set forth in this Chapter or any other applicable Chapters. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, the Animal Services Officer or the Planning Director may, in their respective discretion, limit the numbers of dogs or cats over the age of four months which are kept or maintained in any kennel or cattery, and such limitation may be imposed at such time as an application for an initial kennel or cattery license is considered or at such time as an application for renewal of a kennel or cattery license is considered. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, the Animal Services Officer is hereby authorized to enter upon and inspect the premises of any kennel or cattery located in the City for the purpose of determining whether such kennel or cattery is in compliance with the provisions of this Title and the conditions set forth in Chapter 17.09 of the Municipal Code. As a condition of the issuance of a kennel or cattery license, each owner and operator of a kennel or cattery shall agree to allow such entry and inspection and such agreement shall be made a part of the license application. Such inspections shall be made during reasonable hours at times when the owner or operator of the kennel or cattery is present on the kennel or cattery premises, and with such frequency as the Animal Services Officer shall deem appropriate, and such inspections may, at the discretion of the Animal Services Officer, be made without prior notice to the owner or operator of the subject kennel or cattery. Willful refusal on the part of a kennel or cattery owner or operator to allow such inspection shall be grounds for summary denial of an application for a kennel or cattery license or for summary suspension or revocation of a kennel or cattery license. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.16.030 - Fees, fee exemptions. 
    The Class I kennel, Class II kennel, Class III kennel, Class IV kennel, sentry dog kennel, cattery, and Animal Rescue Facility license fees, and late fees, shall be as set by separate Resolution of the City Council of the City of Beaumont. If an application for a license or renewal of a license is made more than 30 days after the date such license is required or such previous license has expired, a late fee shall be added. 
    A nonprofit corporation formed pursuant to the provisions of the California Corporations Code commencing with Section 10100 for the prevention of cruelty to animals, shall not be required to pay a fee for the licenses required by this Title; provided, however, that all other provisions of this Title shall be applicable to any such nonprofit corporation, as well as the provisions of Section 6.16.040 of this Title if the nonprofit corporation is an animal rescuer. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.16.040 - Animal rescue facilities. 
    Any person engaged in the rescue of animals, shall first obtain a rescue permit from the Department and shall meet all requirements and standards for a kennel/cattery license. 
a.  For an animal rescuer that is not a valid nonprofit corporation formed pursuant to the provisions of the California Corporations Code commencing with Section 10100 for the prevention of cruelty to animals, the animal rescuer may keep two dogs with a rescue permit and no minimum land requirement so long as all other requirements and standards for a kennel license, referred in this Title, are met. 
b.  For an animal rescuer that is a valid nonprofit formed pursuant to the provisions of the California Corporations Code commencing with Section 10100 for the prevention of cruelty to animals, the animal rescuer may maintain up to ten dogs with a rescue permit and no minimum land requirement so long as all other requirements and standards for a kennel license are met. Such animal rescuer shall not need to obtain a Class I kennel permit. 
c.  For an animal rescuer maintaining 11 or more dogs a Class II kennel license is required, and the minimum land requirement shall be one acre. 
d.  For an animal rescuer maintaining five or more cats, a cattery license is required; and the minimum land requirement shall be one acre. 
e.  An animal rescuer may keep a maximum of four personal (not for adoption or sale) dogs and nine personal (not for adoption or sale) cats and must include these animals as "personal pets" on the animal rescue permit application. 
f.  Personal dogs (not for adoption or sale) shall be individually licensed in accordance with this Title. 
g.  All rescued dogs and rescued cats older than four months must be spayed/neutered prior to releasing to an adopting party. In any event, the animal must be altered within 30 days of receipt by the rescuer. 
h.  Accurate and complete records of all animals shall be maintained by the animal rescuer on forms which will be made available to Department for inspection upon request. 
i.  An animal rescuer may recoup, from the adopting party, the cost of any inoculations, the cost incurred by having the animal altered prior to adoption, and any costs related to the treatment of illness or injury. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1; Ord. 1020, 06/05/12) 
6.16.050 - Denial, suspension, revocation and appeal of license. 
    The Animal Services Officer may, in his/her discretion, deny any application for a kennel, cattery or rescue facility license whether such application is for an original license or renewal of a license, and may suspend or revoke any license if it is found that the kennel, cattery or rescue facility fails to meet any or all of the Standards as set forth in this Title, or is in violation of any law of the State of California or any provision of this Title, any provision of any other City Title or provision of a Conditional Use Permit. 
    When such denial, suspension or revocation occurs, the Animal Services Officer shall prepare a written notice of such denial, suspension or revocation which shall contain a brief statement of the reason or reasons for such denial, suspension or revocation. The Animal Services Officer shall serve such notice upon the applicant or licensee by hand-delivery or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Denial, suspension or revocation shall be effective 30 days after service of such notice. Where an application for a kennel or cattery license is denied or where a kennel or cattery license issued pursuant to this Title is revoked, no application for a new license for such kennel or cattery shall be considered for a period of one year from the effective date of such denial or revocation; provided, however, that for good cause shown the City Council may direct that there be a lesser period of time before such application will be considered. 
    Any person whose application has been denied or whose license has not been renewed, or whose license has been suspended or revoked, may appeal such denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation by filing with the City Clerk of the within 15 days after notice of such denial, suspension or revocation, a written notice of appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why the appellant alleges such denial, non-renewal, suspension or revocation is improper. Within five days of the receipt by the said Clerk of such notice of appeal, the Clerk shall set a hearing date for the appeal and shall give written notice of the date, time and place of such hearing to the appellant, and such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. The date of hearing shall be not less than 20 days from the date of mailing of the notice of the date, time and place of the hearing, and the hearing shall be conducted not later than 45 days from the date of mailing of the notice of denial, non-renewal, suspension or revocation; provided, however, that at the request of the appellant, the City Clerk may extend the hearing date for a reasonable period beyond the aforementioned 45 day limit. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm, modify, or reverse the denial, non-renewal, suspension or revocation. In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses, as applicable in courts of law. To be admissible, evidence shall be of the type upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. During the pendency of the appeal, there shall be in effect an automatic stay of the denial, non-renewal, suspension or revocation; provided, however, that during said period of pendency the Animal Services Officer may take such action as he/she deems appropriate under this Title. or any other provision of law respecting the subject kennel or cattery, including but not limited to the abatement of public nuisances, inspection of the kennel or cattery premises, or the prosecution of any violation of this Title. or any other provision of law not related to the failure of the subject kennel or cattery to be currently and otherwise validly licensed. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
Chapter 6.18 - LARGE ANIMALS 

6.18.010 - Running at large-Impoundment. 
    No person owning or having the care, custody, or control of any horse, mule, jack, cow, sheep, goat, or other domestic animal or livestock shall permit the same to be at large and not be under the immediate control of some person. No person shall picket such animal in such a manner that the animal can go upon any of the streets, alleys, or public parks, or public grounds within the City. It shall be the duty of the Animal Services Officer to impound any animal that may be found running at large. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.18.020 - Notice of Impoundment-Required. 
    Within not less than two, nor more than five days from the impoundment of any animal under this Chapter, it shall be the duty of the Animal Services Officer to give notice of the impounding of such animal to the owner or person claiming to own such animal. If the owner cannot be ascertained, a notice shall be posted for five days in a conspicuous place in the City therein giving a description of each animal impounded and stating that if such animal is not sooner redeemed, the Animal Services Officer will at a time and place named in such notice, sell such animal at public auction to pay the charges and costs provided for in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.18.030 - Fees and charges-Impounded animals-Redemption. 
    Any person owning or claiming to own any animal under the provisions of this Chapter may redeem such animal by payment of the fees and charges established in amounts by resolution of the City Council: 
a.  Impoundment. The City shall charge a fee for impoundment, plus the actual costs of transporting the animal, veterinary care and related services rendered to the animal while impounded, the actual costs for the Animal Services Officer, as well as any other agencies involved, the actual costs of sale incurred, actual costs of any extraordinary measures required in or for the handling and maintaining of the animal while impounded. Upon impounding any bovine animal, horse, mule or burro, the Animal Services Officer shall comply with Food and Agriculture Code Section 17003 and immediately notify the Secretary of Food and Agriculture. 
b.  Feeding and Keeping. For feeding and keeping any animal, a fee for each day or fraction thereof the same shall remain in the Animal Services Officer's custody. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.18.040 - Right to redeem. 
    Any animal impounded under this Chapter may at any time be redeemed upon payment to the Animal Services Officer of such fees and charges as may have already been incurred per Section 6.20.030. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.18.050 - Sale of impounded animal-Terms-Time. 
    At the time and place set forth in the notice of sale, the Animal Services Officer shall cause the sale of the impounded animal at public sale, to the highest bidder, for cash. If no bid is offered for such animal, the Animal Services Officer may cause the sale of such animal at private sale or humanely destroy such animal, or otherwise dispose of it as permitted by law. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.18.060 - Sale of impounded animal-Bill of Sale. 
    The Animal Services Officer, upon receiving the purchase money for an animal sold under this Chapter shall provide the purchaser with a bill of sale signed by the Animal Services Officer. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.18.070 - Sale of impounded animal-Proceeds. 
    All money received for the sale of an animal under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.18.090 - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of the Animal Services Officer to maintain accurate records on all animals impounded, redeemed or sold under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
Chapter 6.20 - APIARIES 

6.20.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The City Council finds that honey bees are of benefit to mankind by providing agriculture, fruit, and garden pollination services and by furnishing honey, wax, and other useful products. The City Council recognizes that gentle strains of honey bees can usually be maintained within populated areas within reasonable densities without causing a nuisance if the bees are properly located and carefully managed. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish certain requirements of sound beekeeping practices, which are intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.20.020 - Hives. 
    All bee colonies shall be kept in Langstroth type hives with removable frames, which shall be kept in sound and useable condition. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.20.030 - Fencing of flyways. 
    In each instance in which any colony is situated within 25 feet of a public or private property line of the tract upon which the apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest establishment, the beekeeper shall maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends ten feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet above ground level over the property lines in vicinity of the apiary. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the property adjoining the apiary tract in the vicinity of the apiary is undeveloped property for a distance of at least 25 feet from the property line of the apiary tract. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.20.040 - Water. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at all times to the bees so that the bees will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcock, pet watering bowls, bird baths, or other water sources where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.20.050 - General maintenance. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials are left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon their removal from the hive all such materials shall promptly de disposed in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee proof enclosure. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.20.060 - Queens. 
    In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation or exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly requeen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming characteristics. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.20.070 - Colony densities. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following number of colonies on any tract within the City, based upon the size of configuration of the tract on which the apiary is situated: 
1.  One quarter acre or less tract size two colonies. 
2.  More than one-quarter acre but less than one-half acre tract size four colonies. 
3.  One-half acre but less than one acre tract size six colonies. 
4.  One acre or larger tract size eight colonies. 
    Regardless of tract size, where all hives are situated at least 200 feet in any direction from the property lines of the tract on which the apiary is situated, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies. 
    Regardless of tract size, so long as all property, other than the tract upon which the hives are situated, that is within a radius of at least 200 feet from any hive remains undeveloped property, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies. 
B.  For each two colonies authorized under Colony densities (Subsection A) there may be maintained upon the same tract one nucleus colony in a hive structure not exceeding one standard 9?-inch depth ten-frame hive body with no supers attached as required from time to time for management of swarm. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an authorized colony within 30 days after the date it is acquired. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.20.080 - Marking hives, presumption of beekeeping. 
A.  In apiaries, name and telephone numbers shall be branded, painted, or otherwise clearly marked upon the structure of at least two hives at opposite ends of the apiary. Instead of marking the hives, the beekeeper may conspicuously post a sign setting forth the name and telephone number of the beekeeper. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that a colony is kept upon the same tract upon which the owner resides. 
B.  Unless marked in accordance with Subsection (A) it shall be presumed for purposes of this article that the beekeeper is the person or persons who own or otherwise have the present right of possession and control of the tract upon which a hive or hives are situated. The presumption may be rebutted by a written agreement authorizing another person to maintain the colony or colonies upon the tract setting forth the name, address, and telephone number of the other person who is acting as the beekeeper. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.20.090 - Inspection. 
    The Animal Services Officer shall have the right to inspect any apiary between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Where practicable, prior notice shall be given to the beekeeper if he resides at the apiary or if his name is marked on the hives. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.20.100 - Compliance. 
A.  Upon receipt of information that any colony situated within the City is not being kept in compliance with this Title, the Department shall cause an investigation to be conducted. If he finds that grounds exist to believe that one or more violations have occurred he shall cause a written notice of hearing to be issued to the beekeeper. 
B.  The notice of hearing shall set forth: 
1.  The date, time and place at which the hearing will be conducted. 
2.  The violation(s) alleged, 
3.  That the beekeeper may appear in person or through counsel, present evidence, cross examine witnesses, and request a court reporter. 
4.  That the bees may be ordered destroyed or removal from the City if the hearing officer finds that they have been kept in violation of this article. 
    Notice shall be given by certified United States Mail or personal delivery. However, if the City is unable to locate the beekeeper, then the notice may be given by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  The hearing shall be conducted by the Hearing Officer. The burden shall be on the City to demonstrate by a preponderance of credible evidence that the colony or colonies have in fact been kept in violation of this Title. If the hearing officer finds that the colony or colonies have been kept in violation of this Chapter, then he may order that the bees be destroyed or removed from the City, not to exceed 20 days, and that bees not thereafter be kept upon the tract for a period of two years. In instances where the hearing officer finds that the violations were not intentional and that the beekeeper has employed corrective actions that will probably be effective to cure the violations alleged, then he may issue a warning in lieu of ordering the bees be removed or destroyed. Upon failure of the beekeeper to comply with the order, the officer may cause the bees to be destroyed and the hive structures to be removed. In each instance in which a bee colony is destroyed all usable components of the hive structure that are not damaged or rendered unhealthy by the destruction of the bees shall upon the beekeeper's request be returned to the beekeeper, provided that the beekeeper agrees to bear all transportation expense for their return. 
D.  The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the City Council by filing a notice to appeal with the City within ten days following the date that the hearing officer announces his decision, or if the decision is not announced at the conclusion of the hearing, then within 15 days following the date that the hearing officer places written notice of his decision in the mail to the beekeeper. An appeal shall not sway the hearing officer's decision, and it shall be the responsibility of the beekeeper to remove the bees from the City pending the determination of the appeal. 
E.  The provisions of the section shall not be construed to require a hearing for the destruction of (1) any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping or (2) any swarm of bees or (3) any colony residing in a standard or man-made hive, which by virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
Chapter 6.22 - ANIMAL CONTROL HEARINGS 

6.22.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide standardized animal control hearing procedures concerning the seizure and impoundment of animals. Specifically, the hearings required by Chapter 6.08 regarding seizure and impoundment, Chapter 6.10 regarding potentially dangerous dogs and Chapter 6.12 regarding dangerous animals, shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Chapter 6.22. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.22.020 - Neutral Hearing Officer. 
    All hearings conducted pursuant to this Chapter shall be conducted by the Chief of Police or his designee who shall not have been directly involved in the subject action and shall not be subordinate in rank to the person seizing or impounding the animal(s). The name of the candidate hearing officer shall be promptly communicated to the owner of the animal, and the owner shall have 24 hours to disqualify the candidate on the grounds that the owner reasonably believes that the candidate is prejudiced against the owner or the interests of the owner. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; §1) 
6.22.030 - Scheduling the hearing. 
    The designated hearing officer shall schedule the hearing, and the hearing shall be conducted, within ten business days of the date the hearing officer is appointed; provided, however, that the hearing officer may continue the hearing for a reasonable period of time if he/she deems such continuance to be necessary and proper, or if the owner or custodian of the animal shows good cause for such continuance. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.22.040 - Hearing procedures. 
    To the extent applicable and feasible, the hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in compliance with the following guidelines: 
A.  The Animal Services Officer shall have the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, the existence of the condition or conditions which gave rise to the need for seizure or impoundment or otherwise. 
B.  The Animal Services Officer shall present its case first, following by the party against whom the seizure or impoundment is being proposed. The Animal Services Officer may present rebuttal in the discretion of the hearing officer. 
C.  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any other matter relevant to this issue even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination, to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness, and to rebut evidence. 
D.  Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath. 
E.  The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing to explaining other evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.22.050 - Recording. 
    The hearing may be recorded if ordered by the hearing officer or requested by the owner or custodian of the animal. A stenographic report shall also be made of the proceedings if ordered by the hearing office or requested by the owner or custodian, with the costs thereof to be borne by the person making the order or request. A copy of the recording or transcript of the proceeding shall be made available to person upon request and upon payment of the cost of the preparation thereof. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.22.060 - Hearing Officer's decision. 
    Within three business days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render, in writing, his/her findings, decision and order thereon, and shall give notice, in writing, of the determination and orders issued, either personally or by first-class mail, postage prepaid. Specific findings that shall be made by the hearing officer, and a more complete statement of the hearing officer's disposition authority may be found in Chapters 6.08, 6.10 and 6.12 of this Title. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.22.070 - Appeal to the Riverside County Superior Court. 
    If the owner or custodian of the animal contests the hearing officer's determination, he/she may, within five days of the receipt of the notice of determination, appeal the decision to the Riverside County Superior Court and shall pay a fee for filing such appeal to the Clerk of the Court, as provided in Section 70826(b) of the Government Code. 
    The owner or custodian of the dog shall serve personally, or by first-class mail, postage prepaid, the notice of appeal on the Chief of Police. 
    The Court hearing the appeal shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 30612(b) of the Flood and Agriculture Code. The determination of the Court hearing the appeal shall be final and conclusive upon all parties. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
6.22.080 - Failure to appeal. 
    If the owner or custodian of the animal fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer, and the Superior Court hearing the appeal, may decide all issued for or against such absent owner or custodian. 
(Ord. 960, 10/20/09; § 1) 
TITLE 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapter 8.01 - REGULATION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD FACILITIES 

8.01.010 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter. 
A.  "Food establishment" shall mean a food establishment as defined in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, Section 27520 of the California Health and Safety Code. These are commonly referred to as restaurants, markets, delis or similar operations. 
B.  "Food facilities" shall mean a food facility as defined in Section 27521 of the California Health and Safety Code. These are commonly referred to as wholesale food facilities, vehicles, vending machines, satellite food distribution facilities, open-air barbecues, certified farmers markets, stationary food preparation units and mobile food preparation units. This definition also includes commercial food establishments. 
C.  "Enforcement Officer" shall mean the director of the County of Riverside Department of Environmental Health Services and his or her duly authorized Environmental Health Specialists. 
D.  "Food preparation" shall mean food preparation as defined in section 27522 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
E.  "Official inspection form" shall mean the form provided by the County of Riverside Department of Environmental Health Services. 
(Ord. 747) 
8.01.020 - Grading. 
A.  All food establishments and food facilities shall be inspected and graded uniformly using an official inspection form. The grade of each food establishment shall be determined by the Enforcement Officer using the scoring method provided on the Official Inspection Form. The grade of each food establishment shall be evidenced by the posting of a Grade Card bearing the letter I "A" 1 "BU or "C". 
1.  The letter "A" shall indicate a score of 90 percent or higher, and indicates that the food establishment passed the inspection by meeting those minimum health standards as set forth by the State of California in the California Retail Food Facilities Law, California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 4, Sections 27520, et seq., and interpreted by the Enforcement Officer. Grade "A" Cards shall be printed in blue on high-impact white styrene plastic. 
2.  The letter "E" shall indicate a score of less than 90 percent, but not less than 80 percent, and indicates that the food establishment has not passed the inspection and does not meet minimum health standards. Grade "E" cards shall be printed in green on high-impact white styrene plastic. 
3.  The letter "C' shall indicate a score of less than 80 percent, and indicates that the food establishment has failed the inspection and has conditions existing which may pose a potential or actual threat to public health and safety. The facility may also be ordered closed, with its permit being suspended or revoked by the Enforcement Officer. Grade "C' cards shall be printed in red on high-impact white styrene plastic. 
B.  The grade card shall be provided by the enforcement officer and shall be nine inches by 11 inches in size. The grade letter shall not be more than five [inches] in height. 
C.  The grade card shall be posted in a conspicuous place selected by the enforcement officer, at or near each entrance to the food establishment used by its patrons, and shall be removed only by the enforcement officer. 
D.  It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the grade card is placed as posted by the enforcement officer. 
E.  Private schools and public schools shall not be required to post a grade card. 
F.  Food facilities and food establishments which are not engaged in food preparation shall not be required to post a grade card. 
(Ord. 747) 
8.01.030 - Inspections. 
A.  The enforcement officer shall inspect each food facility and food establishment at regular intervals. All food establishments and food facilities shall comply with those requirements set forth in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, as amended appearing in California Health and Safety Code Sections 27500, et seq. 
B.  A signed copy of the Official Inspection Form shall be delivered to the owner, operator, or person in charge of the food establishment or food facility who shall sign a receipt therefore. 
C.  Any food establishment or facility that has received a "B" or "C" grade shall receive a re-inspection within five working days of the initial inspection, or as otherwise arranged with the facility operator, to assure that the violations have been corrected. The Grade "B" or "C" shall remain posted at the food establishment, indicating to the public that the particular food establishment failed to maintain minimum health standards during its most recent routine inspection performed by the Riverside County Department of Environmental Health Services. 
D.  If, after a re-inspection of the food establishment or facility, the score is not 90 percent or higher, any or all of the following legal actions may ensue: 
1.  Administrative hearing offered for the suspension or revocation of the licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 27580, et seq. 
2.  Issuance of a citation. 
3.  Initiation of civil, criminal or other legal proceedings. 
E.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Enforcement Officer may order immediate closure of a facility or establishment pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 27852 whenever he reasonably believes the facility or establishment to present an immediate danger to the public health or safety. 
F.  Any re-inspection following legal actions, other than one re-inspection following an initial administrative hearing, will result in the operator being charged an hourly on-site fee. 
(Ord. 747) 
8.01.040 - Permits. 
    No person shall operate a food establishment or facility without holding a valid permit issued by the County of Riverside Department of Environmental Health Services. Application for a permit shall be made to the County of Riverside Department of Environmental Health Services upon a form provided by the Department, and shall be accompanied by a fee as required by Riverside County Ordinance No. 640. A permit shall be valid for not more than one year. 
(Ord. 747) 
8.01.050 - Criminal penalties. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. Such individual shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during which any violation of this Chapter is committed or allowed to exist. 
B.  Any individual convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be: 
1.  Guilty of an infraction and punished by a fine of not less than $50.00, but not to exceed $100.00 for the first offense. 
2.  Guilty of an infraction and punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, but not to exceed $200.00 for the second offense. 
3.  The third and any subsequent offense shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00, but not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or six months in the county jail, or both. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a first or second offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. 
D.  Payment of any penalty herein shall not relieve an individual from the responsibility of correcting the violations as noted on the official inspection report form. 
(Ord. 747) 
8.01.060 - Public nuisance declaration. 
    In addition, any violation of this Chapter is hereby deemed to be a public health nuisance and may be abated by the enforcement officer, irrespective of any other remedy hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. 747) 
8.01.070 - Civil penalties. 
    Any person who willfully violates any provision of this Chapter or any other rules or regulations adopted by the County of Riverside Department of Environmental Health Services pursuant to this Chapter, in addition to any criminal penalties, shall be liable for a civil penalty of between $50.00 and $250.00 for each day of violation. The enforcement agency shall be authorized to file and maintain an action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to collect any such civil penalty arising under this section. 
(Ord. 747) 
8.01.080 - Right of inspection. 
    Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 27650, the enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect any food facility or establishment, or any facility suspected of being a food establishment or facility, at any reasonable time. If inspection is refused, the permit may be suspended or revoked, and/or the owner or operator shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. 747) 
8.01.090 - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of applications of the provisions of this Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions of this Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 747) 
Chapter 8.04 - FOOD HANDLERS 

8.04.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prevent the spread of infections and disease and to attain a uniform standard by requiring all food handlers in the City to demonstrate through process of examination that they possess an adequate knowledge of the sanitary principles and practice within the food industry. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following word and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Food worker's certificate" means a statement issued by the Health Officer certifying that a person is free from active communicable tuberculosis in a manner acceptable to the Health Officer, and has satisfactorily demonstrated his or her competency in food sanitation principles and practices. 
B.  "Food Worker's Manual" means the manual prepared and distributed to food handlers by the Health Officer that describes acceptable procedures and sanitary practices as it pertains to the retail food service industry. 
C.  "Health Officer" means the Health Officer of the City, or his designated representative. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.030 - Food worker's certificate-Required. 
    No person shall engage or serve employment in any" work, occupation or employment which requires or occasions the handling of any food, liquid or material intended for food or drink for human consumption, who does not hold or produce a food worker's certificate as required by this Chapter within 14 days after engaging or serving in such work, occupation or employment, and no owner, manager or agent of such owner, or person in charge of any establishment or business shall retain in the employ thereof for the performance of such services, any person who does not hold and produce a food worker's certificate as required by this Chapter within 14 days after such person engages or serves in such employment. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.040 - Food worker's certificate-Exemption. 
    Any person who engages or serves or seeks employment relating to domestic or household work or to temporary, occasionally or intermittent functions of bona fide religious, charitable or public service organizations, including fraternal organizations, veterans' organizations, established youth organizations, parent-teacher associations, or students in public or private schools under the age of 16 engaged in school food operations, and civic or community organizations or groups, the primary purpose of which is the betterment of the cultural, social or economic welfare and environment of the community, shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 8.04.030. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.050 - Food worker's certificate-Application. 
    Any person who is engaged or intends to engage in an occupation or employment for which a food worker's certificate is required by Section 8.04.030 shall file with the Health Officer an application for such certificate or a renewal thereof in such form as the Health Officer may require, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $5.00; provided, however, that students 16 years of age or older engaged in school food operations are exempted from such. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.060 - Food worker's certificate-Qualification. 
    To qualify for the issuance or renewal of a food worker's certificate required by Section 8.04.030, the applicant shall have demonstrated his or her knowledge of acceptable practices in the sanitary preparation, service, storage, distribution and sale of food and beverages and the proper sanitation of equipment and facilities. Such demonstration of knowledge shall be by satisfactorily passing an examination conducted by the health officer on such subjects, based on the practices and procedures set forth in the Food Worker's Manual. A copy of the latest edition of the manual shall be made available by the health officer to those persons applying for a food worker's certificate or renewal thereof. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.070 - Food worker's certificate-Issuance. 
    When qualified pursuant to Section 8.04.060, the applicant shall be issued a food worker's certificate containing the following information: certificate number, name, home address, expiration date and attesting signature. Such certificate shall expire two years after the date it was issued. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.080 - Food worker's certificate-Duplicate. 
    A duplicate food worker's certificate, for good cause, may [be] issued by the Health Officer for a fee of $1.00. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.090 - Food worker's certificate-Revocation. 
    The food worker's certificate may be revoked by the health officer upon evidence indicating repeated or continuing violations of accepted practices and procedures in the preparation, service, storage, distribution, or sale of food or beverages, or upon evidence indicating falsification of information required for issuance of such certificate. 
(Ord. 628 § 2(part), 1986) 
8.04.100 - Food worker's certificate-Appeal. 
A.  Any person who has an application for a food worker's certificate denied by the health officer, or who has had such a certificate revoked by the health officer, may appeal such denial or revocation by filing with the City Clerk within ten days after the date of such denial or revocation, a written notice of appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial or revocation is not proper. The clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing to the applicant. 
B.  Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the decision or take such other action as it deems appropriate. In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited 'by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.110 - Food worker's certificate-Display. 
    Any person required to have a food worker's certificate shall immediately submit such certificate to his or her employer. It shall be the duty of every such employer to keep on continuous display at the place of employment the food worker's certificates of all such persons employed or engaged therein, and to display therewith a current list of all such persons therein engaged or employed for comparison with such certificates. Upon termination of employment, such unexpired certificate shall be returned to the holder. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
8.04.120 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $50.00 for the first violation; a fine not exceeding $100.00 for the second violation within one year; a fine not exceeding $250.00 for each additional violation within one year. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. 628 §2(part), 1986) 
Chapter 8.08 - WEEDS AND WASTE MATTER 

8.08.010 - Certain weeds a nuisance. 
A.  All weeds, dry grasses, dead shrubs, dead trees, rubbish or any material growing upon the streets, sidewalks, or upon private property within the City, which by reason of their size, manner of growth and location constitute a fire hazard to any building, improvements, or other property, and weeds and grasses which, when dry, will, in the sole judgment of the fire chief, constitute such a fire hazard, are declared a public nuisance. 
B.  Cultivated and useful grasses and pastures shall not be declared a public nuisance. However, if the fire chief or his authorized representative determines it necessary to protect adjacent improved property from fire exposure, a fire-break may be required, as specified by the fire chief. 
(Ord. 385 §1, 1968) 
8.08.015 - Property maintenance standards. 
    Property owners and occupiers of real property in the City shall maintain their property to eliminate fire hazards. Whether by self-help or on order of the Fire Chief, property owners and occupiers shall maintain their properties in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Maintain a firebreak for the protection of structures by removing all flammable waste and materials (including wood piles) and growth around each structure for a distance of not less than 30 feet; 
B.  Maintain a firebreak of at least ten feet in all directions from liquefied propane (LP) gas tanks; 
C.  Remove dead or dying trees, and remove the portion of any tree which extends within ten feet of the outlet of any chimney or stovepipe; 
D.  Keep roofs free of leaves and needles; 
E.  Maintain a non-flammable screen with openings of no more than half inch in size over the outlet of every chimney and stovepipe; 
F.  Parcels of five acres or less in size shall be mowed to a three inch-high stubble, or disked provided that such disking does not create fugitive dust emissions in violation of state air quality rules and that the owner takes all steps necessary to control fugitive dust emissions; 
G.  Parcels larger than five acres in size shall be mowed to a three inch-high stubble, or disked around the perimeter of the parcel in a swath 100 feet wide and with a 100 foot wide "crisscross" through the center of the parcel provided that such disking does not create fugitive dust emissions in violation of state air quality rules and that the owner takes all steps necessary to control fugitive dust emissions. 
The Fire Chief is authorized to impose such additional requirements as may be necessary in order to ensure the abatement of an existing or potential fire hazard. 
(Ord. 983, 11/16/2010) 
8.08.020 - Waste matter-Defined-Declared a nuisance. 
A.  Waste matter is defined for the purpose of this chapter as unused or discarded matter having no substantial market value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any structure or otherwise concealed from public view, and which consists, without limitation or exclusion by enumeration, of such matter and material as: 
1.  Rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile; 
2.  Rubbish, crates, cartons, metal and glass containers; 
3.  Vehicle bodies and parts. 
B.  Waste matter as defined in subsection A of this section, which by reason of its location and character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises, or the abatement of a nuisance as defined in Section 8.08.010, is declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 385 §§2, 3, 1968) 
8.08.023 - Enforcement, inspection and authority to enter property. 
A.  Fire Chief Designee. For the purpose of enforcing or administering this Chapter, the Fire Chief may designate any person or persons as his/her deputy in the performance of duties imposed by this Chapter. 
B.  Authority to Enter Property. For the purpose of enforcing or administering this Chapter, the Fire Chief (or designee) may enter any real property for the purpose of inspecting the property or for summary abatement activities whenever the Fire Chief (or designee) is informed or has reasonable cause to believe that a fire hazard exists, constituting a condition dangerous and injurious to the health or welfare of persons or to the public, including the environment, or is otherwise in violation of this Chapter. No person shall interfere with the entry of the Fire Chief (or designee) acting in the official course and scope of his duty. 
(Ord. 983, 11/16/2010) 
8.08.026 - Summary abatement proceedings. 
    In addition to the authority granted by law to the Fire Chief in exigent situations, the Fire Chief (or designee) is authorized to enter real property and summarily abate any fire hazard including, without limitation, combustible vegetation, determined by the Fire Chief (or designee) to constitute an immediate threat to public health or safety, without prior notice or hearing. The Fire Chief (or designee) shall, thereafter, seek recovery of the cost of abatement. 
(Ord. 983, 11/16/2010) 
8.08.030 - Notice to owner-Specifications. 
    If it is determined that a public nuisance exists on any lot or premises, or upon any sidewalk, parking or street adjacent to such lot or premises, the chief of the fire department shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed, "NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES" in letters not less than one inch in length and which shall, in legible characters, direct the abatement of the nuisance and refer to this chapter for particulars. Notices served by means other than posting as provided by this chapter shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance. 
(Ord. 385 §4, 1968) 
8.08.040 - Notice to owner-Posting or service. 
    The notice required by Section 8.08.030 may be served in any of the following manners: 
A.  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; 
B.  By regular mail addressed to the owner or person in charge and control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known; 
C.  By posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting public right-of-way and insertion of an advertisement at least once a week for the period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice that property in the City has been posted in accordance with the ordinance codified in this chapter and contain a general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of such newspaper advertisements shall not be considered in computing the appeal periods provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 385 §5, 1968) 
8.08.050 - Appeal-Hearing-Decision by City Council. 
    Within ten days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, as indicated by the fire chief, of posting, mailing or personal service of the required notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot or premises affected may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Clerk. At the regular meeting or regular adjourned meeting of the City Council, not less than five days nor more than 20 days thereafter, it shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal, and the decision of the City Council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 385 §6, 1968; Ord. 454 §2, 1974) 
8.08.060 - Removal of nuisance. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, the agent of the owner, or the person in possession of any lot or premises in the City within ten days from the date of notification as provided in this chapter, or in case of an appeal to the City Council, within ten days from the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to remove the nuisance as stated. 
(Ord. 385 §7, 1968) 
8.08.070 - Failure by owner to remove-Abatement by City-Costs filed with City Clerk. 
    If the owner fails or neglects to remove the nuisance as defined in this chapter, within the time specified in this ordinance, the chief of the fire department shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may be done by the City crews or by private contractor. A report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost of abating the nuisance on each separate property shall be filed with the City Council. 
(Ord. 385 §8, 1968) 
8.08.080 - Hearing on costs of abatement-Setting meeting. 
    The City Clerk shall thereupon set the report and account for hearing by the City Council at the first regular or adjourned meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after the date of filing, and shall post a copy of the report and account and notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the Council Chambers in the City Hall. 
(Ord. 385 §9, 1968) 
8.08.090 - Hearing on costs of abatement-Protests-Lien on property in form of resolution. 
    The City Council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by any interested parties. Any owner of land or person interested therein may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the City Council. The amounts so approved shall be liens upon the respective lots or premises, and the City Council shall adopt a resolution assessing said amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll, and determining that such weeds, grasses, dead shrubs, and waste matter constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 385 §10, 1968) 
8.08.100 - Filing of resolution. 
    The City Clerk shall prepare and file with the county auditor a certified copy of the resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 385 §11, 1968) 
8.08.110 - Acceptance of payment before hearing. 
    The City may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the City Council hearing, as called for in Section. 8.08.080. 
(Ord. 385 §12, 1968) 
8.08.120 - Government Code provisions adopted-Entering assessment in county roll. 
    The provisions of Sections 39580 to 39585, inclusive, of the Government Code are incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. The county auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and if delinquent the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. 385, § 13, 1968) 
8.08.130 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 8.12 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1109, § 2, adopted June 18, 2019 , repealed the former Ch. 8.12, §§ 8.12.010-8.12.090, and enacted a new Ch. 8.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 8.12 pertained to mandatory solid waste collection and disposal and derived from Ord. No. 921, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2007; Ord. No. 934, § 1, adopted April 1, 2008; Ord. No. 994, adopted April 19, 2011. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

8.12.010 - Purpose; findings. 
A.  Purpose. The management and proper disposal of solid waste is a matter of great importance to the City, its citizens, visitors, property owners and businesses. The City finds that the public health, safety, and well-being require the generation, accumulation, handling, collection, transportation, conversion and disposal of solid waste be controlled and regulated by the City through the comprehensive system provided in this Chapter. This Chapter is intended to ensure solid waste handling services are readily available, adhere to uniform standards, and are reliable, clean, and efficient. The City has a strong interest in reducing the harboring and breeding of rodents and insects, reducing the spread of disease, and preventing pollution and other unsightly degradation of the environment, which can occur with the improper handling of solid waste and the excess accumulation of solid waste. 
B.  Findings. The City finds and declares: 
1.  Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution authorizes cities to make and enforce within their limits all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws. 
2.  The Legislature of the State of California, by enactment of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, ("AB 939" or the "Act") (codified at Public Resources Code §§ 4000 et seq.) established a solid waste management process that requires cities and other local jurisdictions to adopt and implement plans to reduce the amount of solid waste generated within their jurisdiction and to maximize reuse and recycling. 
3.  AB 939 states that the frequency of solid waste collection, the means of solid waste collection and transportation, levels of services, charges and fees for services, and the nature, location and extent of providing solid waste services, are matters of local concern. 
4.  AB 939 expressly allows cities to provide solid waste services to its residents by its own forces or by authorizing a private entity to provide those services. 
5.  This Chapter implements Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution and AB 939 in the City of Beaumont and protects public health and safety by authorizing the City Council to provide solid waste handling service itself or to award one or more franchises to private entities. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. Words and phrases not defined in this Chapter shall have the meaning ascribed by Section 1.04.010 of this Code, and if not defined therein, then as applicable, as in: Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Sections 40100 et seq.; the regulations of the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery; the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et seq. and the regulations implementing RCRA, as they may be amended. 
    "AB 939" or "Act" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in part at Public Resources Code, §§ 40000 et seq. as it may be amended, and as implemented by the regulations of CalRecycle or its successor agency. 
    "Account holder" means the persons or entities whose name(s) are on a solid waste franchisee's account for a premises. 
    "Bin" means a container, typically between one and eight cubic yards, provided by a solid waste franchisee for the collection of solid waste, recyclable material and organic waste. 
    "Bulky waste" means solid waste that would not typically fit within a container, including, but not limited to, large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses, automobile tires, and oversized green waste such as tree trunks and large branches if no larger than two feet in diameter and four feet in length, and similar large items discarded from a residential premises. "Bulky waste" does not include consumer electronics, such as televisions, radios, computers, monitors, and the like, which are regarded as universal waste, the disposal of which is governed by regulation of the Department of Toxic Substances Control. 
    "CalRecycle" means the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery. 
    "Cart" means a container, typically between 64 and 96 gallons, provided by a solid waste franchisee for the collection of solid waste, recyclable material, and organic waste. 
    "City" means the City of Beaumont, California, a municipal corporation, and all of the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the City as presently existing and all geographic areas which may be added or annexed to the City. 
    "City Manager" means a person having that title in the employ of the City of Beaumont, or the City Manager's designated representative. 
    "City Premises" means City-owned or operated premises where solid waste is generated or accumulated. 
    "Commercial premises" means all premises in the City, other than single family residential premises, multifamily residential premises, and City premises, where solid waste is generated or accumulated. The term "commercial premises" includes, but is not limited to, stores; offices; restaurants; boarding houses; hotels; motels; industrial and manufacturing, processing, or assembly shops or plants; hospitals, clinics, convalescent centers and nursing homes. 
    "Construction and demolition material" or "C&D Material" means discarded building materials, "inert wastes" as defined in Public Resources Code § 41821.3(a)(1) (e.g. rock, concrete, brick, sand, soil ceramics and cured asphalt), recyclable construction and demolition materials, packaging, plaster, drywall, rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations, but does not include asbestos-containing materials or hazardous waste. 
    "Container" means any cart, bin or debris box. 
    "Debris box" means a container, typically ten to 40 cubic yards, provided by a solid waste Franchisee for the collection of solid waste that is normally tipped loaded onto a motor vehicle and transported to an appropriate facility. 
    "Green waste" means leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic materials generated from maintenance or alteration of landscapes or gardens including, but not limited to, tree trimmings, prunings, brush and weeds and incidental pieces of scrap lumber. "Green waste" includes unadorned holiday trees (except such trees which are frosted, flocked or which contain tinsel or metal), but does not include stumps or branches exceeding four inches in diameter or four feet in length, or palm fronds, or yucca, which are not suitable for composting. "Green waste" is not a "recyclable material". "Green waste" is solid waste if it is not segregated from solid waste and is discarded into the solid waste stream. 
    "Hazardous waste" means any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as a "hazardous substance" or "hazardous waste" pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous Substance Account Act ("HSAA"), codified at California Health & Safety Code §§ 25300 et seq.; the Electronic Waste Recycling Act of 2003, codified at California Health & Safety Code §§ 25214.9 et seq. and California Public Resources Code §§ 41516 et seq., laws governing Universal Waste, all future amendments to any of them, or as defined by CalRecycle or the Department of Toxic Substances Control, or by their respective successor agencies. If there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term "hazardous waste" shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition. 
    "Household hazardous waste" means dry cell household batteries; cell phones and PDAs; used motor oil; used oil filters when contained in a sealed plastic bag; cooking oil; compact fluorescent light bulbs contained in a sealed plastic bag; cleaning products; pesticides; herbicides; insecticides; painting supplies; automotive products; solvents; stripes; and adhesives; auto batteries; and universal waste generated at a single-family or multifamily residential premises. 
    "Multifamily residential premises" means a multi-family residential building with five or more units, including but not limited to mobile home parks, apartments, condominiums and town homes, which utilize bins for the temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste. The City will have sole authority to resolve any ambiguity as to whether a particular premise is a single family residential premises or a multifamily residential premises. 
    "Organic waste" means food waste, green waste, nonhazardous wood waste, compostables and soiled paper waste that is mixed in with food waste. 
    "Overfill" or "overfilled" means to fill a container in a manner such that the lid of the container is unable to fully close and exceeds a 45-degree angle. 
    "Owner" means the persons or entities listed on the last equalized assessment roll as the owner of a lot or parcel of real property within the City. 
    "Person in charge" means an owner, account holder, tenant, occupant or other person or persons responsible for the day to day operation of a premises. 
    "Premises" means place where any person resides, or any business is carried on or conducted, or any other place upon which solid waste is generated or accumulated. 
    "Recyclable material" means materials that can be reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture, consistent with the requirements of AB 939, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Aluminum cans; 
2.  Glass jars and bottles; 
3.  Steel, bi-metal and tin cans, and empty aerosol containers; 
4.  Recyclable plastics; 
5.  PVC pipe; 
6.  Juice boxes and milk cartons (aseptic packaging, Tetra Pak&reg;, and waxed cardboard); 
7.  Detergent containers; 
8.  Scrap metal, coat hangers and metal foil; 
9.  Newspapers and telephone books; 
10.  Mixed paper (e.g., ledger, computer, junk mail, magazines, paperback books, cereal boxes, envelopes, paper shopping bags and non-metallic wrapping paper); 
11.  Corrugated cardboard and chipboard; 
12.  Chlorofluorocarbons (contained in bulky waste set out for collection under Section 8.12.230); 
13.  Tires (if set out for collection as bulky waste to be collected under Section 8.12.230.); and 
14.  Wood (incidental scrap pieces if set out for collection with green waste, and larger quantities if set out for collection with bulky waste). 
    "Self-haul" means the transportation of solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste directly to a licensed or permitted landfill or other licensed or permitted disposal facility by a person who has received a self-haul permit. 
    "Self-haul permit" means a permit issued by the City to self-haul under this Chapter. 
    "Single-family residential premises" means a detached single family dwelling unit, or each unit in a multifamily residential building with up to four units, such as a duplex, triplex, or quadraplex, a townhouse, a condominium, or a mobile home of permanent character placed in a permanent location, which utilizes one or more carts, or a bin, for the temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste. The City Manager will have sole authority to resolve any ambiguity as to whether a particular premise is a single family residential premises or a multifamily residential premises. 
    "Solid waste" means and includes any materials defined as "solid waste" by section 40191 of the California Public Resources Code, and specifically includes, without limitation, recyclable materials and organic waste that has been disposed into the solid waste stream, bulky waste, construction and demolition materials, and all other materials, excluding universal waste and hazardous waste, that are discarded into the solid waste stream, or collected in exchange for a fee or any other consideration, regardless of form or amount. 
    "Solid waste enterprise" means any individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation, which is regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste handling services. 
    "Solid waste franchisee" means a solid waste enterprise that has been granted the right and privilege by the City, or by operation of law, to perform one or more solid waste handling services within the City or a portion thereof. 
    "Solid waste handling services" means the collection, transportation, processing, recycling, composting, conversion, retention and disposal of solid waste, organic waste, recyclable materials, construction and demolition materials, bulky waste, and/or universal waste. 
    "Spilled" means deposited, released, spilled, leaked, pumped, poured, emitted, emptied, discharged, injected, dumped or disposed into the environment, or which otherwise has come to be located outside an authorized container. The term "disposed into the environment" shall include, but is not limited to, the abandonment or discarding of barrels, bags, cans and other closed receptacles containing solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste. 
    "Universal waste" means and includes, but is not limited to, "universal waste electronic devices" or "UWEDs," (i.e., electronic devices subject to the regulation of the Department of Toxic Substances Control, 23 CCR §§ 66273.1, et seq.), and other universal wastes, including, but not limited to non-empty aerosol cans, fluorescent tubes, high intensity discharge lamps, sodium vapor lamps, and any other lamp exhibiting a characteristic of a hazardous waste, batteries (rechargeable nickel-cadmium batteries, silver button batteries, mercury batteries, small sealed lead acid batteries [burglar alarm and emergency light batteries] alkaline batteries, carbon-zinc batteries and any other batteries which exhibit the characteristic of a hazardous waste), mercury thermometers, and mercury-containing switches. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 

8.12.100 - Disposal of solid waste required. 
    In order to protect the public health, safety and wellbeing, and to prevent the spread of vectors, the owner or other person in charge of a premises shall make arrangements with the City or the City's solid waste franchisee for solid waste handling services. 
    All premises in the City must have the applicable solid waste handling services required under this Chapter. 
    A violation of this Section is a misdemeanor and punishable as provided in Article VII of this Chapter. The City may cite violations as infractions where an appropriate downgrade is approved by the City Prosecutor or City Attorney. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.110 - Containers-Use, placement for collection, storage. 
A.  Use. Every person in charge of a premises shall: 
1.  Keep on the premises a sufficient number of containers that will hold all solid waste, recyclable materials, and organic waste that accumulates on the premises each week without spilling, leaking, or emitting odors. 
2.  Deposit or cause to be deposited all solid waste, recyclable materials and organic waste generated or accumulated on the premises into containers meeting the requirements of this Chapter. 
3.  Use those containers: 
a.  Provided by the appropriate solid waste franchisee; or 
b.  Approved by the City under a valid self-haul permit for the premises. 
B.  Placement for Collection. To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, no person shall place a container in a public right-of-way for collection by the appropriate solid waste franchisee more than 24 hours prior to the normal collection time. Containers placed in a public right-of-way for collection shall be removed from the right-of-way within 24 hours after collection. 
C.  Storage. Except during the time a cart or bin is placed for collection, no cart or bin shall be visible from the public right-of-way. A debris box may be placed in a location that is visible from the public right-of-way at a single-family residential premises for up to 30 consecutive days and for no more than 60 total days during any 12-month period. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.120 - Clean-up. 
A.  Until solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste has been picked up by the appropriate solid waste franchisee, or is self-hauled in accordance with a valid self-haul permit, each person in charge of a premises shall be responsible for the cleanup of any and all solid waste, recyclable material, or organic waste generated or accumulated on the premises that is spilled on, at, or in the premises. This cleanup responsibility includes the cleanup of solid waste, recyclable materials and organic waste spilled for any reason, including but not limited to human or animal interference with a container, wind or other natural forces, at any time during storage, collection, removal, or transfer of the materials. 
B.  The City's solid waste franchisee(s) shall clean up any solid waste, recyclable material, or organic waste spilled during its collection, removal, or transfer, as soon as the spill occurs. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.130 - Disposal frequency. 
    All solid waste accumulating upon a premises must be disposed of as frequently as required to avoid an accumulation of solid waste, but in no case shall disposal occur less frequently than one time per week, except that less than weekly disposal is permitted during any period of time the premises is temporarily unoccupied and solid waste is not accumulating on the premises due to out-of-town travel or other similar situations. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.140 - AB 939 Fees. 
    Pursuant to Division 30, Part 2, Chapter 8 of the Public Resources Code, Section 41900 et seq., the City may impose fees on premises in amounts sufficient to pay the costs of preparing, adopting, and implementing a countywide integrated waste management plan, including the costs of preparing, adopting and implementing the City's required source reduction and recycling element, household hazardous waste element, and nondisposal facility element, and the costs of setting and collecting the fees. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.150 - Recycling requirements. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish requirements for the recycling of recyclable materials generated from commercial premises, single family residential premises, multifamily residential premises, and City premises. These requirements are intended to increase the diversion of recyclable materials from landfills, conserve capacity and extend the useful life of landfills utilized by the City, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and avoid the potential financial and other consequences to the City of failing to meet State law diversion requirements. 
B.  Requirements. 
1.  Owners, landlords, tenants and occupants of commercial premises, single family residential premises, multifamily residential premises, and City premises, jointly or severally, shall recycle recyclable materials by depositing the same in recycling containers provided by the City's solid waste franchisee. 
2.  Occupants or landlords of commercial premises and multifamily residential premises shall designate, for the convenience and use of occupants' employees and independent contractors, recycling collection and storage areas and shall place appropriate signs in and around the proximity of such areas. 
3.  Occupants or landlords of commercial premises and multifamily residential premises shall ensure that their employees, occupants, and independent contractors are educated about recycling services available at the site. Information, including the types of recyclable materials accepted, the location of recycling containers, and the employees' and occupants responsibility to recycle shall be distributed periodically, and all new occupants, employees when hired, and independent contractors when retained, shall also be given such information and instruction. All occupants, employees and independent contractors shall also be given appropriate information and instructions concerning any change in recycling services to the commercial premises and multifamily residential premises. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.160 - Processing or composting of organic waste. 
    Every commercial premises, multifamily residential premises, and City premises shall make arrangements with the City or the City's solid waste franchisee for organic waste recycling services in compliance with AB 1826 (California Public Resources Code section 42649.8 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISES 

8.12.200 - Findings. 
A.  California Constitution Articles XIII(C) and XIII(D), commonly known as "Proposition 218," regulates a public agency's imposition of certain fees for property-related services provided by the public agency. Proposition 218 does not restrict or regulate what a private profit-making entity may charge for property-related services provided by a private entity. 
B.  The rates and fees established by a solid waste franchisee pursuant to this Article are not subject to Proposition 218 because, among other reasons, the solid waste franchisee independently establishes, charges and collects the fees and rates for its service; owners of single-family residential premises may avoid the imposition of such fees and rates by obtaining a self-haul permit; and owners of any property in the City may avoid the imposition of such fees and rates by leaving their property undeveloped or unoccupied. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.210 - Provision of solid waste handling service. 
A.  The City Council may grant franchises to one or more solid waste enterprises to make arrangements with the persons in charge of premises within the City for solid waste handling services, in accordance with this Chapter. 
B.  The City Council may determine solid waste collection categories, (e.g., single-family residential, multifamily residential, commercial, construction & demolition materials, household hazardous waste, universal waste, recyclable materials, organic waste and others) and may make or impose franchise, license, contract or permit requirements which may vary for such categories. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.220 - Solid waste franchises. 
A.  The City Council may award exclusive, partially exclusive, or non-exclusive franchises for one or more types of solid waste handling services for all or a portion of the premises in the City. Any such franchise shall be in the form of a written agreement, approved by the City Council by written resolution, and shall be subject to all of the continuation rights, if any, held by any other solid waste enterprise pursuant to Public Resources Code § 49520 et seq. Where a franchise agreement is silent on an issue, the provisions of this Chapter shall govern. Where a franchise agreement predates the effective date of this Chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall govern over any inconsistent provisions contained in this Chapter. 
B.  Any franchise granted pursuant to paragraph A of this section shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the City Council shall establish in its sole discretion. At a minimum, the franchise shall provide: 
1.  The solid waste franchisee shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter; and 
2.  The solid waste franchisee shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold the City harmless from such acts, omissions, liabilities and damages related to the agreement as the City Attorney and City Manager determine to be reasonable necessary to adequately protect the City; and 
3.  The solid waste franchisee shall be required to cooperate with City in solid waste disposal characterization studies and the preparation of waste stream audits, and to submit information required by the City to meet the reporting requirements of AB 939, or any other law or regulation, and to implement measures consistent with the City's source reduction and recycling element to reach the solid waste and recycling goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as it may be amended from time to time. 
4.  The solid waste franchisee shall provide commercial recycling service in a manner to exceed compliance with AB 341, as it may be amended from time to time. Solid waste franchisee will notify all commercial premises of the requirements to comply with the law and must provide the necessary volume of collection services in order for all commercial premises to be in full compliance with the law. The solid waste franchisee will conduct in-person outreach to all non-participating commercial premises a minimum of once per calendar year. 
5.  The solid waste franchisee shall provide organic waste recycling services in a manner to exceed compliance with AB 1826 and SB 1383, as they may be amended from time to time. The solid waste franchisee will notify all commercial premises, multifamily residential premises, and City premises of the requirements to comply with the law and must provide the necessary volume of collection services in order to be in full compliance with the law. The solid waste Franchisee will conduct in-person outreach to all non-participating commercial premises, multifamily residential premises, and City premises a minimum of once per calendar year. 
6.  The solid waste franchisee shall provide services to ensure the City is in compliance with State law diversion requirements and AB 1594. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.230 - Manner, time and frequency of collection. 
A.  Regular Collection. The City's solid waste franchisee(s) shall make arrangements with its account holders specifying the manner in which solid waste handling services are to be regularly provided, subject to the terms of its franchise. 
B.  Special Collections. The City's solid waste franchisee(s) shall provide on-call collection of bulky waste to its account holders, and shall provide its account holders with debris boxes when requested and collect the debris box when the account holder no longer requires the debris box. The terms and conditions upon which such special collections are provided to account holders shall be arranged between the solid waste franchisee and the account holder, subject to the terms of the solid waste franchisee's franchise from the City. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.240 - Liability for solid waste collection fees. 
A.  Joint and Several Liability. The owner of a premises and the account holder for a premises are jointly and severally liable for solid waste handling services provided to the premises by a solid waste franchisee. 
B.  Delinquencies-Single Family Residential Premises. Pursuant to Health & Safety Code section 5470 et seq., the City may collect delinquent fees or charges for solid waste handling services on the property tax roll for the premises. If the City decides to collect delinquent solid waste handling fees or charges on the property tax roll, it shall adhere to the following procedures: 
1.  City will fix a time, date and place for hearing the report of delinquencies submitted by the solid waste franchisee and any objections and protests to the report. The solid waste franchisee shall publish and provide notice of the hearing on the report in accordance with Health and Safety Code section 5470 et seq. At the hearing, City shall hear any objections or protests of Owners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The City may make revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
2.  The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the premises listed in the report and are a lien on the premises for the amount of the delinquent fees. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the Riverside County Auditor for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective premises as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the Riverside County Recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary ad valorem property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for those taxes. 
3.  City shall remit to its solid waste franchisee(s) amounts collected pursuant to this process within 30 days of receipt from the Riverside County Assessor. Solid waste franchisee(s) shall notify the City in the event any delinquency on the report for which a lien has been created is paid or otherwise resolved. 
C.  Delinquencies-Commercial Premises and Multifamily Residential Premises. Solid waste franchisee(s) may discontinue service to a commercial premises if the account holder of the commercial premises has not remitted required payment for solid waste handling services and upon 30 days prior written notice by the solid waste franchisee to the service recipient and the City. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - SELF-HAULING 

8.12.300 - Applicability. 
    Because it is more difficult to transport larger volumes of solid waste, recyclables and organic waste in a manner that is safe and sanitary, self-haul permits are available only to single family residential premises. The difficultly posed by self-hauling larger volumes of solid waste, recyclables and organic waste pose an unwarranted threat to the public health, safety and welfare, as it could lead to increased illegal dumping and burning, failure to segregate recyclables and organic waste, unauthorized deposit of solid waste in the containers of another, and the accumulation of solid waste at a premises for more than one week. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.310 - Self-haul permit. 
A.  Permit Required. The person in charge of a single-family residential premises may apply for and obtain a permit to self-haul, and shall not self-haul without a valid self-haul permit issued pursuant to this section. Every person in charge of a single-family residential premises who desires to self-haul in lieu of making arrangements with the appropriate solid waste franchisee for solid waste handling services shall obtain a self-haul permit from the City's public works director or his or her designee prior to commencing self-hauling. 
B.  Term. A permit to self-haul shall be good for one calendar year, or such part of the calendar year that is remaining after the issuance of the permit. All self-haul permits shall expire on December 31, and may be renewed annually. Application for a renewal permit must be filed at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the permit to allow adequate time for processing, inspection and verifications required to issue the permit. 
C.  Issuance of Permit. An applicant for a self-haul permit shall submit a completed application, on a form approved by the City's public works director, to the public works department. The public works director or his or her designee shall determine whether the application is complete within five working days of the receipt of the application. If the director or his or her designee finds the application incomplete, the applicant shall be given a list of further information needed to complete the application. 
    After it is determined that an application for a self-haul permit is complete, the applicant shall produce the items listed in numbers C.1. through 8. below. The director of public works or his or her designee shall issue a self-haul permit within five working days of the production of all of the required items. 
1.  The applicant produces for inspection the vehicle the applicant intends to use for self-hauling, and the vehicle meets the following standards: 
a.  The vehicle is capable of safely hauling a minimum of 32 gallons (4.3 cubic feet) of solid waste, recyclable materials and organic waste in a safe and sanitary manner so that such matter will not spill; and 
b.  If the vehicle is not fully enclosed, the applicant produces a tarp or other material that is demonstrated to completely secure the materials being self-hauled. 
2.  The applicant produces evidence that he or she owns or leases the vehicle produced for inspection or has a written agreement to use the vehicle for self-hauling with the vehicle's owner or lessor; 
3.  The applicant produces evidence that he or she has a valid California driver's license to operate the vehicle produced for inspection and that the vehicle is registered in the State of California; 
4.  The applicant provides the City with a certificate of automobile insurance for the vehicle; 
5.  The vehicle is operational and meets all applicable Vehicle Code standards; 
6.  The applicant provides the City with proof that the applicant has containers for the storage of solid waste, recyclable materials and organic waste on the applicant's premises before the materials are hauled to a disposal facility; and 
7.  The applicant provides proof that he/she is has no outstanding charges due to the City's solid waste franchisee for solid waste handling services previously received at the premises for which the self-hauling permit application is being submitted; and 
8.  The applicant pays the fee for a self-haul permit authorized by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall reflect the City's reasonable costs of issuing and monitoring compliance with the permit. Permits issued between January 1 and March 31 shall pay 100 percent of the permit fee; permits issued between April 1 and June 30 shall pay 75 percent of the permit fee; permits issued between July 1 and September 30 shall pay 50 percent of the permit fee; permits issued between October 1 and December 31 shall pay 25 percent of the permit fee. 
D.  Appeal of Denial. An applicant whose application for a self-haul permit has been denied may appeal that decision. An appeal may be filed within five days of the date the applicant was notified of the denial. Appeals shall be heard by the City Manager. The decision of the City Manager is final. 
E.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Permittees must dispose of solid waste weekly at a licensed or permitted landfill or disposal facility and shall procure and retain weekly receipts from such landfill or other disposal facility. Receipts shall be submitted to the City upon request. Failure to show proof of solid waste disposal for each week that a person is permitted to self-haul shall constitute a public health and safety nuisance sufficient to permit City to revoke the permittees' self-haul permit. 
2.  Permittees must notify the City of any change in the vehicle being used to haul solid waste by the permittee. Permittees must bring the new vehicle in for an inspection and demonstrate compliance with items 1. through 5. of paragraph B. of this section before the new vehicle is used to haul any solid waste under the permit. 
3.  Permittee must keep on file with the City copies of the current automobile insurance and registration for the vehicle used to self-haul and the permittee's current California driver's license. Permittee must provide proof to City of renewed automobile insurance, vehicle registration, and California driver's license within five days of expiration of respective document. 
4.  Permittees must separate and bag solid waste, recyclable materials and organic waste. Recyclable materials shall be disposed of at a licensed or permitted recycling center. Organic Waste shall be disposed of at a licensed or permitted composting center or shall be composted on the premises covered by the self-haul permit. 
5.  Permittees are liable for any damages and clean-up costs resulting from any solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste spills during the course of the permittees' self-hauling activity. 
F.  Revocation of Permit. The self-haul permit shall be subject to revocation if the permittee violates any provision of this chapter. A notice of revocation shall be mailed to the permittee informing them that their self-haul permit is being revoked, identifying the violations of this chapter that have occurred, and informing the permittee that he or she has the right to dispute the revocation by an appeal to the City Manager. An appeal of a revocation must be filed within five calendar days of the mailing of notice of the revocation. A revocation appeal hearing will be scheduled within five days of the date the City receives the request for an appeal. The City Manager will issue a decision on the appeal within five days of the hearing and provide the permittee written notice of the decision. The decision of the City Manager on the appeal shall be final. A person whose self-haul permit has been revoked pursuant to this paragraph F may not obtain another self-haul permit for one year from the date of the revocation. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.320 - AB 939 Fees. 
    Pursuant to Division 30, Part 2, Chapter 8 of the Public Resources Code, Section 41900 et seq., the City may impose fees on persons with a self-haul permit in amounts sufficient to pay the costs of preparing, adopting, and implementing a countywide integrated waste management plan, including the costs of preparing, adopting and implementing the City's required source reduction and recycling element, household hazardous waste element, and nondisposal facility element, and the costs of setting and collecting the fees. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
ARTICLE V. - RECYCLABLE MATERIALS, GREEN WASTE AND C&D MATERIALS 

8.12.40. - Recyclable materials-Ownership, right to dispose. 
A.  Upon placement by the owner of recyclable material at a designated recycling collection location, or placement of recyclable materials in a container provided by the appropriate solid waste franchisee, the recyclable material becomes the property of the recycler or solid waste franchisee, by operation of state law. 
B.  Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the right of any person, organization or other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of any recyclable material segregated from the solid waste stream owned by that person, organization or other entity, provided that the person, organization or other entity does not pay the buyer or donee any consideration for collecting, processing or transporting such recyclable material, or a consulting or broker's fee for recycling services. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.410 - Landscapers-Disposal of green waste. 
    Landscapers may collect, transport and compost or dispose of green waste without obtaining a self-haul permit, provided that any such green waste is transported to a site permitted by CalRecycle or exempt from permitting. 
    Landscapers shall not contract with a solid waste enterprise to collect, transport and compost or dispose of green waste unless that solid waste enterprise has a franchise from the City to perform said services. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.420 - Licensed contractors-Disposal of C&D materials. 
    Licensed contractors performing work within the scope of their licenses within the City may collect, transport and dispose or recycle self-generated construction and demolition materials without obtaining a self-haul permit, provided that the licensed contractor adheres to the standards for disposal of construction and demolition material provided in the California Green Building Standards Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 11). Construction and demolition materials must be transported to a landfill or recycling facility permitted by CalRecycle or exempt from permitting. 
    Licensed contractors shall not contract with a solid waste enterprise to collect, transport and dispose or recycle of construction and demolition materials unless that solid waste enterprise has a franchise from the City to perform said services. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
ARTICLE VI. - PROHIBITED ACTS 

8.12.500 - Use of containers. 
A.  Recyclable Materials and Organic Waste Contamination is Prohibited. No person in charge of a premises shall keep solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste in any container other than a container provided by the appropriate solid waste franchisee or approved by the City pursuant to an approved self-haul permit. Recyclable materials must be separated by the person in charge of a premises from solid waste and organic waste, and organic waste must be separated by the person in charge of a premises from solid waste and recyclable materials. 
B.  Any container not provided by the appropriate solid waste franchisee or approved by the City pursuant to an approved self-haul permit is prima facie evidence that the owner of the container is engaging in solid waste disposal in violation of this Chapter. Any such unauthorized container may be abated as a public nuisance and impounded as provided in Section 8.12.740. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) of this section, composting organic waste at a single-family residential premise in a container other than one provided by a solid waste franchisee or approved by the City pursuant to an approved self-haul permit shall not be a violation of this section. 
D.  No person in charge of a premises may place an overfilled container out for collection by a solid waste franchisee. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.510 - Removal of solid waste. 
    No person other than the person in charge of any premises or a City solid waste franchisee shall: 
1.  Remove any container from the location where the container was placed for storage or collection by the person in charge of the premises; or 
2.  Remove any solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste from any container; or 
3.  Move a container from the location in which it was placed for storage or collection without the prior written approval of the person in charge of the premises. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.520 - Bulky waste. 
    No person shall place bulky waste adjacent to or in a street or public right-of-way for collection or removal purposes without first making arrangements with the appropriate solid waste franchisee for the collection or removal of such bulky waste. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.530 - Hazardous waste. 
    No person shall place or deposit hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, or universal waste in any container provided by a solid waste franchisee, or deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, dump or dispose into the environment any hazardous waste, household hazardous waste or universal waste. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.540 - Solid waste burning. 
    No person shall burn any solid waste within the City, except in an approved incinerator or transformation facility or other device for which a permit has been issued, and which complies with all applicable permit and other regulations of air pollution control authorities, and provided any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other laws, rules and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.550 - Franchise required. 
    No person, except a solid waste franchisee, a person with a self-haul permit, a landscaper, or a licensed contractor performing work within the scope of that license, shall collect or remove any solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste from any premises within the City. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.560 - Public nuisance. 
    It is unlawful and a public nuisance if one of the following conditions exists at a Premises: 
1.  The person in charge of the premises has not made arrangements with the appropriate solid waste franchisee for solid waste handling services, and the person in charge of the premises does not have a valid self-haul permit; 
2.  The person in charge of the premises has made arrangements with the appropriate solid waste franchisee for solid waste handling services, but the solid waste franchisee has terminated services to the premises due to the account holder's failure to pay for such services; and 
3.  The person in charge of the premises has obtained a self-haul permit from the City, but the permittee has violated one or more of the operational standards contained in Section 8.12.310(E). 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.570 - Unauthorized disposal. 
    No person shall place anything in another person's containers without the permission of such other person. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.580. - Spills. 
    It is unlawful for any person transporting solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste not to clean up, or arrange for the cleanup, of any solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste spilled during removal or transport within the City by such person. If any person transporting solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste spills any such materials and does not clean up or arrange for the cleanup of the spill, the City may clean up the spill and charge the person responsible for the spill 100 percent of the costs the City incurred in cleaning up the spill. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.590 - Unlawful dumping. 
    It is unlawful for any person to negligently or intentionally spill upon any property within the City any solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste, or to cause, suffer, or permit solid waste, recyclable materials or organic waste to be located upon any property in the City, except as authorized by law. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.600 - Solid waste facilities. 
    No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management facility, including but not limited to a materials recovery facility, solid waste transfer or processing station, composting facility, a buy-back or drop-off center, disposal facility or a recycling center without first satisfying all City requirements for land use, environmental and other approvals. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT 

8.12.700 - Enforcement. 
A.  Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, any City code enforcement officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and as well as those of California Penal Code Sections 374, 374a, 374.2, 374.3, 374.4, 374d, 374.7, and 375; California Government Code Section 68055 et seq.; and California Vehicle Code Sections 23111 and 23112. 
B.  Any violation of this Chapter may be enforced in any manner authorized by law, including but not limited to, any enforcement mechanism set forth in the Act, a criminal citation, a civil citation, and/or administrative citation, or nuisance abatement action as authorized by the City's Municipal Code. The City may simultaneously pursue more than one method of enforcement for any violation of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.710 - Violation. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, violations of this Chapter are punishable as set out in Chapter 1-17 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.720 - Fines and penalties. 
    The City Council may, by resolution, establish fines and penalties for the violation of this Chapter and the Act. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.730 - Misdemeanor. 
    Violation of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor. The City may cite violations as infractions where an appropriate downgrade is approved by the City Prosecutor or City Attorney. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.740 - Attorney's fees. 
    In any action or proceeding brought to enforce a violation of this Chapter, including but not limited to a nuisance abatement action and an action to foreclose on a special assessment, the prevailing party shall recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
8.12.750 - Impounding containers. 
A.  Containers Subject to Impounding. Any container within the City that is not provided by the appropriate solid waste franchisee or approved by the City pursuant to an approved self-haul permit may be impounded in accordance with this Section. Containers used for composting at single-family residential premises, as allowed by Section 8.12.500(C) of this Code, shall not be subject to impounding pursuant to this section. 
B.  Notice to Remove. The public works director may cause a notice to remove to be posted on the illegal container. The notice to remove shall state that the Container must be removed from the premises within three calendar days from the date the notice is posted on the container or it will be removed and stored by the City and the contents disposed of at the expense of the owner of the container. The posting of the notice to remove constitutes constructive notice to the owner of the container and the person in charge of the premises that the container must be removed from the premises. 
C.  Removal of Containers. If the container is not removed within three calendar days of the notice to remove, the public works director may direct the removal and storage of the container and the disposal of its contents. The City may employ the services of its solid waste franchisee(s) or any other contractor to remove said containers. Any person whose duty it is to remove and store containers may enter upon private property with the consent of the owner or other person in charge of the premises, or by authority of a warrant, or without consent or a warrant if exigent circumstances exist. 
D.  Storage of Containers. After a container is removed and placed in storage, the director shall mail to the owner of the container a notice to claim the stored container, if the identity of the owner of the container is known. The director shall make reasonable efforts to identify the owner of a stored container. If the container is not claimed within 30 calendar days after notice to the owner is mailed, or 30 days after the container is removed if the owner is not known, the Container shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly. 
E.  Release of Container. No container shall be released to its owner unless the owner has paid the City for the actual costs of the removal, storage and disposal of contents, plus any administrative and ancillary fees, fines or penalties established by resolution of City Council. All amounts due to the City shall constitute a civil debt owed to the City by the owner of the container. 
( Ord. No. 1109, § 2(Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ) 
Chapter 8.16 - BURNING 

8.16.010 - Unlawful to burn-Exceptions. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to burn by fire any material of any nature other than in a stove or other suitable burning receptacle located entirely within a residence or other building structure; except between the hours designated by the City Council and in no event during any time that a wind of over ten miles per hours is blowing in the. vicinity of such burning; provided, however, any person, firm or corporation desiring to burn tree trimmings, brushing or other materials attached to the soil or otherwise, and incapable of placing in an incinerator or other burning receptacle, shall first obtain a fire permit from the Fire Chief of the City, or his duly authorized agent. The permit is to be in form prescribed by the Fire Chief, and will be issued for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. 384 §1(part), 1968) 
8.16.020 - Unlawful to deposit combustible materials after certain time period. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit, or leave for any reasonable length of time (24 hours or more shall be deemed to be an unreasonable length of time) any refuse material of a combustible nature of any kind in or upon any street, alley, yard, lot or any public or private place in such quantities or in such manner as may become a fire hazard, and any such person, firm or corporation placing, depositing or leaving any such refuse material in any such place in any such quantities, or in such manner as may become a fire hazard, shall remove the same as soon as reasonably possible, and in the event, shall cause the same to be removed immediately upon being so advised by the Fire Chief of the City, or his authorized agent, shall take such steps as may be necessary to remove the same, and charge the cost thereof to the person, firm or corporation responsible therefore, which shall thereupon become a civil obligation, the collection which shall be enforceable at law. 
(Ord. 384 §1(part), 1968) 
8.16.030 - Amendment by resolution. 
    This chapter may be amended and/or modified to provide for the further or different regulation of the burning of materials in the City, and the obtaining of a permit therefore, by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 384 §4, 1968) 
8.16.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $300.00, or by imprisonment in the City or County jail not exceeding three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 384 §2, 1968) 
Chapter 8.20 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

8.20.010 - Scope of article. 
    This Chapter deals with the abatement and removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles on private or public property, not including highways, and adopts a Vehicle Abatement Program pursuant to California Vehicle Code, Sections 22660 et seq. The authority and procedure for abating and removing abandoned vehicles from highways is contained in the California Vehicle Code. The actions and remedies set forth herein are to be considered as alternatives to all other proceedings authorized by the Beaumont Municipal Code or otherwise by law. The determination as to which alternative action or remedy shall be applied in a particular case shall be made by the City in its discretion based on the facts and circumstances of the particular case. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.020 - Findings and declarations. 
    In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code of the State to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the Council makes the following findings and declarations: 
    The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter: 
A.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained or open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. "Highway" includes "street". 
B.  "Inoperative" includes, but is not limited to, a vehicle which is not currently and validly registered for operation or use on the highways and streets in the state as required under the provisions of Division 3 (commencing at Section 4000 et seq.) of the Vehicle Code of the State. 
C.  "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
D.  "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and the last legal owner of record. 
E.  "Public property" does not include "highway". 
F.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.040 - Abandoned vehicles hearing officer. 
    The Abandoned Vehicle Hearing Officer shall be the City Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.050 - Presumption of an abandonment. 
    Any vehicle or part thereof left parked or stored on public property for a period in excess of 72 hours shall be presumed to be abandoned. Any vehicle left, parked or stored on private property for a period in excess of 21 days shall be presumed to be abandoned. These are rebuttable presumptions. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.060 - Exception. 
    This Chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
B.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard; provided, however, that this exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code, and this Chapter. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.070 - Regulations supplemental. 
    This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.080 - Administration and enforcement. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police or by any employee or employees of the City appointed by him and acting under his direction provided that the Chief of Police shall file a written confirmation of appointment with the City Clerk. In the enforcement of this Chapter, such persons charged with administration and enforcement may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter, provided written permission or a proper warrant has been obtained. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.090 - Right to enter on private property. 
    When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter, provided written permission or a proper warrant has been obtained. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.100 - Fixing administrative costs. 
    The City Council shall from time-to-time by resolution determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof, under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.110 - Abatement and removal-Authority. 
    Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property within the City, the Public Safety Director or his designated representative shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.120 - Abatement and removal-Notice of intention. 
    A ten day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof, as a public nuisance, shall be mailed by the Chief of Police or his designated representative via registered mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership, and unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. The form of the notice shall be such as is prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designated representative, and approved by the City Attorney, and shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. However, the notice of intention is not required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof which is located upon a parcel that is zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units, and which is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than $200.00 by a person specified in Section 22855 of the California Vehicle Code, and is determined to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, provided that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Prior to final disposition under Section 22662 of the California Vehicle Code of such a low-valued vehicle or part for which evidence of registration was recovered pursuant to subdivision (a), the Chief of Police or his designated representative shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or part, and if the vehicle or part is not claimed and removed within 12 days after the notice is mailed, from a location specified in Section 22662, final disposition may proceed and the City or a contractor of the City shall not be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or part thereof removed pursuant to such section. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.130 - Abatement and removal-Request for public hearing. 
A.  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the Chief of Police or his designated representative within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a hearing shall be held by the Abandoned Vehicle Hearing Officer established pursuant to Section 8.20.040 on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
B.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Chief of Police or his designated representative via registered mail at least ten days before the hearing date to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership or unless ownership records are no longer available through the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
C.  If such a request for a hearing is not received within ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a hearing, upon the written order of the Chief of Police or his designated representative, a copy of which order shall be filed with the City Clerk, provided written permission or a proper warrant has been obtained. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.140 - Abatement and removal-Conduct of hearings decision. 
A.  All hearings under this Chapter shall be held before the Abandoned Vehicle Hearing Officer who shall hear all facts and testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The Hearing Officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence, however, the hearing shall be conducted formally, all testimony shall be sworn testimony, and the hearing shall be recorded. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn, written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
B.  The Hearing Officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this Chapter. The Hearing Officer may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property, and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site, and a copy shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
C.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in it presence, the Hearing Officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
D.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the Hearing Officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
E.  If the Hearing Officer finds that the property owner did not consent or subsequently acquiesce to the presence of the vehicle or parts thereof, then the vehicle owner may be assessed for the costs of removal. 
F.  If the vehicle or parts thereof is on public property, the owner of the vehicle may be assessed for the costs of removal. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.150 - Abatement and removal-Appeals. 
A.  Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Abandoned Vehicle Hearing Officer by filing a written notice of the appeal with the Hearing Officer within seven days after his decision. 
B.  Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order, or take any other action which may be deemed appropriate. 
C.  The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 8.20.120. 
D.  In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence, however, the hearing shall be conducted formally, all testimony shall be sworn testimony, and the hearing shall be recorded. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be a written decision which shall be served upon all interested parties by registered mail. The written decision shall contain a notice that judicial review, if desired, must be sought within the 90day time limit set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.160 - Abatement and removal-When. 
    Ten days after the latter of 1) the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, 2) the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 8.20.140 or 3) the action of the Council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualified for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle licenses plates pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.170 - Abatement and removal-Notice and transmittals Department of Motor Vehicles. 
    Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.180 - Abatement and removal-Assessment of costs of landowners. 
    If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 8.20.140 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal there from, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes. 
(Ord. 634, 1986) 
8.20.190 - Penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who has previously had any vehicle owned by him or placed on his land abated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, excepting the owner of land exonerated pursuant to Section 8.20.140C, to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof, which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the City unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in conjunction with a business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to fail or to refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Any violations as set forth in subsections A and B of this Section 1.16.030 and 1.16.040 of the Beaumont Municipal Code shall apply. 
(Ord. 634, 1986; Ord. 639 §1, 1987) 
8.20.200 - Judicial review. 
    California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6 is hereby adopted and made applicable to any judicial review of any decision made by the City or its Vehicle Abatement Hearing Officer, agents, representatives or employees under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.210 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is, for any reason, held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Chapter, and each section, subsection, clause, sentence and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, sentences or phrases be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid. 
(Ord. 718, 1993) 
8.20.220 - Gender and number. 
    Any reference to the masculine shall include the feminine and any reference to the feminine shall include the masculine. Any reference to the singular shall include the plural and any reference to the plural shall include the singular. 
(Ord. 718, 1993) 
Chapter 8.24 - OIL AND GAS WELLS 

8.24.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the words set out in this Section shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Derrick" means any structure, improvement, equipment, or facility, whether movable or affixed to the land, and each and every part of any thereof, whether completed or not, and which is or are required, or used or useful for or in connection with drilling and/or operating, and/or maintaining a well for the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons from the earth, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, improvement, equipment, or facility, including, but not limited to, any foundations and sills therefore, tower, pump houses, engine houses or housings, boiler, boiler plants, piperacks, postings, walkways, mud ditches, bull-wheels, calf-wheels, band-wheels and crown block. 
B.  "Erect" means and includes to build, construct, install, assemble, put together, improve, alter, move, reconstruct, restore, renovate, renew or repair any building, structure, improvement or facility, or any part thereof. 
C.  "Well" or "oil well" means a well or hole' drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring for or extracting from the earth, oil, gas and/or other hydrocarbon substances, and/or a well or hole in the earth by means of and through which oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances are extracted or produced from the earth, and in addition to such hole in the earth, the term "well" or "oil well" means and includes all permanent well casing, required to be used or used in connection with drilling, operating and/or maintaining such hole, and extracting or producing oil, gas and/or other hydrocarbon substances from the earth. 
(Ord. 264 §1, 1952) 
8.24.020 - Drilling prohibited. 
    It is unlawful and a nuisance to drill any oil or gas well or well-hole, or to erect any derrick or equipment for such purpose in or upon any real property in the City. 
(Ord. 264 §2, 1952) 
8.24.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Every person, whether a principal, agent, servant, employee, or otherwise, violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding three months, in the City or County jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and every such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. 264 §3, 1952) 
Chapter 8.28 - HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION 

8.28.010 - Prohibited acts. 
    No persons shall distribute or throw upon any street, alley or public place or upon any private yard, lawn, driveway, sidewalk, porch or steps of any residence or upon or in any part of any structure or upon any vacant property or in any letter box in the City any advertising sample, handbill, dodger, circular, booklet or other notice of commercial advertising, to which the resident has not heretofore subscribed; provided, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the distribution and delivery of any newspaper which is capable of being entered as second-class matter under the provisions of the United States Post Office regulations, and other United States Statutes; and that nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the delivery of any such matter by the postal service. 
(Ord. 436 §1, 1972) 
8.28.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 8.32 - NUISANCES 

8.32.000 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, words and phrases designated herein shall have the following meaning; 
    "Fire Chief' means the Chief of the Riverside County Fire Department providing fire protection services to the City, and his authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. "Police Chief' means the Chief of the Police Department of the City of Beaumont, California, and his authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
    "City" means the City of Beaumont, California. 
    "City Council" means the City Council of the City of Beaumont, California. 
    "Director" means the City's Director of Community Development, and his authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
    "Health Officer" means the official of the City or the County responsible for the enforcement of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the State, County and City relating to the public health, sanitation, food handling and environmental health including his authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
    "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Beaumont, California, and his authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
    "Public nuisance" means any act or condition defined in Civil Code, Section 3480, including, but not limited to, the acts or conditions more particularly described below in Sections 8.32.030 through 8.32.270. 
    "Premises" means any building, structure, wall, fence, property, lot, setback, yard, or any portion thereof. 
8.32.005 - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to safeguard life, health, property, and the public welfare within the City as follows: 
A.  By delineating premises maintenance standards, and 
B.  By providing procedures for abatement of sub-standard conditions in a manner which affords due process to affected premises owners. 
    In setting and enforcing such standards, the City seeks to secure such benefits as the appreciation of property values, physical improvement of residential areas, attraction of investors of capital to residential and commercial zones, increase in commercial trade, maximum use of property for its highest and best use, and an increase in the tax base of the City. 
8.32.007 - Summary abatement power. 
    Whenever this Code or any provision of law authorizes the City Manager or any other City code enforcement officer to declare a public nuisance, the City Manager or designee shall be consulted for approval to summarily abate by any reasonable means and without notice or hearing when immediate action is necessary to preserve or protect the public health or safety because of the existence of a dangerous condition or imminent threat to life, safety or health, on public or private property. Summary abatement actions shall not be subject to the notice and hearing requirements of this Chapter, and a City code enforcement officer, with City Manager approval, shall not be prohibited from summary abatement actions after initiation of due process proceedings pursuant to this Chapter if immediate action at any time becomes necessary to preserve or protect the public health or safety. Summary abatement shall be limited to those actions which are reasonably necessary to immediately remove a threat. 
    In the event a public nuisance is summarily abated, the City Manager or other code enforcement officer may keep an account of the cost of abatement and bill the property owner therefor. If the bill is not timely paid, the officer may proceed to obtain a special assessment and lien against the owner's property in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1034, 5.7.13) 
8.32.010 - Relation with other chapters of Municipal Code. 
    The actions and remedies set forth herein are to be considered as alternatives to all other proceedings authorized by the Beaumont Municipal Code or otherwise by law. The determination as to which alternative action or remedy shall be applied in a particular case shall be made by the City in its discretion based on the facts and circumstances of the particular case. 
8.32.020 - Declaration of nuisances generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, leases, rents, occupies, has charge of, or possesses any premises in the City to maintain, or allow the maintenance of, on such premises any public nuisance. 
8.32.025 - Littering on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, leases, rents, occupies, has charge of or possesses any premises in the City to deposit litter originating from such premises into any gutter, or onto any sidewalk, driveway, street, parking lot or other public place by means of leaf blowers, water hoses, rakes or brooms. "Litter" is defined as used, unused or discarded matter or material having no substantial market value and which consists of such matter and material as rubbish, refuse, debris, paper, lawn, leaf and landscape trimmings and clippings. The littering of public property in the manner described is declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 3-5-02) 
8.32.030 - Refuse and waste. 
    "Refuse and waste matter" is defined for the purpose of this Chapter as unused or discarded matter or material having no substantial market value, and which consists of such matter and material as rubbish, refuse, debris, and matter of any kind, including, but not limited to, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal, ferrous or nonferrous, furniture or parts thereof, trimmings from plants or trees, cans, bottles and barrels. Refuse and waste matter as defined which by reason of its location and character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, detrimentally affects property values in the surrounding neighborhood or community, or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.035 - Portable basketball hoops. 
    Portable basketball hoops placed on public rights-of-way including, but not limited to, streets, alleys and sidewalks, whether temporarily or otherwise, are declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 1,9-16-03) 
8.32.040 - Unsanitary animals. 
    Any animals, fowl, or birds which, with concurrence of the City's Animal Control Officer, are kept or permitted to be kept in foul, offensive, obnoxious, filthy or unsanitary conditions on any premises are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.050 - Sewage on ground. 
    It is declared a nuisance to permit any part of the contents of any privy, vault, cesspool, septic tank, water closet, urinal, pipe, sewer line, or any sewage, slop water or any other filthy water, matter or substance, to flow or discharge upon the ground or upon the surface of any premises, or in any public street or other public place. 
8.32.060 - Building Code violations. 
    All premises, both permanent and temporary, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, or appendages, maintained in violation of the uniform building codes adopted by the City pursuant to Sections 15.04.010, 15.08.010, 15.12.010, 15.16.010, 15.17.010 and 15.20.010 of the Beaumont Municipal Code, or subject to any of the following conditions, are declared a public nuisance. 
A.  Faulty weather protection including, but not limited to, crumbling, cracked, missing, broken, or loose exterior plaster or other siding, roofs, foundations or floors, broken or missing windows or doors, or unpainted surfaces causing dry-rot, warping, or termite infestation. 
B.  Buildings or structures, or parts thereof, not completed within a reasonable time as per the determination of the City's Chief Building official and for which the permit for such construction has expired. 
C.  Unoccupied buildings which have been left unlocked or otherwise open to or unsecured from intrusion by persons, animals or the elements or which are boarded up by a method or material not approved by the City. 
D.  Fences or walls in a hazardous condition or which are in disrepair, or which hinder free access to public sidewalks. 
E.  Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions or inviting trespassers. 
8.32.070 - Zoning ordinance violations. 
    Any premises, including, but not limited to, any building, sign or other structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of the City's zoning ordinance, as amended, and any use of premises, including, but not limited to, land or building, established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of the City's zoning ordinance, as amended, is declared a public nuisance. Any and all uses not expressly permitted in the City's zoning ordinance, as amended, are not permitted, and are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.080 - Graffiti. 
    Graffiti which is visible from adjacent premises or from a public street or right-of-way is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.090 - Polluted water. 
    "Polluted water" is defined for the purpose of this Chapter as water contained in a swimming pool, pond, or other body of water, which contains any of the following: organic matter conducive to bacterial growth including algae, remains of insects, remains of deceased animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse and waste matter, debris, papers, or any other foreign matter or material which, because of its nature or location, constitutes an unhealthful, unsafe or unsightly condition. Any swimming pool, pond or other body of water, which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted as defined, is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.100 - Stagnant water. 
    Any premises maintained so as to cause the accumulation of stagnant or still water, or any other condition which harbors and breeds mosquitoes or any other poisonous or objectionable insect is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.105 - Improper slope maintenance. 
    The ponding of surface water at or near the top of a slope so as to cause saturation of the ground and subsequent weakening of the slope, or the spilling of storm water or the disposal of water from swimming pools, ornamental ponds, waterfalls, and similar facilities over the top of a slope, either directly onto the ground or onto adjacent premises unless directed into an approved terrace drain facility, or the maintenance of slope vegetation in such a condition as to cause erosion or failure of a slope, or the lack of slope vegetation necessary to prevent slope erosion or failure, or rodent burrows in and near the top of a slope which, because of their depth and number, cause saturation and weakening of the slope and area near the top of the slope, are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.110 - Insects, vermin. 
    Any premises, including, but not limited to, any building, vacant lot, setback, yard, vehicle, or place, maintained in such a manner as to permit the breeding or harboring therein or thereon of flies, bedbugs, cockroaches, black widow spiders, lice, fleas, termites or any other insects or vermin is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.115 - Outdoor displays/storage of merchandise. 
    Any outdoor display or outdoor storage of merchandise for sale which is offensive to the senses, or harbors therein or thereon flies, bed bugs, cockroaches, black widow spiders, lice, fleas, or Any other insects or vermin is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.120 - Noisy animals. 
    Any animal or fowl kept, maintained or permitted to remain on any premises which by any sound or cry disturbs the peace and comfort of any neighborhood, or interfere with one or more persons in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life and property is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.130 - Tree trimmings. 
    Accumulations of limbs, branches, prunings, trimmings, stumps and parts of domestic or cultivated fruit trees, cut, removed, fallen or severed from such trees are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.135 - Landscaping and vegetation. 
    Landscaping and vegetation, including lawns and lawn areas, plants, bushes, shrubs, trees and other landscaping, shall be maintained; provided, however, that any dead, dying, decade or diseased landscaping, vegetation or portions thereof is declared a public nuisance and shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 3-5-02) 
8.32.140 - Infested trees or shrubs. 
    Any commercially cultivated fruit tree or ornamental tree or shrub infested with red, yellow, or black scale, mistletoe, mealy bug or other insect pests or diseases detrimental to agricultural crops, as determined by the Riverside Agricultural Commissioner, is declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 3-5-02) 
8.32.150 - Privies. 
    Any privy vault maintained in violation of this Code is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.160 - Unlawful, unsafe, or out-of-date signs. 
    Every sign or advertising structure subject to any of the following conditions is declared a public nuisance. 
A.  The sign or advertising structure was unlawfully erected on public or private property, or declared to be hazardous or unsafe by the Director. 
B.  The sign or advertising structure advertises or is related to events which have already taken place. 
C.  The sign was legally erected, but its use has ceased, or the structure upon which the display is placed has been abandoned by its owner, not maintained, or not used to identify or advertise an ongoing business for a period of 90 days or more. 
D.  The sign was legally erected, but has not been maintained in a safe, presentable and structurally-sound condition. "Maintenance" includes the replacement of broken parts and defective wiring and ballasts, such that signs are capable of being fully illuminated and legible. "Maintenance" also includes keeping signs clean, painted and legible, repairing and replacing the face(s) thereof to eliminate holes, cracks and other visual defects. "Maintenance" also includes the removal of signs advertising former businesses and tenants. 
E.  Signs legally erected which later become nonconforming as a result of the adoption of an ordinance on which the amortization period provided by the ordinance or other law has expired, and for which conformance has not been accomplished. 
F.  Any sign in violation of Chapter 17.61 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 3-5-02) 
8.32.170 - Obstructions to water. 
    Any structure, fence, conduit, wall, tree, masonry, pipe, lumber, or other material or manner of maintenance which obstructs or constitutes a hazard to the free flow of water through a stream, drainage channel, watercourse, or terrace drain, down drain, catch basin or other drainage facility is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.180 - Premises maintenance. 
    Maintenance of premises in such a condition so as to cause significant diminution in use, enjoyment, or value of adjacent premises; or in such a condition so as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare; or in such a condition so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standard of adjacent premises as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent premises is declared a public nuisance. 
    "Premises maintenance" shall mean and include, but is not limited to: 
A.  The removal of graffiti. 
B.  Maintaining the painted surfaces of buildings and structures in good condition. For purpose of this subsection, "good condition" means that the painted surface is devoid of unsightly cracking, fading, peeling or blistering. 
C.  Repairing or replacing broken, rotted, or crumbling fences. 
D.  Maintaining driveways, the approaches thereto and sidewalks, including public sidewalks adjacent to the premises, free of any holes or potholes, and cracks and other defects having a width or height of three-quarters of an inch or more. 
E.  Repair or replacement of broken windows, or broken or damaged doors and gates that constitutes a safety hazard or invitation to trespassers or vagrants. 
F.  The repair or replacement of exterior stairs, porches, balconies and hand railings. 
G.  The repair or replacement of awnings, when substantially faded or when ripped. 
H.  The maintenance of landscaping, including lawn areas, plants, shrubs and trees, and if dead or diseased, the removal thereof. 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 3-5-02) 
8.32.185 - Improper grading or excavation. 
    Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, as a result of grading or excavation operations, causes erosion, subsidence or surface water runoff problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent premises, is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.190 - Smoke and soot. 
    Any excessive smoke, soot or cinders permitted to be emitted from any engine, firebox, stove, furnace, chimney or smokestack in a manner so as to annoy any resident of the neighborhood and which in the opinion of the Fire Chief constitutes a fire hazard, or the operation of any engine or machinery using fuel oil, emitting offensive odors, or smoke or soot which extends to dwelling houses in the neighborhood to such an extent as to render their occupancy materially uncomfortable, or to interfere with the use and comfortable enjoyment of property is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.200 - Internal combustion engines. 
    Any stationary internal combustion engine used, run, or otherwise operated within 300 feet of any private residence, rooming or lodging house without first obtaining the consent of all persons residing within such distance is declared a public nuisance, provided that such consent shall be unnecessary if the exhaust and noise there from is muffled so as to prevent the emission of any excessive soot, smoke or noise. This Section shall not apply to the use of generators during public emergencies. 
8.32.205 - Abandoned, inoperative, or unlicensed trailers, campers, etc. 
    Abandoned, inoperative or unlicensed trailers, campers, boats, and/or other mobile equipment being either a single item or any combination of the above not included under Abandoned Vehicles, Chapter 8.20 of the Beaumont Municipal Code that is/are not parked or stored entirely within an enclosed structure or not screened from view and is visible from the street or other public or private property is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.210 - Salvage materials. 
    Any lumber, junk, trash, debris, refuse, waste matter or other salvage materials visible from a public right-of-way or adjoining premises is declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.220 - Attractive nuisances. 
    Attractive nuisances dangerous to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment and machinery, unguarded or unfenced commercial outdoor displays and storage, hazardous pools and excavations, are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.230 - Household fixtures. 
    Abandoned or discarded furniture, appliances, play equipment or other household fixtures or equipment, stored so as to be visible from public right-of-way or from adjoining premises, are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.240 - Clotheslines. 
    Clotheslines in front or side yard areas of comer lots or clothes hung to dry on walls, fences, trees, bushes or carport areas where such is visible from the public right-of-way are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.250 - Materials stored on roofs. 
    Materials or items of any type stored on roofs and visible from the public right-of-way are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.260 - Discarded materials. 
    Garbage or trash cans, containers or plastic bags stored in front or side yards, visible from the public right-of-way or which cause offensive odors are declared a public nuisance. 
8.32.270 - Overgrown plants. 
    Any overgrown trees, hedges, weeds, shrubs and other overgrown vegetation, cultivated or uncultivated, which is likely to harbor insects, rats or other vermin, or which constitute an unsightly appearance, which constitutes a safety hazard, or which is detrimental to neighboring premises or property values, or which is grown on/or over the public right-of-way and impairs vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or the visibility of such traffic, which impairs the visibility of traffic signs and signals is declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 3-5-02) 
8.32.280 - Right of entry. 
    The Fire Chief, Police Chief, Director, Health Officer and City Manager shall be entitled to enter any premises, occupied or vacant, to determine whether any act or condition may constitute a public nuisance if he/she has reasonable cause to believe that such act or condition may exist on the premises. If the premises are occupied, credentials shall be presented to the occupant and permission to enter shall be obtained in writing. In the event that the premises are secured against entry, a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control over the premises for permission to enter. If entry is refused, the Fire Chief, Police Chief, Director, Health Officer, or City Manager shall obtain such authorization, including a warrant, as may be necessary under the circumstances to secure entry. 
8.32.290 - Report of findings. 
    The Fire Chief, Police Chief, Director, Health Officer, or City Manager, acting either in concert or independently, may examine, or cause to be examined, every premises reported in writing to or by a City department head or his/her designee as dangerous or damaged or which may constitute a public nuisance, and upon examination shall prepare a Report of Findings setting forth the condition of the premises and, if necessary, his/her/their recommendation for the review and inspection by the legal or equitable owners of the premises to which it relates. 
8.32.300 - Order to abate public nuisance. 
    If the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Official, Health Officer or City Manager finds that any premises constitutes a nuisance and determines that City abatement thereof is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, the City Manager shall cause to be prepared an Order to Abate Public Nuisance stating in detail the condition which renders the premises a public nuisance. The Order shall set forth the street address, the assessor's parcel number or other appropriate method of determining the location of the nuisance. Such Order shall be in substantially the following form: 
ORDER TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE 
To all persons having any interest in the premises having assessor's parcel number ___________ and commonly known as ___________ in the City of Beaumont: 
Your attention is hereby called to the provisions of Sections 8.32.000 through 8.32.545 of the Municipal Code of the City of Beaumont, California, on file in the office of the City Clerk in the City Hall located at 550 East Sixth Street, Beaumont, California. 
Pursuant to the provisions of said Sections, you are hereby notified that certain unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or obnoxious conditions have been declared a public nuisance by the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Official, Health Officer or City Manager. 
Said nuisance must be abated by the removal or repair of said unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or obnoxious conditions as follows: 
_____
_____
_____
_____
If such action(s) are not completed within _____ days from the date of this Order, the City of Beaumont will remove or repair such conditions and will abate the nuisance, in which case the cost of such removal or repair and abatement shall be assessed upon the premises on which said conditions exist, and such costs will constitute a lien upon such premises unless and until paid in full. 
Right to Hearing 
YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO A HEARING REGARDING THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS ORDER BY FILING A WRITTEN REQUEST FOR HEARING WITH THE CITY CLERK IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 8.32.345 OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF SERVING, MAILING, PUBLISHING OR POSTING OF THIS ORDER TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE, WHICHEVER IS LATER. 
Date: _______ 
___________ 
Code Enforcement Officer 
City of Beaumont 
(Ord. 957, 10/06) 
8.32.310 - Service of notice-Persons to be served. 
    The City Manager shall cause copies of such notice to be served upon each of the following: 
A.  The person, or persons, if any, occupying or in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved; and 
B.  The owner of the premises as shown on the most recent tax assessment; 
C.  Any other person or persons known by the City Manager to have an ownership or leasehold interest in the premises. 
(Ord. 957, 10/06) 
8.32.320 - Service of order-Manner of service. 
    The Order shall be served as follows: 
A.  The person, or persons, if any, at least 18 years of age and occupying or in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved shall be personally served if reasonably possible. If personal service cannot with reasonable diligence be accomplished, then the Order shall be mailed, certified, return receipt requested, to such persons at the address of the premises. 
B.  The owner of the premises as shown on the most recent tax assessment roll and any other person or persons actually known to have an ownership, leasehold or other interest in the premises shall be personally served if reasonably possible. If personal service cannot with reasonable diligence be accomplished, then the Order shall be mailed, first class mail, postage prepaid, to such persons at their last known address. 
C.  If no address is known, then the Order shall be mailed to such persons at the address of the premises involved and the Order shall be published in a newspaper circulated within the City and one certified copy of the Order shall also be conspicuously posted on the premises at least ten days before the time fixed for the hearing before the Nuisance Abatement Hearing. 
(Ord. 957, 10/06) 
8.32.330 - Service of order-Proof. 
    Proof of service of the Order and/or publishing and posting thereof shall be documented at the time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time and manner in which such Order was given and/or published and posted. He shall file such declaration in the Building Official's or the City Clerk's office and therewith any proof of mailing, publishing, or posting. 
(Ord. 957, 10/06) 
8.32.340 - Voluntary abatement by premises owner. 
    The owner, lessee, or occupant of any premises alleged to be a nuisance under the provisions of this Chapter may abate the nuisance by rehabilitation, repair, removal, or demolition at any time within the abatement period provided in the Order to Abate Public Nuisance. Once advised of such abatement, the City shall inspect the premises to verify that the condition has been abated. 
(Ord. 957, 10/06) 
8.32.345 - Request for hearing before Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer. 
    Within ten days of the service, mailing, publishing, or posting the order to abate public nuisance, whichever is later, the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises described in the order to abate may request a hearing before the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer regarding the requirements of the order to abate. Such request shall be made in writing, shall state the objections of the person filing the request, shall state the interest in the property of the person filing the request and shall be filed with the Building Official or the City Clerk. The matter shall be assigned to the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer and set for hearing at least ten days after the date of the mailing of the Notice of Hearing to Abate Public Nuisance. The person filing the request shall be entitled to one continuance of up to 14 additional days. The person filing the request, and all others having an interest in the premises, shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing before the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer by a notice of hearing to abate public nuisance as set forth below. 
(Ord. 957, 10/06) 
8.32.350 - Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer. 
    Any and all requests pursuant to Section 8.32.345 shall be heard by the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer who shall be the City Manager or his/her designee. The decision of the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer shall be final unless an appeal to the City Council is filed pursuant to section 8.32.495. 
(Ord. 957, 10/06) 
8.32.355 - Notice of hearing to abate public nuisance. 
    If the nuisance is not abated voluntarily, or if a request for hearing is filed pursuant to Section 8.32.345, a notice of hearing to abate public nuisance shall be prepared in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF HEARING TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE 
To all persons having any interest in the premises having assessor's parcel number ___________ and known and described as ___________ in the City of Beaumont: 
Notice is hereby given that you must appear before the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer at the hearing to be held on the day of _______, at City Hall located at 550 East Sixth Street Beaumont, California, at _______ a.m./p.m., or as soon thereafter as the matter may be heard, to show cause why certain unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or obnoxious conditions existing on said premises shall not be declared a public nuisance and said nuisance be abated by the removal or repair of said unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or obnoxious conditions. 
Otherwise, upon the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer's finding that the same constitutes a public nuisance, the nuisance will be abated by the City of Beaumont, in which case the cost of such removal or repair and abatement shall be assessed upon the premises on which said conditions exist, and such costs will constitute a lien upon such premises unless and until paid in full. 
The conditions upon said premises which cause them to be a public nuisance are as follows: 
_____
_____
_____
Dated: _______ 
___________ 
Code Enforcement Officer 
City of Beaumont 
8.32.360 - Hearing on abatement-Content of testimony. 
    The Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer shall, at the scheduled time as specified in the notice of hearing to abate public nuisance, proceed to hear and consider any relevant testimony or evidence offered by the Fire Chief, Police Chief, Director, Health Officer, City Manager, other officials or employees of the City or other qualified witnesses, as well as the owner, a responsible person in charge and control of the affected premises, his representatives, a mortgagee or beneficiary under any trust deed, lessee, any other person having any estate or interest in such premises, or any other competent person who may be present and desire to testify, respecting: 
A.  The condition of the affected premises, 
B.  The estimated cost of abating the alleged nuisance by repair or removal, and 
C.  Any other pertinent matters. 
    The Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer may continue the hearing from time to time as it shall deem advisable. 
(Ord. 716 §2, 1993) 
8.32.370 - Hearing on abatement-Procedure. 
    The bearing shall be conducted formally, although the technical rules of evidence shall not apply, except that irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. All evidence taken shall be sworn evidence and the proceedings shall be recorded. During the course of the hearing, the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer may visit and inspect any premises involved in the proceeding. 
8.32.380 - Hearing on abatement-Decision. 
    Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer shall consider the evidence presented and shall, as soon as reasonably possible thereafter, make written findings of fact, based upon the evidence, to support his/her decision and shall make his/her determination and conclusion with respect to the alleged public nuisance. The ruling shall be made by the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer within 30 days of the close of such hearing, and copies thereof shall be served upon all interested parties in the same manner as set forth in Sections 8.32.310 through 8.32.330. Failure of the owner or other persons having any interest in the affected premises to appear at or be represented at the hearing shall in no way affect the validity thereof. The ruling shall contain a notice that appeal to the City Council, if desired, must be sought by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Section 8.32.495. 
(Ord. 716 §2, 1993) 
8.32.390 - Order to abate public nuisance. 
    If, from the evidence received at the hearing, the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer determines that the premises or any portions thereof are unsafe or dangerous and a public nuisance, then he/she shall, by written ruling, order the nuisance abated. The order to abate public nuisance shall set forth the following: 
A.  A statement of the particulars which render the premises obnoxious or unsafe and a public nuisance; 
B.  A statement of the things required to be done to abate the nuisance; 
C.  The time within which the work required to abate must be commenced, which shall be not less than ten days after the passage and adoption of the resolution; 
D.  A reasonable time within which the required abatement shall be completed; 
E.  That the occupant, lessee, or another person in possession or charge, or any mortgagee, beneficiary under any deed of trust, or other person having an interest or estate in such premises, may at his own risk, abate the nuisance. 
F.  That appeal to the City Council, if desired, must be sought by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Section 8.32.495. 
(Ord. 716 §2,1993) 
8.32.400 - Order to abate-Service. 
    The City Manager shall cause copies of the order to be posted upon the premises involved and served in the manner and upon the persons prescribed in Section 8.32.310 through 8.32.330, except that a copy of the affidavit or certificates of mailing shall be included with each copy of the order which is mailed. 
8.32.410 - Abatement by premises owner. 
    The premises owner, lessee, occupant, or person having charge or control of the premises, may, at his own expense, abate the nuisance as prescribed by the order to abate prior to expiration of the abatement period set forth in the order to abate. If the nuisance has been inspected by a representative of the City and has been abated in accordance with the order to abate, proceedings shall be terminated. 
8.32.420 - Abatement by the City. 
    Whenever an order to abate public nuisance upon a premises, or any portion thereof, has not been complied with within the time set by the Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer, the City Manager shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy provided for in this Chapter, to: 
A.  Cause the premises to be vacated until such time as the nuisance has been abated; 
B.  Cause the nuisance upon the premises, or any portion thereof, to be abated and the premises restored to a condition in compliance with the provisions of the Beaumont Municipal Code, rules and regulations promulgated thereunder and the laws and statutes of the State of California. Immediately upon completion of such abatement, the City Manager shall cause a notice of such completion to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, Riverside County, State of California. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from contracting with an independent contractor to perform such work as may be necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. 716 §2, 1993) 
8.32.425 - Right of entry to abate. 
    The Fire Chief, Police Chief, Director, Health Officer and City Manager shall be entitled to enter vacant or occupied premises to carry out an order to abate public nuisance. If the premises are occupied, credentials shall be presented to the occupant and permission to enter shall be obtained in writing. In the event that the premises are secured against entry, a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control over the premises for permission to enter. If entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the Fire Chief, Police Chief, Director, Health Officer, or City Manager shall obtain such authorization, including a warrant, as may be necessary under the circumstances to secure entry. Authorization may be obtained following the same procedures as set forth in state law for inspection authorization, including, but not limited to, obtaining from the municipal court an administrative abatement warrant. 
8.32.430 - Immediate hazards. 
    Any condition which poses an immediate hazard to public health or safety shall be determined and declared by the City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Health Officer or Director to be an immediate hazard. In such event, the City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Health Officer or Director may take immediate action to abate the hazard, without notice to the owner, lessee, person having custody or charge of the premises involved, or any other interested person, and without the necessity of a hearing thereon by the Hearing Officer. However, such immediate action shall be limited to such action as the City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Health Officer or Director deems reasonably necessary in his/her discretion to eliminate the immediate hazard or to protect persons or property from immediate injury or damage. Any further action to abate a nuisance which does not pose an immediate hazard to public health and safety shall be taken only in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 716 §2, 1993) 
8.32.440 - Costs-Report. 
    The Fire Chief, Police Chief, City Manager, Director or Health Officer shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating any nuisance or immediate hazard on each separate premises where the work has been done and, upon completion of the abatement, the City Manager shall cause to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk an itemized report of costs of nuisance abatement specifying the following: 
A.  The work performed; 
B.  The cost of the work, including any salvage value and incidental expenses; 
C.  A description of the premises on which the nuisance or immediate hazard was located. 
D.  The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  The assessment against each premises proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. Any such report of costs of nuisance abatement may include work performed on any number of premises, whether or not contiguous to each other. The term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to, the expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, reports of title search and the costs of printing, mailing and serving papers required under this Chapter. 
8.32.450 - Costs-Notice of hearing. 
    Upon filing of the report of costs of nuisance abatement by the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Director, Health Officer or City Manager with the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall add consideration of the Report to the agenda of the next City Council meeting which will permit time for proper notification of interested persons. The City Clerk shall cause to be served copies of the report and a notice of hearing on costs of nuisance abatement at least 21 days before the scheduled hearing upon the persons and in the manner set forth in Sections 8.32.310 through 8.32.330. The notice of hearing on costs of nuisance abatement shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF HEARING ON COSTS OF NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
To all persons having any interest in the premises having assessor's parcel number ___________ and known and described as ___________ in the City of Beaumont: 
Notice is hereby given that the City Council, at its meeting to be held on the ___ day of _______, ___, at City Hall located at 550 East Sixth Street, Beaumont, California, at _______ a.m./p.m., or as soon thereafter as the matter may be heard, will hear any protest or objection to the cost of the abatement of the public nuisance on the premises described above for the purpose of correcting, modifying, or confirming said costs and assessing the same against said premises. Failure to make any objection will be deemed to be a waiver of any objection or protest to any and all procedures concerning the same. A report of costs of nuisance abatement showing the cost and proposed assessment for such abatement is on file at City Hall and is open to public inspection. 
Dated: _______ 
___________ 
City Manager 
City of Beaumont 
8.32.460 - Costs-Hearing. 
    Any person interested in and affected by the proposed assessment may file written protests or objections with the City Clerk at any time prior to the hour and date set for the hearing on the reports of costs of nuisance abatement. Each such protest or objection must contain a description of the premises in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report of costs of nuisance abatement, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any premises owner liable to be assessed for the costs of abatement, and any other interested persons. The City Council may make such correction, revision, or modification in the report of costs of nuisance abatement as it may deem just, and when the City Council is satisfied of the correctness of the assessment, the report of costs of nuisance abatement is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, together with the assessment, shall be confirmed by resolution. The resolution shall be passed and adopted by the City Council within 30 days of the close of such hearing, and copies thereof shall be served upon all interested parties in the same manner as set forth in Sections 8.32.310 through 8.32.330, except that a copy of the affidavit or certificate of mailing shall be included with each copy of the resolution which is mailed. The resolution shall contain a notice that judicial review, if desired, must be sought within the 90-day time limit set forth in California code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6. The City Council may adjourn the hearings from time to time. 
8.32.470 - Costs-Assessment and personal obligation of owner. 
    The amount of the costs of abating the nuisance or the immediate hazard upon each premises, including incidental expenses, as confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute an assessment against each such premises, and as thus made and confirmed shall also become the personal obligation of the owner of each said premises. Such assessment shall be due and payable 30 days from the date of confirmation thereof, and thereafter shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest until paid. Such assessment shall also constitute a lien on such premises for the amount of such costs until paid pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.1, and shall also constitute a special assessment against such premises for the amount of such costs pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.5. 
8.32.480 - Costs-Collection-Recorded lien. 
    Upon the City Council's confirmation of the amount of costs as set forth in Section 8.32.460, pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.1, the City Clerk shall cause a Notice of Lien to be served upon the persons and in the manner prescribed in Section 8.32.485, and to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Riverside County, State of California. Such Notice of Lien shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 8.32 of the Beaumont Municipal Code, City of Beaumont, California, and in California Government Code, Sections 38773 and 38773.1, the City of Beaumont, did cause a nuisance to be abated on _______, 199___, on the premises described below and did, by Resolution _______ dated _______, 199___, assess the cost of such abatement upon said premises described below. Of said cost there remains unpaid to the City of Beaumont the sum of _______ Dollars ($_____), together with interest calculated thereon at the legal rate of interest from _______, 199___, until said amount has been paid in full this lien discharged of record. 
The premises described above and upon which a lien is hereby claimed is that certain premises situated in the City of Beaumont, County of Riverside, State of California, and more particularly described as follows. 
_____
The name and address of the owner of record of such premises described above is: 
_____
City of Beaumont 
Dates: _______, ___ 
By: ___________ 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
City Clerk 
8.32.485 - Cost-Collection-Service of notice of lien. 
    The Notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 415.10 et seq. as follows: 
A.  The person, or persons, if any, at least 18 years of age and occupying or in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved shall be personally served unless the premises is vacant. 
B.  The owner of the premises as shown on the most recent tax assessment roll and any other person or persons actually known by the City Manager to have an ownership, leasehold or other interest in the premises shall be personally served. If personal service cannot with reasonable diligence be accomplished, the Notice may be served by leaving a copy of the Notice at such person's dwelling house, usual place of abode, office box, in the presence of a competent member of the. household or a person apparently in charge of his or her office, place of business, or usual mailing address, at least 18 years of age, who shall be informed of the contents thereof, and by thereafter mailing a copy of the Notice (by first-class mail, postage prepaid) to the person to be served at the place where a copy of the Notice was left. Service is deemed complete on the tenth day after the mailing. 
C.  If no address is known, then the Notice shall be. Mailed to such person at the address of the premises involved and the Notice shall be published in a daily newspaper circulated within the City and one certified copy of the Notice shall also be conspicuously posted on the premises at least ten days before the' time fixed for the hearing before the City Council. 
8.32.490 - Costs-Collection-Special assessment collected with taxes. 
    Upon the City Council's confirmation of the amount of costs as set forth in Section 8.32.460, pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.5, a certified copy of such confirmed special assessment, which remains unpaid, shall be filed with the Assessor and Tax Collector of Riverside County acting for the City in order that such County officials may enter the amount of the special assessment on the appropriate assessment book opposite the a description of the particular premises. Thereafter such amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest, and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale of delinquency, as provided by law for City taxes. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes are made applicable to such special assessment. 
8.32.495 - Appeal to the City Council. 
A.  Whenever any person is aggrieved by any final order of the Hearing Officer issued pursuant to this Chapter, such person may appeal to the City Council the issuance of said order by filing a written notice of appeal there from no later than 15 calendar days from the date of decision. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall state the objections of the person filing the notice and shall state the interest in the property of the person filing the notice. 
B.  The City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing at the next regular City Council meeting at least 14 calendar days after the date of the mailing of the Notice of Hearing on the appeal. The City Clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing before the City Council to all interested parties in the same manner as set forth in Sections 8.32.310 through 8.32.330. 
C.  The hearing before the City Council shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the provisions of Sections 8.32.360 and 8.32.370. After the hearing, the City Council may, by written decision, affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, any final decision or order of the Hearing Officer which is appealed from. The written decision shall be issued within fourteen (14) calendar days of the close of the hearing. Failure of the owner or other persons having any interest in the affected premises to appear at or be represented at the hearing shall in no way affect the validity thereof. 
D.  The City Clerk shall serve the written resolution representing the decision of the City Council on the appeal on all interested parties in the same manner as set forth in Sections 8.32.310 through 8.32.330. The written resolution served shall contain a notice that judicial review, if desired, must be sought within 30 days after the date of posting on the subject premises a notice of the passage of the resolution declaring the nuisance to exist to contest the validity of any proceedings leading up to and including the adoption of the resolution; otherwise, all objections shall be deemed to have been waived. 
(Ord. 957, 10/09) 
8.32.500 - Unlawful Interference. 
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with an officer, agent or employee of the City or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any premises, or any portion thereof, upon which there is a nuisance which has been ordered to be abated, or with any person to whom such premises have been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, when any such officer, agent, employee, purchaser or person having an interest or estate in such premises is engaged in abating a nuisance or immediate hazard thereon, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work, or authorized or directed pursuant thereto. 
8.32.510 - Non-liability of City. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to hold the City or any official, officer, employee or agent thereof responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspections authorized herein, by reason of the determination that a nuisance or immediate hazard exists on any premises in accordance with the provision herein, or by 'reason of any of the procedures or processes related to the actual abatement thereof. 
8.32.520 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
8.32.530 - Judicial review. 
    California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6 is hereby adopted and made applicable to any judicial review of any decision made by the City or its Nuisance Abatement Hearing Officer, agents, representatives or employees under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 716 §2, 1993) 
8.32.540 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is, for any reason, held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Chapter, and each section, subsection, clause, sentence and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that anyone or more sections, subsections, clauses, sentences or phrases be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid. 
8.32.545 - Gender and number. 
    Any reference to the masculine shall include the feminine and any reference to the feminine shall include the masculine. Any reference to the singular shall include the plural and any reference to the plural shall include the singular. 
Chapter 8.36 - ALARM SYSTEMS 

8.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to protect public health, safety and welfare by regulating alarm systems in order to reduce false alarms and the public service costs incurred in responding to such alarms. Many alarm systems currently in use mechanically malfunction or are not operated properly by their users, causing an increase in false alarm responses, thereby constituting a hazard and wasted time for peace officers, communications personnel and the public in general. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section: 
    "Alarm or alarm system" means any device which is used to warn of an unauthorized entry into buildings or onto premises, of an emergency, or the commission of an unlawful act. 
    "Alarm user" means any person who owns, leases or rents, or any on-site agent or representative thereof, any monitored or unmonitored alarm system, device or service. 
    "Automatic dialing device" means a device which is connected to a telephone line, cellular telephone service or radio link and maintains an open line to emergency services or is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit an emergency message either by voice or coded signals indicating a need for emergency response. 
    "Business" means any premises used for non-residential or governmental purposes. 
    "False alarm" means any activation of an alarm eliciting a response by police personnel when a situation requiring a response does not in fact exist. It does not include activation for testing purposes if the Police Department has been given advance notice of such testing. It also does not include activation by police personnel. If an alarm is canceled prior to the dispatch of police personnel the activation shall not be considered a false alarm. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, including governmental entities. 
    "Residential" means premises used as dwelling units, which include apartments and lodging houses. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.030 - Prohibition. 
A.  No person shall use, maintain or possess an alarm system on premises within the City of Beaumont unless that person has obtained an alarm user's license from the City Manager (or his/her designee). 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally activate any alarm or alarm system or cause signals to be transmitted to a monitoring agency indicating the activation of an alarm system for any reason other than to warn of an actual emergency or to test an alarm or alarm system provided that the Police Department has been notified before the test. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for an alarm user to refuse or fail to respond to the scene of his/her activated alarm when requested to do so by any Police Officer or Police Dispatcher. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.040 - Exceptions. 
    This Chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A smoke or heat detector in a single-family residential unit not connected to a central monitoring system. 
B.  An alarm system affixed to a motor vehicle not connected to a central monitoring system. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.050 - Alarm user license. 
A.  All alarm users shall, within ten days of completing the installation of a new alarm system, or within ten days of placing an existing alarm system in service, obtain an alarm user's license from the City Manager (or designee). If an alarm user fails to obtain a license such user shall be cited under Section 8.36.140 for each false alarm until such time as the permit is obtained. 
B.  If an alarm user operates an alarm system after having his/her license placed on the "no response" list pursuant to Section 8.36.100, such user shall be cited under Section 8.36.140 for each false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.060 - Alarm user license: Application. 
A.  Application for an alarm license or renewal must be made by the alarm user to the City Code Enforcement Department upon forms prepared and approved by the Department. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone numbers (land line and cell phone) of the primary alarm user. 
2.  Location of the alarm system, types of activations reported by the system and which of these are audible and which are silent. 
3.  Name of the alarm business installing, servicing, inspecting, maintaining and/or monitoring the alarm system and a 24-hour telephone number of the monitoring station. 
4.  Date of installation of the alarm system. 
5.  Certification that the primary alarm user and all others authorized to operate the system have been properly trained in the use of the system by an alarm business, the subscriber or by the owner of the alarm system. 
6.  a.  For residential installations, the name of one responsible party, in addition to the alarm user, who can be notified to assist police personnel in the event of an activation and who can control the system at any time of the day or night. 
b.  For non-residential installations, the name of three responsible party(s), in addition to the alarm user, who can be notified to assist police personnel in the event of an activation and who can control the system at any time of the day or night. 
B.  The applicant shall, at the time of application, pay the fee established by resolution of the City Council. Fees for initial license application or renewal shall not be refundable, transferable or prorated. The application shall be signed and verified by the owner or lessee (or their agent or on-site representative) of the alarm system for which the license is requested. The application may contain any other such information as may be required by Code Enforcement. 
C.  Whenever any change occurs relating to the information required for a license the user shall give written notice of such change to the Code Enforcement Department within five business days of said change. 
D.  The City Council, may, by resolution, exempt classes of residents, from the payment of applicable fees. Exemptions from fees shall not preclude the City from requiring alarm users obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement Department. 
E.  Subject to the disclosure requirements of the California Public Records Act, information furnished pursuant to this Chapter shall be kept confidential. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.070 - Alarm user license: Renewal and annual fee. 
A.  Licenses shall be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed annually for a fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Each alarm user shall be notified of the need to renew the license approximately 30 days prior to the expiration of the license. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application to renew prior to the expiration date. Failure to renew shall be classified as use of an unpermitted alarm system and the user shall be cited under Section 8.36.180 for each false alarm until a license is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.080 - Notice to Police Department. 
    The Code Enforcement Department shall promptly notify the Police Department of any new, renewed and revised alarm license. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.090 - Responsibilities of alarm user. 
    The following are the duties and responsibilities of all alarm users, alarm owners or primary users operating alarm systems in the City of Beaumont: 
A.  To not manually activate an alarm except when an immediate emergency response is needed. 
B.  To inactivate or cause to be inactivated an audible alarm within 15 minutes of activation. 
C.  To be familiar with all alarm system operating instructions, including those for verification of an alarm. 
D.  To train or cause to be trained any and all persons who might have reason and authority to control the alarm system, in the proper operation of the system. 
E.  To inform persons who are authorized to operate the alarm system of the provisions of this Ordinance, emphasizing the importance of avoiding false alarms. 
F.  To notify the alarm system monitoring company of a false alarm activation as soon as the user is aware of the false alarm. 
G.  To notify the City Manager (or designee) when the alarm is deactivated or the applicant has moved from the location of the alarm system and is no longer responsible for its operation. 
H.  To maintain or to cause to be maintained the alarm system in good working order and to take measures to prevent the occurrence or reoccurrence of false alarms. 
I.  To inspect or to cause to be inspected the alarm system at least once each 12 months. 
J.  To document the condition of the alarm system and the remedial actions taken to prevent false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.095 - False alarm response fines. 
    An alarm user shall become liable to the City for an administrative fine under Section 1.16.030 of this Code if the Police Department is required to respond to repeated false alarms from the user's alarm system. A false alarm response administrative fine shall be paid to the City by the alarm user for each false alarm commencing with the second false alarm received from any one source or from any one alarm system within 12 consecutive months. No false alarm administrative fine shall be charged for false alarms occurring within 30 days following initial installation of any new alarm system provided the system otherwise complies with the requirements of this chapter. Multiple false alarms received in any one 24-hour period shall be considered a single event for the purpose of assessing an administrative fine". 
(Ord. 1047, 7-15-14) 
8.36.100 - No response list; reinstatement; no City liability. 
A.  An alarm and alarm user shall be placed on a "No Response" list after police responses to six false alarms within 12 consecutive months. While on the "No Response" list, a police response will only be made when there is other independent information that an emergency has or is occurring. 
B.  The alarm and alarm user shall not be removed from the "No Response" list until the alarm user provides written evidence that the alarm has been serviced by an authorized alarm company which certifies that the alarm is properly functioning. 
C.  Neither the City of Beaumont nor its employees shall be liable for any failure to respond to an alarm that has been placed on the "No Response" list. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.110 - Regulation of audible alarms. 
A.  Audible alarms shall be equipped with an automatic reset mechanism capable of terminating the audible sound within 15 minutes after activation; 
B.  If an alarm system continues to emit an audible sound in excess of 15 minutes, after reasonable efforts to contact the alarm user or the alarm business that monitors such alarm system, the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, may cause such alarm system to be disconnected. The alarm user shall pay the cost of such disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.120 - Testing, service and repairs of alarm system. 
A.  The alarm user shall notify the Beaumont Police Department Dispatch Center before any service, test, repair, maintenance, alteration or installation of an alarm system that may cause a false alarm. Any alarm activated shall not constitute a false alarm if prior notice has been given. Each activation in violation of this section is subject to citation pursuant to Section 8.36.140. 
B.  When any false alarm has occurred the alarm user shall have the alarm system promptly repaired or disconnected to prevent false alarms. The audible function of the alarm system shall be disconnected while repairs are being made. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.130 - Automatic dialing devices. 
A.  No person or business shall use or cause to be used any automatic dialing device that: 
1.  Automatically selects a public safety or emergency services telephone line of the City and then reproduces any prerecorded message or signal or otherwise maintains an open line without direct person-to-person communication. 
2.  Prevents termination of a call by police dispatch personnel. 
3.  Transmits directly to any public safety or emergency services facility. 
B.  Within 30 days after the effective date of this Chapter all existing automatic-dialing devices described herein shall be disconnected. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
8.36.140 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
8.36.150 - Compliance with this Chapter by existing alarm users. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any and all alarm users including, without limitation, any person using an alarm installed before the effective date of this Chapter. All alarm users of alarm systems installed before the effective date of this Chapter shall apply or, and obtain, an alarm user license in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter within 90 days of its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 895, § 2, 6-20-06) 
Chapter 8.40 - MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION 

8.40.010 - Findings. 
    The City of Beaumont hereby finds and declares that: 
A.  WHEREAS, the City is committed to improving the public health, safety and welfare, including air quality; and 
B.  WHEREAS, mobile sources are a major contributor to air pollution in the South Coast Air Basin; and 
C.  WHEREAS, air quality goals for the region established by state law cannot be met without reducing air pollution from mobile sources; and 
D.  WHEREAS, the South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) calls upon cities and counties to reduce emissions from motor vehicles consistent with the requirements of the California Clean Air Act of 1988 by developing and implementing mobile source air pollution reduction programs; and 
E.  WHEREAS, such programs place demands upon the City's funds, and those programs should be financed by shifting the responsibility for financing from the general fund to the motor vehicles creating the demand, to the greatest extent possible; and 
F.  WHEREAS, Section 44223, added to the Health and Safety Code by action of the California Legislature on September 30, 1990 (Chapter 90-1705), authorizes the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) to impose an additional motor vehicle registration fee of $2.00, commencing on April 1, 1991, increasing to $4.00, commencing on April 1, 1992, to finance the implementation of transportation measures embodied in the AQMP and provisions of the California Clean Air Act; and 
G.  WHEREAS, $0.40 cents of every $1.00 collected under Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code shall be distributed to cities and counties located in the South Coast Air Quality Management District that comply with Section 44243 of the Code, based on the jurisdictions' prorated share of population as defined by the State Department of Finance; and 
H.  WHEREAS, the City is located within the South Coast Air Quality Management District and is eligible to receive a portion of the revenues from the additional motor vehicle registration fees contingent upon adoption of this Ordinance; and 
I.  WHEREAS, the prorated share of the fee revenues for cities that fail to adopt an ordinance pursuant to Section 44243(b)(3) of the Health and Safety Code shall be distributed instead to the jurisdictions within the District that have adopted an ordinance; and 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED that the City of Beaumont, after careful consideration, hereby finds and declares that the imposition of the additional motor vehicle registration fee by the SCAQMD to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs is in the best interest of the City and promotes the general welfare of its residents. 
(Ord. 703 §1, 1991) 
8.40.020 - Intent. 
    This Ordinance is intended to support the SCAQMD's imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the City into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 703 §1, 1991) 
8.40.030 - Definitions. 
    As applied in this Ordinance, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "City" shall mean the City of Beaumont. 
B.  "Mobile source air pollution reduction programs" shall mean any program or project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  "Fee Administrator" shall mean the Finance Director of the City or his designee. 
(Ord. 703 §1, 1991) 
8.40.040 - Administration of vehicle registration fee. 
A.  Receipt of Fee: The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the City, pursuant to this Ordinance, shall be accepted by the Fee Administrator. 
B.  Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund: The Fee Administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of City funds. 
C.  Transfer of Funds: Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the Fee Administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to Subsection (B) above. All interest earned by the Trust Fund Account shall be credited only to that account. 
D.  Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues: All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the Trust Fund Account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Subsection 8.40.030(B) above. All interest earned by the Trust Fund Account shall be credited only to that account. 
E.  Audits: The City consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Sections 44244 and 44244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 703 §1, 1991) 
Chapter 8.42 - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PARKS 

8.42.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Public park" shall mean any park open to the public located within the City of Beaumont, and includes all sidewalks and parking lots located within or on the perimeter of a public park. 
B.  "Smoke" means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of the combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization of a tobacco product, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization is human inhalation of the tobacco product. "Smoke" includes but is not limited to tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, and marijuana smoke. 
C.  "Smoking" means engaging in an act that generates smoke. "Smoking" includes inhaling, exhaling, burning, lighting, possessing, holding, or carrying any lighted cigar, lighted cigarette of any type, lighted pipe, lighted hookah pipe; or operating electronic cigarette, or any other smoke inhalation device of any kind. "Smoking" includes smoking marijuana for medical purposes. 
(Ord. 1036, 7-2-13) 
8.42.020 - Prohibition. 
    No person shall engage in smoking within any public park, except in designated smoking areas. 
(Ord. 1036, 7-2-13) 
8.42.030 - Designation of smoking areas. 
    Persons conducting special events authorized and permitted by the City within a public park may designate a smoking area, provided it is located so as to minimize the effect of smoking on nonsmokers and adjacent nonsmoking areas and appropriate receptacles for the disposal of cigarettes and cigars are provided. 
(Ord. 1036, 7-2-13) 
8.42.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 1036, 7-2-13) 
Chapter 8.44 - URINATION AND DEFECATION IN PUBLIC 

8.44.010 - Public urination and defecation prohibited. 
    No person shall urinate or defecate in public except when using a urinal, toilet or commode located in a bathroom, restroom or other structure enclosed from public view. 
(Ord. 706, §I, 1992) 
8.44.020 - Citation. 
    The Chief of Police or any members of his department are authorized to cite any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 706, §I, 1992) 
8.44.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 706, §I, 1992) 
Chapter 8.46 - PROHIBITION ON THE INSTALLATION OF CERTAIN WATER SOFTENING APPLIANCES 

8.46.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the quality of the waters of the State including, but not limited to, protecting the beneficial uses of the Beaumont Groundwater Basin, which Basin provides most of the potable water drinking supply for the residents of the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 1, 7-3-07) 
8.46.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this Chapter: 
    "City" shall mean the City of Beaumont. 
    "Person" includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, district, county, town, the state, the federal government and any of the agencies and political subdivisions of such entities. 
    "Regional Board" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, created and exercising its powers pursuant to the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, California Water Code, Section 13000 et seq. 
    "Residence" means a structure which is or is intended to be, in whole or in part, a place of dwelling, whether occupied or not, whether fully constructed or not, and includes without limitation, homes, whether attached to another structure or not, apartments, condominiums and mobile homes. 
    "Residential self-regenerating water softening appliance" means a water softening device located within or adjacent to a residence located within the City or which discharges to a community sewer system that is tributary to the sewer system owned and operated by the City, whereby the capability of the appliance to remove hardness from water is renewed by the on-site application of a chloride salt-containing brine solution to the active softening or conditioning material contained therein, followed by a subsequent rinsing of the active softening or conditioning material. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 1, 7-3-07) 
8.46.030 - Findings. 
A.  The State Legislature has found and declared that pollution prevention should be the first step in a hierarchy for reducing pollution and managing wastes, and to achieve environmental stewardship for society. 
B.  The Santa Ana River Basin Plan adopted by the Regional Board, and the waste discharge requirements issued by the Regional Board to the City for the City's publicly-owned wastewater treatment plant obligate the City to protect the pristine quality of the Beaumont Basin water supply by reducing and eliminating saline discharges to the Beaumont Basin. 
C.  The City Council has been informed and advised that residential self-generating water softening appliances individually generate and discharge salt to the Beaumont Basin, which salt cannot be removed from the drinking water supply by traditional water treatment and disposal methods. The City Council has been further advised that new residential development in the City has the potential for creating a proliferation of such appliances thereby potentially impairing the quality of the drinking water supply and undermining the City's ability to comply with the Regional Board's Wastewater Discharge requirements for its wastewater treatment plant. 
D.  Requiring a permit prior to the installation of self-regenerating water softening appliances is a useful means of quantifying the number of such installations and determining the impact on water quality achieving compliance with the waste discharge requirements issued by the Regional Board. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 1, 7-3-07) 
8.46.040 - Prohibition. 
    No person shall install or in any manner assist in the installation of a residential self-regenerating water softening appliance that discharges into the community sewer system owned and operated by the City or that discharges into a community sewer system that is tributary to the sewer system owned and operated by the City unless that person has first obtained a permit therefor from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 1, 7-3-07) 
8.46.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
8.46.060 - Enforcement. 
    The Director of Public Works and the City Manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Public Works Director and the City Manager may be delegated to persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 1, 7-3-07) 
8.46.070 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this ordinance or the applicability thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, and to that end the provisions of this ordinance as severable. 
(Ord. 912, 7-3-07) 
Chapter 8.50 - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

8.50.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to establish regulation and standards which will reduce light pollution generated by residential, commercial and industrial lighting fixtures and devices, minimize light pollution which has a detrimental effect on the environment and the enjoyment of the night sky, reduce and minimize lighting and lighting practices which cause unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties, correct problems of glare and light trespass, and reduce energy use. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
    "Glare" light that causes visual discomfort or disability, or loss of visual performance. 
    "Light fixture" means a complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps, the lamp holder, reflector, lens, diffuser, ballast and/or other components and accessories, together with parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. Sometimes referred to as a "luminaire". 
    "Light pollution" means any artificial light emitted into the atmosphere, either directly or indirectly by reflection that impacts astronomical research and the enjoyment of the night sky by reflection off of airborne dust, water vapor and other atmospheric particulates. 
    "Light trespass" means any artificial light or glare from a light fixture onto neighboring property that interferes with viewing of the night sky, or eliminates the ability to have darkness on the adjacent property, or shines into neighboring windows, properties or structures. Quantitative measurement of light trespass shall be made with a standard yardstick having a length of three feet and a width of 1.5 inches. The yardstick shall be placed at the complainant's property line nearest the light source. The Planning Director or his or her designee shall then determine if a shadow is cast by the light source onto a plain white paper. The light source, yardstick and shadow must be in alignment. Measurements shall not be taken when there is a moon in the night sky. 
    "Nuisance lighting" means and includes, but is not limited to, glare, sky glow, light pollution and light trespass. 
    "Shielded" a light fixture having a housing or optics that prevents a direct view of the light source from normal viewing angles. Types of shielding include: 
i.  "Fully shielded" a lighting fixture shielded or constructed so that light rays are only emitted at angles below a horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the fixture from which it is emitted. Sometimes referred to as a "full-cutoff' fixture; 
ii.  "Shielded" a light fixture emitting less than two percent of its light above the horizontal plane; 
iii.  "Partly shielded" a light fixture emitting less than ten percent of its light above the horizontal plane. Sometimes referred to as a "semi-cutoff' fixture; 
iv.  "Unshielded" a light fixture that emits ten percent or more of its light above the horizontal plane. 
    "Sky glow" the brightening of the night sky attributable to man-made sources of light. 
    "Temporary lighting" lighting installed with temporary wiring and operated for less than 60 days in any calendar year. Temporary lighting includes "string lighting", which is any type of lighting and utilizes more than one lamp or bulb connected by a continuous wire and not exceeding 1.5 watts per bulb. Temporary lighting does not include flashing lamps or bulbs unless they are temporary holiday decorations. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.030 - Establishment of Lighting Zones. 
    There is hereby established three Lighting Zones within the City of Beaumont for the purpose of regulating and establishing standards for the reasonable use of outdoor lighting, the area of which zones are defined on the basis of land use: 
    8.50.030.1 The Residential Lighting Zone: shall consist of all areas of the City zoned exclusively for residential uses; 
    8.50.030.2 The Commercial Industrial Lighting Zone: shall consist of all areas of the City zoned exclusively for commercial and industrial uses; 
    8.50.030.3 The Special Use Lighting Zone: shall consist of specific land uses which require accurate color rendition, as more specifically provided for in Section 8.50.080, below. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.040 - Prohibited lighting. 
    The following lighting systems are prohibited in all Lighting Zones, except by special event permit or Conditional Use Permit: aerial lasers, "search light" style lights, mercury vapor lights, flashing lights (unless they are temporary "holiday decorations" as provided for in Section 8.50.050.3 below), low-pressure sodium fixtures, lighting fixtures mounted in such a way as to illuminate a wall, building facade, roof or awning, or aimed only towards a property line, or which interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle as determined by the Police Chief or City Engineer, and billboard lighting that is pointed up. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.050 - Exempt lighting. 
    The following outdoor lighting fixtures are exempt from this Chapter: 
    8.50.050.1 Fossil fuel (e.g., gas) lamps; 
    8.50.050.2 Neon; 
    8.50.050.3 Temporary holiday decorations; 
    8.50.050.4 Flag lighting of 150 watts or less; 
    8.50.050.5 Emergency lighting; 
    8.50.050.6 Internally illuminated signs that have dark backgrounds (opaque or colored) and light lettering (white or colored lighter than the background) so as to minimize glare; 
    8.50.050.7 Motion detector lighting fixtures, provided (a) that there is no light trespass, (b) the fixtures are mounted within five feet of an entrance or exit door or alcove of a structure, (c) installed no more than eight feet above the ground, (d) illuminated with a maximum of two light bulbs of no more than 75 watts each, (e) maximum time the light is on after being triggered is ten minutes, and (f) light cannot be trigger from more than 30 feet away; 
    8.50.050.8 Exposed string outdoor lighting, provided (a) that they consist exclusively of a white light with a clear bulb, and (b) the installation of such lights shall be limited to the lighting of living landscape features (shrubs and trees) in outside dining areas or within the parking areas of a commercial center or plaza. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.060 - Lighting in the Residential Lighting Zone. 
    8.50.060.1 Generally. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be installed and operated in conformance with this Chapter, and the California Building Code. The following standards are applicable to all outdoor lighting within the Residential Lighting Zone. 
    8.50.060.2 Maximum Lumens and Shielding. All outdoor lighting shall comply with the following lamp lumen limits and shielding requirements: 
a.  Fully shielded: 2,250 lumens (or equivalent) maximum; 
b.  Shielded: 825 lumens (or equivalent) maximum; 
c.  Partly shielded: none permitted; 
d.  Unshielded: low voltage (24 volts or less) landscaping lighting only; 
e.  Prohibition against adjustable light fixture mounts: outdoor lighting fixtures shall be permanently installed so as to maintain the shielding requirements, except that low voltage landscaping lighting may use flexible or adjustable mounting systems. 
    8.50.060.3 Height Limit. Lights mounted on poles or structures intended primarily for mounting lights shall not exceed a mounting height of 40 percent of the horizontal distance of the light pole from the property line, up to a maximum of 16 feet high, whichever is lower; except that lighting attached to single family residences shall not exceed the height of the roof eave. 
    8.50.060.4 Total Lamp Power Limit. This subsection applies to all outdoor lighting, whether attached to a building, poles or other structures. The maximum allowable lighting limit per lot in the Residential Lighting Zone shall be determined by multiplying the area (square footage) of the lot by 0.03, the allowable lamp wattage per square foot of lot area. 
    8.50.060.5 Nonconforming Lighting. All outdoor light fixtures existing and legally installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be deemed non-conforming and are exempt from the requirements of this Chapter except that non-conforming lighting fixtures shall not be structurally altered, reconstructed or replaced so as to extend their useful life. In the event that any non-conforming lighting fixture is structurally altered, reconstructed or replaced, such fixture shall be made to conform to the requirements of this Chapter. Additionally, should it be determined that a non-conforming light fixture results in light trespass, the Planning Director may require that the light be shielded, filtered, redirected, replaced with a less intense light source, removed or a combination thereof, to eliminate light trespass. Alternatively, a variance may be applied for. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.070 - Lighting in the Commercial/Industrial Zone. 
    8.50.070.1 Generally. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be installed and operated in conformance with this Chapter, and the Uniform Building and Electrical Codes. The following standards are applicable to all outdoor lighting within the Commercial/Industrial Zone: 
    8.50.070.2 Maximum Lumen and Shielding. All outdoor lighting shall comply with the following lamp lumen limits and shielding requirements: 
a.  Fully shielded: 60,000 lumens (or equivalent) maximum; 
b.  Shielded: 1,500 lumens (or equivalent) maximum; 
c.  Partly shielded: 825 lumens (or equivalent) maximum; 
d.  Unshielded: low voltage (24 volts or less) landscape and ornamental lighting; 
e.  Prohibition against adjustable light fixture mounts: outdoor lighting fixtures shall be permanently installed so as to maintain the shielding requirements, except that landscape and ornamental lighting may use flexible or adjustable mounting systems. 
    8.50.070.3 Height Limit. Lights mounted on poles or structures intended primarily for mounting lights shall not exceed a mounting height of 40 percent of the horizontal distance of the light pole from the property line, up to a maximum of 20 feet high, whichever is lower; except that lighting attached to single story building shall not exceed the height of the roof eave. Poles shall be appropriately scaled for small buildings and lots. Fixtures shall be in scale with the proposed height. 
    8.50.070.4 Total Lamp Power Limit. This subsection applies to all outdoor lighting, whether attached to a building, poles or other structures. The maximum allowable lighting limit per parcel in the Commercial/Industrial Zone shall be determined by multiplying the area (square footage) of the parcel by 0.05, the allowable lamp wattage per square foot of parcel area. Project scale may require closer spacing and lower wattage. 
    8.50.070.5 Lighting Curfew. Outdoor lighting systems in the Commercial/Industrial Zone shall be turned off or reduced in lighting by at least 50 percent beginning at 10:00 p.m. or close of business, whichever is later, until dawn or the start of business, whichever is sooner. The reduction shall be determined as an overall average for the parcel. When possible, the lighting system shall be turned off rather than reduced in lighting level. Lighting shall be equipped with controls for photocell on and timer off. Exceptions to the lighting curfew are as follows: 
a.  When there is only one conforming lighting fixture for the parcel; or 
b.  When a law or regulation requires lighting for steps and stairs; or 
c.  When, in the opinion of the Planning Director, reduced lighting levels at a given location will cause unacceptable increased risk and design levels must be maintained. 
    8.50.070.6 Nonconforming Lighting. All outdoor light fixtures existing and legally installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be deemed non-conforming and are exempt from the requirements of this Chapter except that non-conforming lighting fixtures shall not be structurally altered, reconstructed or replaced so as to extend their useful life. 
    In the event that any non-conforming lighting fixture is structurally altered, reconstructed or replaced, such fixture shall be made to conform to the requirements of this Chapter. Additionally, should it be determined that a non-conforming light fixture results in light trespass, the Planning Director may require that the light be shielded, filtered, redirected, replaced with a less intense light source, removed or a combination thereof, to eliminate light trespass. Alternatively, a variance may be applied for. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.080 - Special Use Zone. 
    8.50.080.1 Generally. The Special Use Zone shall consist of specific land uses where the use of the space or area requires colors to be rendered as accurately as possible. Such uses may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Automobile sales lots; 
b.  Outdoor recreation facilities (e.g. tennis courts, driving ranges, ball fields); 
c.  Outdoor advertising displays; 
d.  Service stations; 
g.  Industrial areas were higher pole heights are required to avoid interference with vehicle operations; 
    8.50.080.2 Conditional Use Permit Required. A Conditional Use Permit ("CUP") for outdoor lighting in a Special Use Zone shall be applied for and obtained from the Planning Director, upon written application therefore and the payment of an administrative fee. To obtain a CUP, applicants shall demonstrate that the proposed lighting installation: 
a.  Is not within the Residential Lighting Zone; 
b.  Utilizes fully-shielded, side shielded and internally-shielded light fixtures to the maximum extent practicable; 
c.  Includes measures to mitigate light trespass and artificial sky glow. 
    8.50.080.3 Lighting Curfew. Outdoor lighting systems in the Commercial/Industrial Zone shall be turned off or reduced in lighting by at least 50 percent beginning at 10:00 p.m. or close of business, whichever is later, until dawn or the start of business, whichever is sooner. The reduction shall be determined as an overall average for the parcel. When possible, the lighting system shall be turned off rather than reduced in lighting level. Lighting shall be equipped with controls for photocell on and timer off. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.085 - Parks and trails lighting specifications. 
    8.50.085.1 Generally. The following specifications shall apply to all public and private sidewalks, pedestrian trails, bicycle paths, and equestrian trails (collectively, "trails"), and public parks. 
    8.50.085.2 Trails. Overhead lighting shall be placed on poles not more than 16 feet in height, illuminating only the trail itself plus an additional area of not more than five feet in width on either side of the trail, with a total lamp power limit of 0.040 watts per square foot. 
    8.50.085.3 Parks. Overhead lighting in parks shall be placed on poles not more than 16 feet in height, with a total lamp power of 0.020 watts per square foot. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.090 - Street lighting specifications. 
    8.50.090.1 Generally. The following specifications apply to all street lighting in the City, on all public and private roadways. The City has adopted the Southern California Edison (SCE) rate standards; scheduled rates LS-3 and LS-2. The City will accept the option of re-lamping. This rate schedule is for collector roads, arterial roads and highways. LS-3 is a metered system with a special rate. It may be combined with the sprinkler controller meter pedestal, in most cases. The in-tract streetlights on residential roads will be LS-2, fed from the nearest Point of Contact with SCE. The developer of each tract map or parcel map will pay the City to install the street lighting system. The street lighting system will be wholly-owned and installed by the City. The LS-3 systems shall consist of a two-inch conduit from the SCE source to a meter pedestal to the lights per approved layouts. All work performed shall be by a Licensed Electrical Contractor. All inspections shall be by the City of Beaumont. 
    8.50.090.2 Lamps. All street lighting lamps will be deluxe high-pressure sodium, clear, and have a mogul base. The watts and lumens are as follows: 70-watt is 6,400 lumens, 100-watt is 9,500 lumens, 150-watt is 16,000 lumens, 200-watt is 22,000 lumens, 250-watt is 30,000 lumens, and 400-watt is 51,000 lumens. All lamps are to have a rated life of 24,000 plus hours. All lamps are to be universal burning position. 
    8.50.090.3 Luminaries. The specified and test brand is General Electric, style M-250R2 for 70- to 200-watt, and style M-400 for 250- to 400-watt fixtures. The photometric layout is type MC3, full cutoff with 0 degrees of light above 90 degrees. The specific photometric layout for 70-watt fixture is #7292. The specific photometric layouts for the 100- and l50-watt are #9168. The specific photometric layouts for the 200- and 250-watt fixtures #1045, #1006 and #7305. All light fixtures to have flat glass lenses. All fixtures to have a quad tap ballast and a twist lock photocell socket. All fixtures will get a twist lock photocell oriented to the north, or if necessary away from any other light sources. Layouts are based on a .81 light loss factor. All fixtures are to be wired 240-volt. 
    8.50.090.4 Poles. All poles will be octagonal concrete tapered poles with a natural rock finish. The color for all perimeter streets will be "black and white (gray)". On interior streets the builder can select the street light color or use the basic City color of "black and white (gray)". Each pole will have an access door in the base to facilitate wiring. The Type A is a 70-watt and will be installed on a 23-foot pole, with a six-foot arm upswept three feet for a luminaire mounting height of 26 feet. The Type D is a 100-watt and will be mounted on a 25-foot pole with a 12-arm upswept five feet for a luminaire mounting height of 30 feet. The Type C-1 and Type C-2 will have either one or two luminaries with 150-, 200-, 250-, and 400-watt fixtures and will be mounted on a 31-foot pole with a 12-arm upswept five feet for a luminaire mounting height of 36 feet. All arms are to be hot dipped galvanized steel or aluminum with a rain cap. Colored arms may be baked powder coating. Arms will have a two-inch mounting pipe for the luminaire. Poles must have a minimum 80 miles per hour wind factor and sustain a 1.3 gust factor. The approved manufacturer is Ameron, Inc. The 23-foot pole number is Ameron #ICl-23. The 25-foot pole number is Ameron #ICl-25. The 31-foot pole number is Ameron #ICI-31. All poles will be identified on the pole label with the letters "BMT" to signify they are part of the City of Beaumont street lighting system. Type B pole is a specially approved custom pole and has a specific luminaire. 
    8.50.090.5 Pole Bases. All poles will have a 30-inch round or square in-ground base with a depth of 48 inches from top of curb, and a minimum 42 inches of concrete base depth. There will be four one-inch anchor bolts 36 inches long with a four-inch turn. Washers will be installed above and below the one-inch pole-mounting flange. Anchor bolts, washers and nuts will all be hot dipped galvanized steel per pole manufacturer specifications. All pole bases will be "capped" with a removable 18" wide by 24" deep by 31"-inch thick concrete cap, either poured separate from the sidewalk or deep scored for easy removal. All poles are to be placed behind the curb with a center of pole measurement of 18 inches from the face of curb to the center of pole. In projects with a "rolled" curb or a "wedge" curb streetlights may be placed behind the sidewalk if necessary. Concrete for pole bases shall be a public works design mix with test strength of 3250 PSI. 
    8.50.090.6 Wiring to Pole. Wiring to pole will be two #12 THWN stranded (one red and one black) ran down through pole, in one-inch schedule 40 PVC underground to an 11 inches wide by 17 inches long by 12-inch deep concrete hand hole with concrete cover marked "street lights" behind the sidewalk or next to the pole, in the sidewalk. All pull boxes shall have locks for the covers. Install a #6 copper wire through the one-inch PVC and ground below the top washer on one of the pole flanges with one-inch threaded nuts. In the same box provide 2 Fusetron GEB-II-II fuse holders with five amp 250-volt midget fuses on the power conductors (black and red). All fuse holders shall be taped with a 50 percent overlay, and a minimum of three layers. Two coatings of "scotch coat" shall be applied to all taped connections, for waterproofing. At the luminaire leave 12 inches of slack wire as a service loop. All wire shall be copper. 
    8.50.090.7 The Main Wiring. System shall be one-inch schedule 40 PVC run behind the curb, or shall be trenched with a minimum depth of 18 inches, in the parkway and 24 inches under any street, or be four inches below four inches of concrete. At all times there must be a one-inch separation between the installed conduit and the concrete above it. On regular curb installations, with cut out or depressed driveway approaches, conduits run behind the curb must not be installed in the approach pour. Concrete pull boxes sized 11 inches by 17 inches by 12 inches will be placed behind the sidewalk at each pole and placed in long runs at a distance of 300 feet. The same pull boxes will be used for street crossings and branch wiring terminations. A pull box must be installed on at least one side of each street crossing, and all street crossing shall be run at a ninety-degree angle with the main flow of the street. All Main wiring between the street lights, and the meter will be one #8 THWN Black, one #8 THWN Red, and one #8 THWN Green. Midblock lights are fed by one #8 THWN Blue, and one #8 THWN Yellow, in the same conduit. All terminations and splices will have epoxy seal packs installed on each connection in the pull boxes. All terminations will be made up with 3M brand Blue wire nuts. Ground wires do not require epoxy seal packs. All wire shall be copper. When wire nuts are used in the luminaire installation they must be securely taped. All wiring shall be #8 to three or more poles. When wiring under the LS-2 system with two poles or less the wire shall be #12 to the hand holes and to the Point of Contact. Use approved fuse holders at Point of Contact with SCE. 
    8.50.090.8 The Circuitry and Voltage Drop. On the wire, shall not exceed five percent to the last light on the run or in any circumstance. The #8 THWN wire will have a breaker rated at 50 amps and be a two-pole rated breaker. If a large number of lights are fed off one pedestal and it is necessary to run two radial circuits, install a second 50-amp two-pole breaker to feed the second set of lights. The main switching of all lights will be the photocell at each light. Wire must be oversized to allow for voltage drop, use #6 THWN or #4 THWN when necessary. Circuit designs are about 3,000 plus feet for #8 THWN wire, and may extend to over 4,000 feet depending on connected load. 
    8.50.090.9 The Meter Pedestal and Point of Contact. The meter pedestal will be an enclosed "traffic signal" type. It will be rated 120/240 - one phase three-wire, and have four jaws. The minimum amperage will be 100. The maximum AIC rating is 10,000 AIC. If the number of lights on one circuit exceeds the capacity of the breaker, add a second one. If the number of lights exceeds a load of 100 amps, use a 200-amp meter with the same specifications. The meter pedestal will be fed from the nearest SCE pull box with three-inch schedule 40 PVC, verify location with the area SCE planner. If there is a landscape sprinkler clock, which controls solenoids only, no booster pumps, it may be added to the street light meter pedestal. This saves the need for two different meters. All meter pedestals require three one-inch PVC 90-degree stub outs for future wiring of lighting or sprinkler timing clocks. The meter pedestal is only required with LS-3 street lights. Under LS-2 the Point of Contact is the nearest available SCE power, a hand hole, transformer pad or other junction point. When required the SCE meter coordination, SCE Service application, SCE fees, City of Beaumont electrical permit and the City of Beaumont service account setup is the responsibility of the Contractor. The Point of Contact for the LS-2 street lights shall be interconnected with SCE with two-inch schedule 40 PVC, with 24-inch radius sweeps, 30 inches of cover, and a 36-inch pull rope. Fuses shall be installed in the Point of Contact pull box, SCE will provide #2 wire to the first hand hole. A ?-inch copper-clad ground rod will be installed in the Point of Contact hand hole and the #8 ground wire will clamped to the rod with a "football or acorn style" ground clamp. 
    8.50.090.10 Layout of Poles. Will be based on the following street width design: 
A.  36, 40 and 44 foot streets. These are Local/Collector Streets, will be 70 watt or 100 watt luminaire, the standard is 100 watt. 70 watt will be used on interior streets of tracts at intersections, knuckles and culs-de-sac. 
1.  For RESIDENTIAL streets the only lights to be installed are at intersections, knuckles, culs-de-sac, or bends where other street lights are not visible. A midblock light shall permitted in areas in which the block is longer than 1,000 feet. The lights will not be metered; they will be served under the LS-2 standard of SCE. They will be served from the nearest Point of Contact, a hand hole, transformer pad or other approved junction point. A 70-watt fixture is to be installed on a Type A 23-foot pole with a mounting height of 26 feet. The arm is to be six feet long. When installed the minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than .37 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be in a ratio of 6:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .06. See diagrams 9.A.1A for photometric layouts. Refer to pole standard 1, Type A. Additional lighting may be permitted per Section 8.50.090.11 for pedestrian conflict areas such as around parks, schools and public meeting places. 
2.  For COMMERCIAL streets only 200-watt fixtures and poles can be used. The minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than .84 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be in a ratio of 6:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .16. The maximum spacing will be 220 feet with stagger or straight spacing. See diagram 9.A.2 for photometric layouts. Refer to pole standard 3, Type C-1 or Type C-2. 
3.  For RURAL streets the only lights to be installed are at intersections, knuckles, culs-de-sac, bends, or other conflict areas as determined necessary by the Director of Planning. The lights will not be metered; they will be served under the LS-2 standard of SCE. They will be served from the nearest Point of Contact, a hand hole, transformer pad or other approved junction point. A 70-watt fixture is to be installed on a Type A 23-foot pole with a mounting height of 26 feet. The arm is to be six feet long. When installed the minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than .37 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be in a ratio of 6:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .06. See diagrams 9.A.1A for photometric layouts. Refer to pole standard 1, Type A. 
B.  56 and 64 foot streets. These are Divided Collector or Secondary Highways, will be 200- and 250-watt luminaire. 
1.  For RESIDENTIAL streets the minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than .66 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be in a ratio of 4:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .16. The maximum spacing will be 240 feet with a straight or stagger spacing. Use a 200-watt luminaire. See diagram 9.B.I for photometric layouts. Refer to pole standard 3, Type C-1 or Type C-2. 
2.  For COMMERCIAL streets the minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than 1.12 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be in a ratio of 4:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .28. The maximum spacing will be 200 feet with a stagger or straight spacing. Use a 250-watt luminaire. See diagram 9.B.2 for photometric layouts. Refer to pole standard 3, Type C-1 or Type C-2. 
3.  For RURAL streets the only lights to be installed are at intersections, knuckles, culs-de-sac, bends, or other conflict areas as determined necessary by the Director of Planning. When installed the minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than 1.12 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be in a ratio of 4:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .28. Use a 250-watt luminaire. Refer to pole standard 3, Type C-1 or Type C-2. 
C.  76 foot and wider streets. These are Major or Arterial Highway or urban alternate streets, will be 250- and 400-watt luminaire. 
1.  For RESIDENTIAL streets the minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than .84 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be at a ratio of 3:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .28. The maximum spacing will be 200 feet with a stagger or straight spacing. Use a 200-watt luminaire. See diagram 9.C.1 for photometric layouts. Refer to pole standard 3, Type C-1 or Type C-2. 
2.  For COMMERCIAL streets the minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than 1.3 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be at a ratio of 3:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .40. The maximum spacing will be 180 feet with a stagger or straight spacing. Use a 250-watt luminaire. See diagram 9.C.2 for photometric layouts. Refer to pole standard 3, Type C-1 or Type C-2. 
3.  If the street has a raised median, the preferred placement of the luminaries is doubled up on the poles mounted in the median. This is the most economical and best layout. This would be when a developer is responsible for the whole street width improvement. 
4.  If the street has a painted median, the placement of the luminaries is on the sides of the streets, not in the painted median. This is when the developer is responsible for one-half the street improvement and the other half is a different developer's responsibility. 
5.  For RURAL streets the only lights to be installed are at intersections, knuckles, culs-de-sac, bends, or other conflict areas as determined necessary by the Director of Planning. When installed the minimum average foot-candles on the lanes of travel will not be less than 1.3 foot-candles. The average divided by the minimum will be at a ratio of 3:1. The minimum foot-candles will be .40. Use a 250-watt luminaire. Refer to pole standard 3, Type C-1 or Type C-2. 
    8.50.090.11 Layout of Poles at Pedestrian Conflict Areas for Residential Neighborhoods. Will include but are not limited to intersections, marked crosswalks, culs-de-sac, knuckles, areas around parks, schools and public meeting places. Where Type A poles are required, the layout will be 26-foot poles with 70-watt luminaries spaced at 190 feet, straight or stagger spacing, with all mid-block lights installed. The minimum average foot-candles are .37 foot-candles on all lanes of traffic. The average divided by the minimum will be at a ratio of 6:1. The minimum foot-candles shall not be less than .06 foot-candles. When required foot candles cannot be meet due to wider streets a Type D (100-watt) pole shall be allowed with a maximum spacing of 240 feet with a stagger or straight spacing. See diagrams 9.A.1B for photometric layouts. Refer to pole standard 2, Type D. 
    8.50.090.12 Special Decorative Fixtures. Will follow the same foot-candle requirements and must be separately calculated for the proper spacing. Due to our dark sky policy, the City of Beaumont Public Works Director or his or her designee must approve all substitutions to prevent any lighting above 90 degrees. All decorative shall be called Type B. 
    8.50.090.13 Placement at Intersections. The poles are to be installed at the back of curb radius, not ever in a radii of the corner. All poles shall be five feet from a driveway approach, fire hydrant, traffic light, crossing signals, or any street signage or safety marker. 
    8.50.090.14 Location of Poles. Poles are to be placed at or as near as possible to property lines on all residential streets. 
    8.50.090.15 Substitutions. All specifications are subject to "or equal" substitutions, and must be approved in advance by the City of Beaumont Public Works Director or his or her designee. 
    8.50.090.16 Street Light Curfew. All mid-block lights on 56-, 64- and 76-foot roads will be turned off by an electronic time clock at the meter pedestal. The time clock will be rated 30 amps and have a 30-amp two-pole breaker installed to feed the time clock. The specified clock model is # ETI04C Intermatic or equal. All lights will still have a photocell and the time clock will control the operation of the photocell. Two extra #8 wires will be pulled in these conduits (1-#8 THWN Blue, and 1-#8 THWN Yellow). No deviation from the color code will EVER be allowed. 
    8.50.090.17 The Street Types and Layout Requirements are as follows: 
MINIMUM AVERAGE HORIZONTAL FOOT CANDLES 
Types of Street Width of Street Commercial Residential Major or Arterial Highway or Urban Alternate 76 Feet and Wider 1.3 fc (3:1) Ratio 0.84 fc (3:1) Ratio Divided Collector Street or Secondary Highway 56 and 64 Feet 1.2 fc (4:1) Ratio 0.66 fc (4:1) Ratio Local and Collector Streets 36, 40 and 44 Feet 0.84 fc (6:1) Ratio 0.37 fc (6:1) Ratio  
Note 1: Ratio is overall average foot-candles divided by the minimum foot-candles. 
Note 2: Special layout on the Local and Collector Streets for residential applications. See #9 A.I and # 10 above for more information. 
    8.50.090.18 Plans. All standards are subject to substitution of brand name for an approved equal. These specifications are a guideline. Street improvement plans must be submitted to the City of Beaumont Public Works Department. The conduit routing, meter pedestals, pole height, and luminaire wattage will be clearly marked on one set. The City will prepare an estimate for the entire street lighting system and include a plan check and inspection fee to the developer. The developer will then provide the preliminary SCE plans to the Public Works Department, which will be compared and marked for SCE as to the location of LS-2 street lights. The final set of mylar street light plans will be prepared by the City and signed by the City Engineer. One set of regular paper plans will be returned to the developer and the mylar set kept by the City as a record copy. Approximately six weeks or longer before the streetlights are needed all fees from the City's estimate shall be paid, in full to the City. The streetlights will not be ordered or any work scheduled until all fees are received. At the completion of the project or phase a Reconciliation of Fees will be prepared and any unused monies will be returned to the developer, likewise any additional charges will be assessed, if necessary. The developer is responsible to pay the fees timely. No release of bonds will occur until all fees are paid. 
    8.50.090.19 Inspection. The developer shall provide the City Inspector with an onsite signed set of plans for inspection purposes. All sites shall have "Dig Alert" called 48 hours prior to excavation and encroachment permits from the City when necessary. 
    8.50.090.20 Monthly O & M Charges. On all private street systems the City will charge the owner or Home Owners Association for the street lighting usage based on the SCE LS-I rates. These charges will be monthly and will include an energy charge, a service charge and a maintenance charge. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.095 - Diagrams and exhibits. 
    All diagrams and exhibits referenced in this chapter shall be kept on file in the Office of the Director of Planning. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
8.50.100 - Administration and enforcement. 
    8.50.100.1 Generally. The Planning Director or his or her designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Any person who wishes to appeal any order, decision or determination made by the Planning Director or his or her designee shall do so in accordance with this Chapter. From time-to-time the Planning Director or his or her designee may recommend, and the City Council may adopt by resolution, as deemed necessary, appropriate fees, rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Chapter. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law and failure to comply shall be considered a violation of this Chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be implemented with the intent of minimizing light pollution, glare and trespass, and reducing energy use. 
    8.50.100.2 Lighting Plan. Outdoor lighting plans shall be submitted, accompanied by application, review and inspection fees, to the Planning Director or his or her designee for all commercial, industrial, institutional and residential development for review. The Planning Director or his or her designee shall determine whether the plans comply with the applicable provisions of this Chapter, and shall be approved if in compliance, except that applications for outdoor lighting in the Special Use Zone may be subject to review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. 
    8.50.100.3 Appeal. An applicant may appeal the determination of the Planning Director or his or her designee within 15 days to the Planning Commission.. The applicant may appeal the Planning Commission's decision to deny or conditionally-approve a CUP within 15 days thereafter to the City Council, and the City Council's determination shall be final and conclusive for all proposes. 
    8.50.100.4 Variance for Non-Conforming Lighting. In the event the Planning Director or his or her designee determines that a non-conforming lighting fixtures results in light trespass, the responsible party shall shield, filter, redirect or replace the light with a less intense light source, or remove the light to eliminate the light trespass. Corrective action shall be taken within ten days after the determination. The Planning Director or his or her designee may grant additional time (not to exceed 90 days) to remedy the light trespass for hardship ("hardship" shall mean that there is a degree of difficulty in accessibility to the fixture, financial difficulty or cost of correcting the light trespass). A variance may be granted only if the following findings supported by substantial evidence can be made: 
a.  There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land, building or outdoor light fixture(s) for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land, building or outdoor light fixtures and do not generally apply to the land, buildings or outdoor light fixtures in the neighborhood; and 
b.  The granting of a variance will generally be in harmony with the intent of this Chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
    The Planning Director shall make a determination of the variance request and notify the applicant in writing of his/her decision. The Planning Director's determination may be appealed by any person to the Planning Commission within 15 days of the decision. Alternatively, the Planning Director may forward the request to the Planning Commission because of the degree of light trespass, the cost of correction or other similar issues. 
    8.50.100.5 Violations and Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, construct, operate, enlarge, alter, replace, move, improve or convert any outdoor lighting fixtures or structure, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of this Chapter. 
a.  Any person who violates the provisions of this Chapter shall first receive a correction notice for the first violation in any given calendar year. The notice shall specify the nature of the offense, the date of occurrence and the required correction. 
b.  In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 1054, 3-17-2015) 
Chapter 8.54 - REGULATION OF ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 

8.54.010 - Findings. 
    The City Council finds that abandoned and distressed residential properties pose a risk to the public peace, health and safety of the citizens of the City of Beaumont because the detrimental effects from the lack of security and maintenance of abandoned and distressed residential properties include dangerous attractive nuisances, increased opportunities for crimes such as squatting, vandalism and burglaries, discouraging buyers from purchasing neighboring homes, lowering property values, and physical and economic blight. 
(Ord. 942) 
8.54.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish uniform and reasonable regulations to prevent the detrimental effects associated with abandoned and distressed residential properties. 
(Ord. 942) 
8.54.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Abandoned Property" a residential property that is vacant and is under a current Notice of Default and/or Notice of Trustee's Sale, pending Tax Assessor's Lien Sale, or a property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by or transferred to the beneficiary of the deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, or a property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
B.  "Neighborhood Standard" those conditions that are present on a simple majority of properties within a 300 foot radius of an individual abandoned property. An abandoned property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, or any other abandoned property within the 300 foot radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority. 
C.  "Out-of-Area" shall mean in excess of 40 road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
D.  "Owner" any person, co-partnership, association, corporation or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. 
(Ord. 942) 
8.54.040 - Registration/fees. 
    Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the City of Beaumont shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust upon default by the trustor and prior to recording a Notice of Default in the Riverside County Recorder's Office. 
A.  If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the City Building and Safety Department on forms provided by the Department. 
B.  The registration shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation or individual), the direct street/office mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no post office box numbers), a direct contact name and phone number for the beneficiary/trustee and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee, the name, address and telephone number of the local property maintenance company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property. Any change of the information in the registration required hereunder shall be reported within ten days of the change. 
C.  The City Council shall establish a registration fee by minute order. An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of the each year and must be received no later than January 31 of the year due. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
D.  Abandoned properties shall remain subject to the annual registration, maintenance, security and sign requirement of this Ordinance as long as they remain abandoned. 
(Ord. 942) 
8.54.050 - Maintenance requirements. 
    Abandoned properties shall be maintained in a manner comparable to the neighborhood standard. At a minimum: 
A.  Abandoned properties shall be maintained so as to be kept free of evidence of vacancy. 
B.  Abandoned properties shall be maintained free of graffiti by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
C.  Maintenance of abandoned property shall include landscape maintenance of visible front and side yards. 
D.  Pools and spas shall either be kept in working order so the water remains clear, or drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of California. 
E.  Adherence to the foregoing requirements do not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations under any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or home owners association rules and regulations which may apply to the abandoned property. 
(Ord. 942) 
8.54.060 - Security requirements. 
    Abandoned properties shall be secured with such measures as may be directed by a City Code Enforcement Officer that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons. In the case of broken windows, "secured" includes re-glazing or boarding of such windows. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current HUD securing standards in effect at the time the boarding is completed or required, and shall additionally require painting the boards with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the structure. 
(Ord. 942) 
8.54.070 - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
    The City Code Enforcement Officer shall have the primary responsibility for enforcing this Ordinance. Violations of this Ordinance shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Nothing herein shall prevent the Code Enforcement Officer from engaging in efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by means of warnings, notices or educational programs. 
    Administrative fines for each violation shall not exceed the amounts set forth in Section 1.16.030 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
    If the violation is not corrected, additional administrative citations may be issued for the same violation. The amount of the administrative fine shall increase at the rate specified above; provided, however, that the administrative fines shall not exceed $1,000.00 for each day, or portion thereof, that the violation continues to exist. 
    The administrative fines assessed hereunder shall be payable to the City of Beaumont. Payment of administrative fines shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall payment be a bar to further enforcement action. 
(Ord. 942) 
TITLE 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapter 9.02 - NOISE CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 19, 2016 , amended Ch. 9.02 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.02, §§ 9.02.010-9.02.110, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 914, § 1, adopted July 3, 2007; Ord. 997, adopted May 3, 2011. 

9.02.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to establish criteria and standards for the regulation of noise levels within the City and to implement the noise provisions contained in the City's General Plan. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.020 - Findings. 
    It is hereby found and declared that: 
A.  The making, creation or maintenance of excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use, affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the City; and 
B.  The necessity for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy. It is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the City. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.030 - Definitions. 
    "Ambient noise" shall mean the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding any intrusive noise. 
    "Capital improvement" shall mean major construction, acquisition or maintenance/repair projects. Examples of capital improvements include street improvements, park development and construction of public buildings or structures, treatment plants. Structures include lighting, sewer and water pipelines and other related utility structures including treatment plants, gas, electric and other infrastructure, landscaping and drainage facilities and all other public infrastructure. "Acquisitions" include the acquisition of land or interest in land. Major maintenance/repairs may include street resurfacing and modifications to public buildings and structures. 
    "Commercial purpose" shall mean the use, operation or maintenance of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, goods or services and/or for the purpose of advertising or attracting the attention of the public to or soliciting patronage for any performance, entertainment, exhibition or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating any such sound equipment. 
    "Cumulative time period" shall mean a period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
    "Decibel (dB)" shall mean a measurement unit of sound pressure level which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio. 
    "Governmental agency" shall mean the United States (federal government), the State of California, the County of Riverside, the City of Beaumont, the school district and any special district within Riverside County or any combination of these agencies. 
    "Impact noise" shall mean the sound produced by the impact or collision of one moving object or mass with a second object or mass that is stationary or moving. 
    "Intrusive noise" shall mean a sound which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise level at a given location. 
    "Motor-driven vehicle" shall include, but not be limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, minibike, go-cart or other self-propelled vehicle, on or off road, and aircraft. 
    "Noise" shall mean any sound that is loud or disturbing or that interferes with one's ability to hear some other sound. 
    "Noise level" shall mean the "A" weighted sound pressure level in decibels audible to humans obtained by using a sound level meter. The unit of noise level measurement shall be designated as dB(A). 
    "Person" shall mean a person, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature. 
    "Public property" shall mean property that is owned by any governmental agency as indicated in this section or held by the public, including, but not limited to, parks, streets, sidewalks, and alleys. 
    "Simple tone noise" shall mean a noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished. 
    "Sound pressure level of a sound, in decibels" shall mean 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to the reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
    As used in Section 9.02.110(H), "public nuisance'' is defined by Civil Code Section 3479. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.040 - Noise level measurement criteria. 
A.  Any noise level measurement, made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be determined by using a sound level meter that meets the minimum requirements of the American National Standard Institute for sound level meters, or by using an instrument with associated recording and analyzing equipment that will provide equivalent data. 
B.  The factors which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The sound level of the objectionable noise; 
2.  The sound level of the ambient noise; 
3.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
4.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
5.  The number of persons affected by the noise source; 
6.  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
7.  The duration of the noise and its tonal, informational or musical content; 
8.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
C.  The above factors shall be considered in addition to the noise levels set forth in this section in determining a violation. However, noises do not necessarily need to exceed those noise level limits to be considered unnecessary or unusual so as to cause discomfort or annoyance to persons in the area. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.050 - Base ambient noise level. 
    All ambient noise measurements shall commence at the base ambient noise levels in decibels within the respective times and zones as follows: 
Decibels Time Zone Use 45 dB(A) 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. Residential 55 dB(A) 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. Residential 50 dB(A) 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. Industrial and Commercial 75 dB(A) 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p:m. Industrial and Commercial  
    Actual decibel measurements exceeding the levels set forth hereinabove at the times and within the zones corresponding thereto shall be employed as the "base ambient noise level" referred to in this Chapter. Otherwise, no ambient noise shall be deemed to be less than the above specified levels. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.060 - Exterior noise level measurement. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, all reference to "exterior noise" or "exterior noise levels" as used in this Chapter shall be as measured at any point relative to the closest point of the source of the noise at the property line of the complaining party. Measurements will not be made during extraordinary times, such as during the movement of a nearby train or airplane. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.070 - Maximum residential noise levels. 
    No noise level shall exceed the following for the duration periods specified: 
Noise Level Exceeded Maximum Duration Period 5 dB(A) above BANL 15 minutes any hour 10 dB(A) above BANL 5 minutes any hour 15 dB(A) above BANL 1 minute any hour 20 dB(A) above BANL Not permitted  
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.080 - Maximum interior noise levels. 
A.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated, any source of sound which causes the noise level, when measured inside another dwelling unit, school or hospital, to exceed: 
Decibels Time Land Use 35 dB(A) 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. Residential 45 dB(A) 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. Residential 45 dB(A) 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 
(while school is in session) School 45 dB(A) Anytime Hospital  
B.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated, any source of sound which causes the noise level, when measured inside another dwelling unit, school or hospital, to exceed: 
Noise Level Exceeded Maximum Duration Period 5 dB(A) above interior BANL 5 minutes any hour 10 dB(A) above interior BANL 1 minutes any hour Over 10 dB(A) above interior BANL Not permitted  
C.  If the measured interior ambient noise level exceeds that permissible within the first two noise limit categories in this section, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be increased in five decibel increments in each category as appropriate to reflect the interior ambient noise level. In the event the interior ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category, the maximum allowable interior noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum interior ambient noise level. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.090 - Maximum nonresidential noise levels. 
    Any provision contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, no exterior noise level shall exceed the base ambient noise levels (BANL) for nonresidential land uses set forth in any development agreement applicable to such development or as otherwise specifically set forth in any development standard which is by its terms enforceable by the City against the noise maker. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.100 - Exemptions. 
    Sound emanating from the following sources is exempt from the provisions of this Chapter: 
A.  Capital improvement projects of a governmental agency. 
B.  Maintenance and repair of public properties by a governmental agency. 
C.  Utility and street repairs, street sweepers, garbage services, emergency response warning noises, emergency generators and fire alarm systems are exempt from this Chapter. 
D.  Other public/governmental services or operations including, but not limited to trains and railway or airplanes and helicopter machinery, equipment or vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.110 - Special provisions. 
A.  Sound Performances and Special Events. Sound performances and special events not exceeding 95 dB measured at a distance of 50 feet from the loudest source are exempt from this Chapter when approval therefore has been obtained from the appropriate governmental entity. 
B.  Vehicle Horns. Vehicle horns, back-up warning devices, or other devices primarily intended to create a loud noise for warning purposes, shall be used only when the vehicle is in a situation where life, health or property are endangered or as required by law. 
C.  Alarm System. An audible alarm system affixed to a motor vehicle shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff, which shuts off the alarm within a maximum of 15 minutes from the time of activation. Such alarm may not emit a sound similar to the sound emitted by sirens in use on emergency vehicles or to those used for civil defense purposes. For purposes of this section, any variable tone, as opposed to one steady pitch, shall be considered similar to the sound emitted by an emergency vehicle siren. The Police Department is authorized to abate the nuisance of an audible alarm system affixed to a motor vehicle, which sounds beyond 15 minutes by using any means necessary to disconnect the vehicle alarm. The expense of disconnecting the alarm shall be a lien against the motor vehicle and shall be the personal obligation of the owner thereof. 
D.  Radios, Televisions, Stereos, Speakers, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person, without special permit or as may otherwise be provided in this Chapter, to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, television, musical instrument, stereo equipment, or other machine or device used for producing, reproducing or amplifying sound at such sound levels as to cause the sound level to exceed 40 dB(A) as measured within the residence of any complaining person. 
E.  Animals, Fowl, etc. It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any animal which emits, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., any unreasonable sound or cry which disturbs or may disturb the peace and comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness who resides in the neighborhood or area in which such animal is located or kept. For barking dog, see limitations set forth in Section 6.04.080. This provision shall not apply to farm animals within any zone in which such farm animals are permitted under the Municipal Code. 
F.  Construction, Landscape, Maintenance or Repair. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or permit the generation of noise related to landscape maintenance, construction including erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any structure or improvement, at such sound levels, as measured at the property line of the nearest adjacent occupied property, as to be in excess of the sound levels permitted under this Chapter, at other times than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The person engaged in such activity is hereby permitted to exceed sound levels otherwise set forth in this Chapter for the duration of the activity during the above described hours for purposes of construction. However, nothing contained herein shall permit any person to cause sound levels to at any time exceed 55 dB(A) for intervals of more than 15 minutes per hour as measured in the interior of the nearest occupied residence or school. 
2.  Whenever a construction site is within one-quarter of a mile of an occupied residence or residences, no construction activities shall be undertaken between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the months of June through September and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the months of October through May. Exceptions to these standards shall be allowed only with the written consent of the building official. 
3.  Construction related noise as defined in subsection (F)(1) and (2) above may take place outside the time period set forth therein and above the relative sound levels in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with the prior permission of the building inspector. Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or until the emergency ends, whichever is less. The permit may be renewed for periods of three days while the emergency continues. 
4.  Unless exempted by this Chapter, if the building official should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the construction related noise, the building inspector may issue a permit for construction within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. The building official may place such conditions on the issuance of the permit that are appropriate to maintain the public health and safety, as determined by the building official. 
G.  Machinery, Equipment, Fans and Air Conditioning. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to operate or permit the operation of any machinery, equipment, device, pump, fan, compressor, air conditioning apparatus or similar mechanical device, including but not limited to the use of any steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, blower or power fan, or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, or other appliance, in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the property line of the property upon which the equipment or machinery is operated to exceed the base ambient noise level by five dB(A). 
H.  Motor Driven Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor driven vehicle within the City that, due to the nature of the operation of the vehicle, or due to the operating condition of the vehicle, or due to any modification made to the vehicle, in such manner as to exceed noise levels set forth in Section 9.02.050 hereof. 
1.  Exhaust. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor driven vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises there from. 
2.  No person shall use or operate a stereo system, radio, electronic music device, television or similar device in a vehicle on a public street which is audible to a person of normal hearing sensitivity, more than 50 feet from said vehicle. 
I.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary and unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or creates a public nuisance. The standard which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The level of noise; 
2.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
3.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
4.  The level and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
5.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
6.  The nature of the zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
7.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
8.  The time of the day and night the noise occurs; 
9.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; 
10.  The duration of the noise; and 
11.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.120 - Exception permits. 
    If the applicant can show to the City manager or designee, that a diligent investigation of available noise abatement techniques indicates that immediate compliance with the requirements of this Chapter would be impractical or unreasonable, a permit to allow exception from the provisions contained in this Chapter may be issued, with appropriate conditions to minimize the public detriment caused by such exceptions. Any such permit shall be of as short duration as possible, but in no case for longer than six months. These permits are renewable upon a showing of good cause, and shall be conditioned by a schedule for compliance and details of compliance methods in appropriate cases. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.130 - Application between zones. 
    In applying the regulations set forth in this Chapter, each source of noise shall be subject only to such regulation as shall apply to the zone, including any designated truck route, within which it is located. A use lying adjacent to a zone with a more restrictive noise requirement hereunder shall not be required to conform to that more restrictive requirement. For purposes of this subsection, "zone" shall be as utilized in Title 17 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.140 - Penalty for violation. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter may be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.150 - Additional remedy-Injunction. 
    As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision hereof and which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
9.02.160 - No mandatory duty created. 
    No section of this Chapter shall impose a mandatory duty on the City, or on any officer, official, agent, employee, board, council, or commission of the City. Instead, if any section purports to impose a mandatory duty of enforcement, that section shall be deemed to invest the City, and the appropriate officer, official, agent, employee, board, council, or commission with discretion to enforce the section or not to enforce it. A police officer, for example, shall have the discretion to quiet a nuisance without applying standards detailed herein. 
( Ord. No. 1067, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-2016 ) 
Chapter 9.03 - REGULATION OF SPECIAL EVENTS 

9.03.010 - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent of this Chapter is to provide a regulatory framework for permitting special events. The use of City streets or other City-owned or controlled property and private property by large groups causes wear and tear on the turf, park equipment and facilities. Further, it requires City staff time to provide coordination. Such uses also subject neighboring residents to excessive noise and traffic, particularly when the property or facility is small or the use is intense. As such, the purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that special events are conducted so as not to violate any other Chapter or regulation of the City or cause any detrimental effects to surrounding properties and the community. The provisions set forth in this Chapter shall establish criteria for characterizing events as "special events" and standards and conditions for approving and permitting such special events. 
9.03.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  "Administrative authority" means the City Manager of the City of Beaumont or his or her designee. 
B.  "Air-medical operations permit" means a permit issued by the Fire Chief or his or her designee, allowing the landing and takeoff of EMS air rescue or air ambulance helicopters for the purposes of special event stand-by services. 
C.  "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Beaumont or his or her designee. 
D.  "Departmental service charges" means the actual costs which a department of the City incurs in connection with activities for which a permit is required under this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the costs of administration or coordination services, support personnel, equipment, materials and supplies. 
E.  "Free speech rights" means expressive activity protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 2 of the California Constitution, provided that such activity is the principal purpose of the event. 
F.  "Indigent natural person" means a person eligible for county relief and support as an indigent person under Section 17000 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code. 
G.  "Medical operations permit" means a permit issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code section 1797.201, which gives the City the right to require and evaluate, modify, approve or reject the "medical operations plan" of any applicant wishing to conduct a special event within the City. 
H.  "Parade" means a parade, procession, march, pageant, review, ceremony or exhibition which is conducted in, on, upon or along any portion of any public street, sidewalk or other property owned or controlled by the City, so as to impede, obstruct, impair or interfere with the free use of such public street, sidewalk or other public property of the City; except, however, the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to funeral processions. 
I.  "Special event" means any temporary event, as further described herein, not exceeding thirty days whether indoors or outdoors, or on improved or unimproved public or private property, which is inconsistent with the permanent use to which the property may legally be put, or the occupancy levels permitted thereon. "Special event" shall also refer to any activity that may result in the closure of any public streets, or any activities which may temporarily require the installation of materials or devices using building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, flammable or similar materials. "Special events" may include, but are not limited to, short-term events such as any show, circus, concert, festival, carnival, dance open to the public, exhibition, lecture, auction, rave, boxing match, wrestling match, walk-a-thon, marathon run, cycling event, sporting event, permitted film production event, farmers' market, pumpkin patch, outdoor sales, including, but not limited to, vehicle sales, or any combination thereof which members of the public are invited for free or admitted for a fee. All "special events" shall be classified under one of the following categories: 
1.  "Major special events" shall mean those events that impact multiple departments within the City and (a) have participation by 500 or more persons, or (b) will result in the closure of a City roadway, street, right-of-way, or highway, or more than 50 percent of a City park (i.e., carnivals, parades, festivals, car races, marathon events, street fairs). 
2.  "Minor special events" shall mean those events that impact multiple City departments and (a) have participation by less than 500 persons, or (b) will have an impact on City rights-of-way (i.e., 5K/10K races, bicycle rides, boxing matches, block parties, grand openings). 
3.  "Miscellaneous special events" means those events which impact only one City department, including, but not limited to, the following departments: 
a.  Community Services; 
b.  Police Department; 
c.  Parks, Recreation and Family Services; or 
d.  Fire Department. 
4.  "Working day" means a weekday (e.g., Monday through Thursday) in which City Hall is open and conducts business. Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays are not working days within the meaning of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1019, 5-15-2012) 
9.03.030 - Special events committee established. 
    A special events committee composed of representatives from each City department is hereby established. The committee will meet on an as-needed basis to review special event applications. The chair for the special events committee shall be the administrative authority. 
9.03.040 - Permit required. 
    No person or organization shall conduct, operate, maintain, organize, advertise, or sell or furnish tickets for a special event or permit its premises to be used for any special event without first obtaining a special event permit as provided for by this Chapter. Special event permits for events which fall into the "major," "minor" and "miscellaneous" special events categories shall be approved by the administrative authority and issued prior to the commencement of the special event. No permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be transferable or movable to another location or another applicant. 
9.03.050 - Permit application-Filing and fee. 
A.  Applications for permits to conduct special events shall be completed in writing on a form provided by the City and shall be filed with the administrative authority within the time frames listed below: 
1.  Major Special Events. Applications shall be filed not less than 60 working days prior to the opening date of the event. 
2.  Minor Special Events. Applications shall be filed not less than 30 working days prior to the opening date of the event. 
3.  Miscellaneous Special Events. Applications shall be filed not less than seven working days prior to the event. If an application on its face demonstrates that the applicant wishes to exercise his or her free speech rights, as defined in this article, such application shall be filed not less than four working days prior to the event. 
B.  Only one special event permit may be obtained every three months for any particular event site or for the same person, persons or organization. Requested for additional events may be approved by the special events committee. This subsection, however, shall not apply to an event involving an exercise of free speech rights. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided by this Code or other applicable law, rule or regulation, or by the terms of a permit, license, lease or contract which has been specifically authorized by the City Council, the permit application fee for use of City streets or other City-owned or controlled property and private property pursuant to this Chapter shall be established by the City Council by resolution and is non-refundable. The applicant shall obtain all required permits and pay all fees required under this Chapter and any other permits and fees required under this Code. Any applicant who pays an application fee under this Chapter for a City-sponsored special event shall be exempt from paying a business application fee under Chapter 5.04 of this Code. 
D.  Any 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization may claim an exemption from the established fee schedule by filing proof of such status and explaining why such an exemption is appropriate. Such an exemption shall only be granted when the administrative authority determines that there is an alternate source of funding available to cover the cost of the City inspection necessitated by the event. 
E.  Any indigent, natural person who cannot apply for a permit because of an inability arising from such indigence to pay this application fee shall not be required to pay the fee. Application for indigent status shall be made at the time the permit application and shall be accompanied by such relevant information and documentation as may, in the opinion of the administrative authority, be reasonable necessary to verify such status. 
F.  If an application is filed after the time prescribed in this Chapter, the administrative authority shall immediately investigate to determine if he or she has sufficient time to process the application, what the effects of the proposed special event on traffic and other conditions may be, and whether police services may be available for such special event. The applicant shall have the opportunity to demonstrate that the circumstances giving rise to the proposed special event did not reasonably allow the applicant to file for a permit within the time prescribed and that imposition of the time limitation would unreasonably restrict the right of free speech or assembly. If such demonstration is made, and the administrative authority makes none of the findings set forth in Section 9.03.070 of this Chapter, he or she shall issue a permit despite the lack of advanced notice. 
(Ord. No. 1019, 5-15-2012) 
9.03.060 - Permit application-Required information. 
    Applications shall be upon a form which is furnished by or acceptable to the administrative authority. Each application shall provide full, complete and detailed information including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  All special events: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number and California Driver's License number or California Identification number of both the applicant and any alternative contact person; 
2.  If the event is proposed to be sponsored by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the organization, and the authorized head of the organization. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners must appear. If the application is a corporation, the application must be signed by the president, vice president and secretary thereof and must contain the addresses of the corporate officers and a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the application; 
3.  The name, address and telephone number, and California Driver's License number or California Identification number of the person(s) who will be present and in charge of the event on the day(s) of the event. All persons listed pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed responsible for the special event and any and all conditions imposed pursuant to a permit; 
4.  The nature/purpose of the event; 
5.  Date and estimated start and ending time of the event, and days and hours of operation, including set-up and clean-up times; 
6.  Location of the event, including its boundaries; 
7.  Site plan and/or building elevations for the event; 
8.  Estimated number of participants and spectators in the event, including estimated number of vendors and contractors involved with the event; 
9.  Number of applicant's agents or employees to be working at the event; 
10.  The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals, and structures which will be used at the event; 
11.  The size, shape and material of signs or banners to be posted at the event or along a parade route, if any, and the method of posting. All signs posted must be in compliance with the regulations concerning signs as set forth in Chapter 18 of this Code and such reasonable time, place and manner restrictions imposed by the administrative authority on the permit issued hereunder; 
12.  Description of the availability of water and toilets; 
13.  Description of any sound amplification equipment which will be used at the event. Any amplification of sound must comply with the City's noise standards as set forth in Chapter 10.16 of this Code; 
14.  Whether any food, beverages or merchandise will be sold at the event; 
15.  Whether any alcoholic beverages will be sold or dispensed at the event. Any sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages at a special event must comply with the City's regulations regarding the public consumption and possession of alcohol beverages as set forth in Section 9.20 of this Code; 
16.  Whether volunteers will be employed to monitor the event; 
17.  Description of vehicle parking spaces needed, vehicle access and on-site traffic control for the event. A plot plan showing arrangement of the facilities including those for parking, egress and ingress shall be submitted with the application; 
18.  Description of type of medical services and fire protection services to be provided for the event such as first aid stations, medical triage areas and stand-by ground ambulances; 
19.  If medical aircraft such as air rescue or air ambulance services will be utilized, a description of the type of aircraft, the estimated arrival time, location of the landing site and contact person responsible for air operations; 
20.  A statement of any specialized medical resources or personnel that are required by the rules or regulations of the event, above the level of advanced first aid, in order for the event to be conducted, i.e. physicians for boxing matches; 
21.  Number of tickets sold at a previous event, if applicable, and number of tickets anticipated to be sold at the event; 
22.  If it is proposed or expected that spectators or participants will remain at night or overnight, a statement of arrangements for illuminating the premises and for camping or similar facilities; 
23.  A statement of the proposed cleanup of the premises and removal of trash after the event has concluded; 
24.  The name, telephone number, address and business license number of any business providing security officers; 
25.  The number and ratio of Security Personnel provided. Note: Any event that permits or provides alcohol beverages, and/or permits dancing, shall be required to include a uniformed, licensed and bonded security guard or Peace Officer for every 50 attendees/patrons expected to participate, with a minimum of one such guard or officer; 
26.  A security plan that includes the regular patrol of restrooms, parking lots and areas adjacent thereto and adjacent to the event location for the purpose of protecting against illegal activities, including, without limitation, motor vehicle burglaries, the sale, possession or use of drugs, and sexual activities; 
27.  A description of the time and manner by which the applicant/event organizer shall notify all residents within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the event, of the nature of the event, and the beginning and ending times of the event. 
B.  Additional information required for parades, races and other events affecting City rights-of-way: 
1.  The assembly point for the event, the time at which units of the parade or other event will begin to assemble; 
2.  The route to be traversed; 
3.  Whether the parade or other event will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
4.  The intervals of space to be maintained between units of a parade or other event; 
5.  The number, types and size of floats, if any; 
6.  Material and maximum size of any signs or banners to be carried along the route. 
C.  The administrative authority may request supplemental application information from the applicant which the administrative authority deems reasonably necessary, under the particular circumstances of the special event application, to determine whether to approve, deny or conditionally approve a special event permit application. A request for supplemental application information shall not effect the relevant application processing time period set forth in this Chapter. 
D.  An application will be deemed incomplete if it lacks any information required by Section 9.03.060 of this Chapter. An incomplete application shall not trigger the relevant application processing times prescribed in Section 9.03.050 of this Chapter until the applicant submits a full, complete and detailed application. The City reserves the right to amend or modify the permit application form at any time. 
9.03.070 - Permit issuance or denial. 
A.  The administrative authority shall approve, conditionally approve or deny applications for special event permits based, on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions set forth within this Chapter. The administrative authority may refer the application to such appropriate City departments as he or she deems necessary from the nature of the application for review, evaluation, investigation and recommendations by the departments regarding approval or disapproval of the application. 
B.  The administrative authority shall issue the permit, conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to comply with any and all terms of this Chapter and any conditions imposed on the issuance of the permit, unless he or she finds that: 
1.  The information contained in the application is false or intentionally misleading, the applicant failed to remit fees and deposits, or failed to provide proof of insurance and an indemnification agreement if required, or failed to provide supplemental application information after having been notified; 
2.  The temporary use of the City's rights-of-way or property will endanger public health, welfare or safety for the reasons set forth herein, and reasonable adjustments to the community traffic control, street and property maintenance, or police, fire or ambulance protection would not alleviate such danger: 
a.  An application received prior in time has been approved for the same time and place so close as to cause undue traffic congestion or exceed the ability of the City to provide police and other services for both uses, events or activities; 
b.  The time, route or size of the proposed use, event or activity will disrupt traffic within the City beyond practical solution; 
c.  The proposed use, event or activity will prevent proper police, fire or ambulance service to contiguous areas or interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
d.  The location of the proposed use, event or activity will substantially interfere with construction or maintenance work scheduled upon or along the City streets or rights-of-way; 
e.  The preparation for or the conduct of the proposed use, event or activity will unduly impede, obstruct or interfere with the City's ability to perform municipal functions or furnish City services in the vicinity of the event area; 
f.  The parade or other event moving along a route within the City and on City rights-of-way will not move from its point of origin to its point of termination in three hours or less; 
g.  The event shall occur at a time when a school is in session, at a route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof, and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class thereof; 
h.  The event shall occur at a route or location adjacent to a hospital, fire station or place of worship and the noise or other disruptions created by the event would substantially disrupt the activities of said hospital, fire station or place of worship. 
C.  Within 30 working days after the filing of the permit application for a "major special event," the administrative authority shall issue, conditionally approve or deny the permit, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the action taken. 
D.  Within five working days after the filing of the permit application for a "minor special event," the administrative authority shall issue, conditionally approve or deny the permit, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the action taken. 
E.  Within five working days after the filing of the permit application for a "miscellaneous special event," the administrative authority shall issue, conditionally approve or deny the permit, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the action taken. If a permit application on its face demonstrates that the applicant wishes to exercise his or her free speech rights, as defined in this Chapter, the administrative authority shall issue, conditionally approve or deny the permit application within three working days after the filing of the permit application, and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. 
F.  In those instances when issuance or denial occurs three days or less before the proposed use, event or activity the administrative authority is authorized to use other reasonable means of notification provided the applicant is provided with actual notification. 
G.  If the administrative authority denies the permit, he or she shall set forth the reasons for denial. The administrative authority's decision shall be final unless appealed. 
H.  If the application could be approved subject to conditions, as authorized in Section 9.03.080 of this Chapter, the administrative authority shall, instead of denying the application, conditionally approve the application subject to such corrections and conditions. The conditions imposed shall provide only for such modifications of the applicant's proposal as are reasonably necessary to avoid situations described in subsections (B)(2)(b) through (B)(2)(h) of this section. 
9.03.080 - Permit conditions. 
    The administrative authority may condition the issuance of a special events permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the event, and such requirements as necessary to protect the safety of persons and property, and the control of traffic, provided such conditions shall not unreasonably restrict free speech rights. Such conditions include, without limitation: 
A.  Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed on the event application; 
B.  Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of parade or other events occurring along a route; 
C.  Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian, adequate parking space, or vehicular traffic and control, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street traversed; 
D.  Requirements for the use of traffic cones, delineators or barricades; 
E.  Requirements for the provision of first aid, medical or sanitary facilities; 
F.  Requirements for use of event monitors, and providing notice of permit conditions to event participants; 
G.  Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures at the event, and inspection and approval of floats, structures and decorated vehicles for safety purposes; 
H.  Compliance with animal protection Chapters and laws; 
I.  Requirements for use of trash containers, cleanup and restoration of City property or right-of-way; 
J.  Restrictions on use of amplified sound; 
K.  Notification to businesses and residences along the affected street(s) and businesses and residents within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the event site; 
L.  Compliance with any relevant Chapter or, law and obtaining any legally required permit or license; 
M.  Restrictions on the consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
N.  Inspection by City staff or designee(s) before, during and after the event; 
O.  Requirements for additional police officers or security officers for an event of 500 or more participants. Said security officers must be uniformed guards licensed by the state and in possession of a valid guard card at all times during the special event. Said security officers must present their valid guard cards upon the request of any police officer. This subsection, however, shall not apply to an event involving an exercise of free speech rights; 
P.  Requirements for additional fire protection if the event is located in or near a hazardous fire area; 
Q.  Requirements for the provision of fire protection equipment or the removal of flammable vegetation, materials or other fire hazards; 
R.  Requirements for an ample supply of portable water for drinking and sanitation purposes on the premises of the event. All water shall meet federal, state and county health and safety standards; 
S.  Requirements that food concessionaires be licensed and operate under a valid health department permit pursuant to state and local laws and that an adequate supply of food available at the event for each day of operation to adequately feed the number of persons expected to be in attendance; 
T.  Requirements for the use of electrical illumination for special events occurring after dark; 
U.  Requirements for the use of overnight camping facilities and overnight areas that meet the requirements of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations for mobile home parks, special occupancy trailer parks and campgrounds, including travel trailer parks, recreational trailer parks, temporary trailer parks, incidental camping areas and tent camps, for events that allow persons attending the event to remain on the premises overnight. 
V.  A requirement that the applicant/event organizer notify the Beaumont Police Department in the event of a threat of violence, or an act of violence, or in the event that a crime has been or is about to be committed. 
W.  A requirement that offsite signs for the event be prohibited except for events with an expected attendance of over 500 attendees, for the purpose of providing motor vehicle traffic and parking directions. The size, placement and number of such signs shall be determined by the administrative authority in consultation with the Police Department. 
9.03.090 - Business license required. 
    A business license shall be required for any special event which involves the conduct of business within the City of Beaumont as defined by Chapter 5.02 of this Code. Said permit application shall be reviewed and approved by the administrative authority and the business license officer or his or her designee, under the provisions of this Code. Any applicant who pays an application fee under this Chapter for a City-sponsored special event shall be exempt from paying a business application fee under Chapter 5.04 of this Code. 
9.03.100 - Medical operations permit required. 
    A special medical operations permit shall be required for any special event, where, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, it is essential for public safety in a place of assembly or any other place where people congregate, due to the number of persons participating in the special event or the projected impact to the emergency medical services system within the City. Where required, the owner, agent or licensee shall submit for approval to the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, a medical operations plan in accordance with the criteria established by the emergency medical service office of the Beaumont Fire Department. This plan may require the owner, agent or licensee to employ one or more medically qualified persons, including medically trained Fire Department personnel, as required and approved, to be on duty at such a place. Such individuals shall be subject to the Fire Chief's orders, or his or her designee's, at all times when so employed and shall be in uniform and remain on duty during times that such places are open to the public, or when such activity is being conducted. Before each performance or the start of such activity, such individuals shall inspect the required medical equipment to see that they are in the proper place and in good working order, and shall keep a diligent watch for medical emergencies during the time such place is open to the public or such activity is being conducted. Events that may require a special medical operations permit include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Any event in which specialized emergency medical services are provided above the level of Advanced First Aid, such as Emergency Medical Technician-1, paramedics, nurses, physician assistants and/or physicians; 
B.  Any event, by the rules of the event, which requires the need to have contract emergency ambulance service providers or personnel on site in order to conduct said event, (i.e., boxing matches, BMX bicycle races or similar high-risk injury activities); 
C.  Any event utilizing standby air rescue or air ambulance services. 
D.  Any event the Fire Chief or his or her designee deems may adversely impact the emergency medical services response capability of the City of Beaumont based upon: 
1.  The location of the event; 
2.  Projected event participation; or 
3.  Any other applicable criteria as established by the Fire Chief. 
E.  Public safety agencies conducting special events within the City may be exempt from some requirements upon approval of the Fire Chief or his or her designee. 
9.03.110 - Air-medical operations permit required. 
    A special air-medical operations permit shall be required for all events utilizing standby air rescue or air ambulance services. The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall direct the landings and takeoffs of all EMS air rescue or air ambulance operations within the City of Beaumont. Standby Fire Department and/or Police Department resources may be required during landing or takeoff operations for safety and security reasons. An air-medical operations plan shall be submitted, for the approval of the Fire Chief or his or her designee, to include the following information: 
A.  Name of the air rescue or air ambulance provider; 
B.  Contact person for air operations; 
C.  Type and size of aircraft; 
D.  Patient transport capability; 
E.  Level of medical staffing; 
F.  Frequency or list of frequencies available for ground-to-air contact; 
G.  Landing zone site and alternate landing zone site; 
H.  Security for landing zone site. 
9.03.120 - Park events-Additional requirements. 
    In addition to any and all regulations or conditions that may be imposed pursuant to this Chapter, applicants must also comply with all regulations affecting the use of City parks as provided in Chapter 12.24 of this Code. 
9.03.130 - Parades-Prohibition of throwing objects. 
    All parade participants are prohibited from throwing any objects from any float, vehicle, horse or movable object during the parade procession. This prohibition does not preclude parade participants from handing out any objects, such as candy, pamphlets or any written materials along the side of the parade route. Those handing out such materials must not impede the flow of traffic in the parade or cause unnecessary or disruptive delays of the parade. 
9.03.140 - Hours of operation. 
    All events which are subject to this Chapter shall close and cease operation continuously between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each and every day, unless otherwise provided in a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
9.03.150 - Departmental services charge. 
A.  In addition to the payment of the permit application fee, an applicant shall pay the City for all City departmental service charges incurred in connection with or due to the applicant's activities under the permit. Additionally, if City property is destroyed or damaged by reason of the applicant's use, event or activity, the applicant shall reimburse the City for the actual replacement or repair cost of the destroyed or damaged property. 
B.  At least three days prior to a parade, event or activity permitted under this Chapter, the applicant shall pay to the City a deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the total estimated City departmental charges which the administrative authority estimates will be incurred in connection with the permit. 
C.  City departments shall submit the final invoices and billings for departmental charges actually incurred to the administrative authority no later than ten working days after the expiration date of the permit. 
D.  If the deposit is less than the final charges pursuant to this section, the applicant shall pay the difference to the City within ten working days of billing. If the deposit is more than such final charges, the City shall refund the difference to the applicant within the 20 working days after the expiration of the permit. 
9.03.155 - Special events recycling. 
    The applicant shall provide recycling receptacles throughout the event venue, and shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
A.  The number of recycling receptacles shall equal the number of solid waste receptacles; 
B.  The solid waste and recycling receptacles shall be placed next to one another throughout the event venue; 
C.  The types of recyclable materials suitable for deposit into each recycling receptacles shall include, at a minimum, aluminum and metal cans, and glass and plastic bottles and jars; 
D.  Each recycling receptacle shall be clearly identified as a recycling receptacle and shall display a list of the types of recyclable materials which may be deposited therein; and 
E.  The applicant shall ensure that the recyclable materials deposited into the recycling receptacles are delivered to the appropriate recycling facility. The recycling facility may be located at a landfill, but recyclable materials shall not be delivered to a landfill for disposal. 
(Ord. 974, 10/5/2010) 
9.03.160 - Security for cleanup. 
A.  At the time of filing an application for special event the applicant shall submit an agreement on a form provided by the City and signed by the applicant stating that, within 24 hours after the conclusion of the special event, the applicant will clean and restore or cause to be cleaned or restored to its original condition the property upon which the special event is to occur and remove any notices posted pursuant to Section 9.03.200 of this Code. 
B.  To ensure the property is restored to the condition it existed in immediately prior to the effective date of the permit, the administrative authority shall require a cash deposit or other City attorney-approved form of financial arrangement from an applicant as a condition to the issuance of permit. The deposit shall be in the amount established by resolution adopted by the City Council. 
C.  A designated representative of the City shall inspect the property within three days of the expiration date of the permit to determine whether the applicant has complied with this section. 
D.  The security deposit, pursuant to subsection (C) of this section, shall be refundable on compliance with the provisions and requirements of this Chapter, including but not limited to the removal of trash and debris, temporary signs, temporary circulation improvements, temporary fencing and appurtenant accessory facilities and structures and the cleanup of the site. In the event the applicant fails to comply with the terms of this Chapter and remove all temporary facilities and structures or clean the site in a manner satisfactory to the administrative authority, the City may do so cause the same to be done immediately after 20 hours of the conclusion of the event and the actual costs thereof and any storage costs incurred by the City shall be charged against the applicant and its cash deposit or bond or against the liability insurance provider. In the event the City removes or causes to be removed any temporary improvements, notice shall be given to the applicant indicating that the City has removed such temporary facilities or structures and that they will be destroyed and/or will become the property of the City within thirty days of such notice if neither the applicant nor any representative of the same has contacted the City prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period. All notices shall be sent to the applicant's address as provided on the special event permit application unless the applicant supplies the City a substitute address in writing. 
9.03.170 - Liability and property damage insurance. 
A.  Concurrent with the issuance of a permit under this Chapter, and as a condition precedent to the effectiveness of the permit, the applicant shall procure and maintain in full force and effect during the term of the permit a policy of insurance from an insurance company with an A.M. Best's insurance rating of A:VIII or better, authorized to do business in the state, and which policy includes the City, its boards, officers, agents and employees as named insured or additional named insured. Proof of insurance shall be submitted to the administrative authority not less than fifteen days prior to major special events, not less than ten days prior to minor special events, and not less than two days prior to miscellaneous special events. The minimum limits of liability coverage shall conform to a schedule as adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  If the administrative authority determines that a particular use, event or activity which is for a permit period of no more than one day does not present a substantial or significant public liability or property damage exposure for the City or its officers, agents and employees, the administrative authority may give a written waiver of the insurance requirements of this section. Provided, however, a carwash shall not be required to provide insurance. 
C.  This requirement, as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, however, shall not apply to an event involving an exercise of free speech rights provided that, to the extent possible, such an event is redesigned or rescheduled to respond to specific risks, hazards and dangers to the public health and safety identified by the administrative authority as being reasonably foreseeable consequences of the event. 
D.  A claim for exclusion and alternative treatment under subsection (C) of this section shall be filed with and at the same time as the special event application and an agreement or proof of insurance, as applicable, shall be filed prior to permit issuance. The administrative authority may require such proof and documentation as he or she deems reasonably necessary to verify the constitutionally protected status of the event and the applicability of subsection (C) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1019, 5-15-2012) 
9.03.180 - Hold-harmless agreement. 
    Prior to the issuance of a special event permit or temporary use permit, the applicant shall provide the City with an executed hold-harmless agreement on a form provided by the administrative authority, which shall substantially state that the applicant agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, defend and reimburse the City, its officers, employees, volunteers and agents from any liability, damage, penalty, expense or loss of any nature, including but not limited to, liability for injury to or death of persons, or damage to property arising out of or in connection with the special event or approximately caused by the negligent or intentional act or omission of the applicant, any officer, employee or agent of the applicant, or any person who is under the applicant's control. In addition, such an agreement shall provide that in the event a claim is made against the City of Beaumont, its officers, employees, volunteers or agents by suit or otherwise, whether the same be groundless or not, arising out of such negligent or intentional act or omission, the applicant shall defend and indemnify the City, its officers, employees, volunteers or agents for any judgment rendered against it or any sums paid out in settlement or otherwise. The City shall choose its legal counsel in defending the City from any and all liability, damage, penalty, expense or loss of any nature arising out of or in connection with the special event or approximately caused by the negligent or intentional act or omission of the applicant, any officer, employee or agent of the applicant, or any person who is under the applicant's control. Such agreement shall be filed with the administrative authority prior to the issuance of the permit. 
9.03.190 - Clearances and inspections-Posting permit. 
    No special event permit shall be issued until clearance and inspections from the appropriate agencies and departments have been completed. The special event permit and all business permits relating to the event must be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place, and a copy thereof must be in the possession of the individual responsible for the supervision of the event. 
9.03.200 - Notice of street closures. 
    If a special event requires the closure of a street or streets, the applicant of the special event may be required to provide proof to the administrative authority of one of the following: 
A.  Notice via United States Mail to property owners and occupants whose property is located on the closed streets that a street closure will occur on a date or dates certain due to a special event; 
B.  Notice via publication in a newspaper of general circulation that a street closure will occur on a date or dates certain due to a special event; 
C.  Notice via posting at properties located on the closed streets that a Street closure will occur on a date or dates certain due to a special event. Such notice shall be posted according to specifications as provided by the administrative authority, including, but not limited to, the distance required between notices, quantity of notices, and the size of such notices. Pursuant to Section 9.03.160 of this Code, within 24 hours of the completion of the event, the applicant must remove all such notices posted. 
D.  Such notices shall be mailed, published or posted not less than 20 days prior to major special events and not less than ten days prior to minor special events. Notices for miscellaneous special events shall be mailed, published or posted as provided by the administrative authority. 
9.03.210 - Inspections. 
    The Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Community Development Director or their designees may conduct, at any time, on-site inspections of special events permitted pursuant to this Chapter for compliance with the imposed requirements and the medical operations plan or air-medical operations plan. In addition to any and all regulations or conditions that may be imposed pursuant to this Chapter, applicants must also comply with all fire code regulations and requirements as set forth in this Code, including payment for inspection costs by the Fire Chief or designee. The Chief of Police or the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, reserve the right to: 
A.  Require immediate correction of hazards, dangerous conditions or deficiencies that have been deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury; and, 
B.  Revoke the special event permit immediately if substantial violation or noncompliance with the previously submitted plans is deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury. 
9.03.220 - Appeals. 
A.  Any applicant may appeal the final decision of the administrative authority or the revocation of a permit granted pursuant to this Chapter to the City Council within two days thereafter. Appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk, either by personal service, fax or first class mail (postage prepaid). Any such appeal shall set forth the reasons for the appeal and shall be accompanied by an appeal filing fee. The appeal filing fee shall be established by the City Council by resolution. Failure of any person to receive written notice shall not invalidate same. The City Council shall act upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled council meeting held more than five working days and less than ten working days after the filing of the appeal. If no such meeting is scheduled, or if a regularly scheduled meeting is not held within such times, the mayor may call a special City Council meeting to consider and act upon such appeal within ten working days after the filing of such appeal. The decision of the City Council regarding such an appeal shall be final. 
B.  If there is insufficient time for a timely appeal to be heard by the City Council prior to the date on which the proposed use event or activity is scheduled, the applicant may, at his or her option, request an appeal before the City Manager or a neutral hearing officer. Any such appeal shall set forth the reasons for the appeal and shall be accompanied by an appeal filing fee. The appeal filing fee shall be established by the City Council by resolution. Upon request for an appeal, the City Manager or neutral hearing officer, shall hold a hearing no later than two working days after the filing of the appeal but in any case before the date of the proposed special event, and will render his or her decision no later than one working day after hearing the appeal but in any case before the date of the proposed special event. Upon such appeal, the City Manager or neutral hearing officer may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the administrative authority or impose any conditions upon approval that the administrative authority could have imposed. The decision of the City Manager or neutral hearing officer regarding such an appeal shall be final. 
9.03.230 - Right to judicial appeal. 
    Any person who has been denied issuance of a permit under this Chapter for an activity involving free speech rights shall have the right to judicial review pursuant to the terms and procedures of Section 1094.8 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
9.03.240 - Revocation of permit. 
A.  A special event permit may be revoked if the administrative authority or Community Development Director finds that one or more of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The special event permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner. 
2.  The applicant fails, neglects or refuses to fulfill any of the conditions imposed upon the granting of the permit. 
3.  The applicant violates or attempts to violate any law of the state, or the provisions of this Chapter, or any other law, Chapter or policy of the City. 
4.  Failure to comply with notice to correct hazards, dangerous conditions or other deficiencies that are deemed to place the public health or safety at risk for harm or injury. A revocation under this subsection shall become effective immediately upon order by the Chief of Police services or Fire Chief. 
B.  All revocations shall be in writing and shall set forth the basis for the revocation. The permit shall be reinstated as soon as the conditions constituting the revocation have abated. 
C.  When any permit is revoked pursuant to this section, the permit shall be reinstated as soon as the conditions constituting the revocation have abated. 
9.03.250 - Violations. 
    Any person who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, or of any conditions attached hereunder, or who falsifies any information on any application hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth by state law and is subject to administrative penalties and fines as set forth in Chapter 1 of this Code. Any special event otherwise in accordance with this Chapter shall be a public nuisance which may be enjoined or abated as allowed by law. The City retains any and all civic remedies, including the right of civil injunction for the prevention of the violations and for the recovery of money damages therefor. 
Chapter 9.04 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN PUBLIC 

9.04.010 - Possession of containers. 
    No person shall have in his or her possession, while in any public park or playground, any bottle, can, or other container containing any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 923, § I, 12-18-07) 
9.04.020 - Possession of open containers. 
    No person shall have in his or her possession, while in or upon any public park, playground, street or in any parking lot, publicly or privately owned, any open container containing any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 923, § I, 12-18-07) 
9.04.030 - Exception to Chapter. 
    The exception to the provisions of this Chapter shall be when an organization or group has reserved the pavilion for an organized function. 
(Ord. No. 923, § I, 12-18-07) 
9.04.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 9.08 - GAMBLING 

9.08.010 - Prohibited games. 
    Every person who deals, plays or carriers on, opens or causes to be opened, or who conducts, either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game not mentioned or included in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state, played with cards, dice, or any other device of whatsoever nature, for money, checks, credit, merchandise, or other representative of value, and every person who plays or bets at or against any of the prohibited games, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00, nor more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the City jail not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 269 §1, 1954) 
9.08.020 - Permitting prohibited games on premises prohibited. 
    Every person who, knowingly, permits any of the games mentioned in Section 9.08.010 to be played, conducted or dealt in any house owned or rented by such person, in whole or in part, is punishable as provided in Section 9.08.010. 
(Ord. 269 §2, 1954) 
Chapter 9.10 - RESTRICTIONS ON THE PUBLIC DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATERIALS TO MINORS 

9.10.010 - Purpose; authority. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to protect public health, safety and welfare and to protect minors in this City from viewing harmful matter as defined herein. This Ordinance is authorized by California Penal Code, Section 313.1. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 1, 3-6-01) 
9.10.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
    "Blinder racks" means any opaque item or device which rests on or in front of harmful matter in such a manner that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to view. 
    "Business establishment" means any indoor or outdoor commercial enterprise which distributes or exhibits harmful matter in such a manner that such matter can be viewed by passersby or by patrons inside the enterprise. 
    "Distribute" or "distribution" means to transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration. 
    "Exhibit" or "exhibition" means to show. 
    "Harmful matter" shall have the same meaning as the term "harmful matter" prescribed by paragraph (a) of Section 313 of the California Penal Code, as that Section may hereafter be amended. 
    "Matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing or photograph, or any statue or other figure. 
    "Minor" means any natural person who is under the age of 18 years 
    "Newsrack" or "vending device" means any mechanism which is located on public property or located in a business establishment in such a manner that the contents can be viewed by members of the general public, and which contains harmful matter for purposes of distribution or exhibition which can be seen by the general public. 
    "Person" means any corporation, partnership, limited liability company or sole proprietorship which owns a business establishment, newsrack or vending device, and any natural person who is responsible for the operation or maintenance of a business establishment, newsrack or vending device including, but not limited to, clerks who are responsible for on-site operation or maintenance of a business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 1, 3-6-01) 
9.10.030 - Requirement of blinder racks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain a newsrack or vending device exhibiting harmful matter within the City unless blinder racks are placed in front of harmful matter thereon or contained therein, or such newsracks or vending devices are located in an area from which minors are excluded. 
(Ord. No. 809, § 1, 3-6-01) 
9.10.040 - Supervision of blinder racks. 
    Any person who owns, operates or maintains a news rack or vending device exhibiting harmful matter within the City, whether or not blinder racks are placed in front of harmful matter thereon or contained therein, shall supervise access to such racks or devices by minors. Every person who, with knowledge that a person is a minor, or who fails to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly fails to supervise access to harmful matter by such minor, shall be guilty of an unlawful distribution of such matter and shall be punished as specified in Section 9.10.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 819, 12/01, Section 1) 
9.10.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 9.12 - PUBLIC NUDITY 

9.12.010 - Legislative authorization. 
    This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this chapter which also are used in Sections 18.5 and 318.6, are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6. 
(Ord. 455 §1, 1974) 
9.12.020 - Exposure by waiters, waitresses and entertainers. 
A.  No person shall, while acting as a waiter, waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves food, beverages, or food and beverages including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages, for consumption on the premises of such establishment: 
1.  Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
2.  Expose any device, costume or covering, which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
3.  Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
B.  A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress, or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person is paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity is performed. 
(Ord. 455 §2, 1974) 
9.12.030 - Exposure by performers in public. 
    No person shall, while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view: 
A.  Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region; or 
B.  Expose any device, costume or covering, which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
C.  Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
(Ord. 455 §3, 1974) 
9.12.040 - Counseling or assisting. 
    No person shall cause, permit, procure, counselor assist any person to expose a simulate exposure as prohibited in Sections 9.12.020 and 9.12.030. 
(Ord. 455 §4, 1974) 
9.12.050 - Exemption of theatrical establishments. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. 
(Ord. 455 § 5, 1974) 
9.12.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 9.16 - OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE 

9.16.010 - Prohibited acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons within the City to engage in any game sport or amusement or exhibit any contrivance or show, or do any other thing in the streets of the City which will interfere with the free and unrestricted use of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public places, unless operating under a license granted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 37 § 16, 1913) 
Chapter 9.20 - DAMAGING PUBLIC PROPERTY 

9.20.010 - Damaging public street or sidewalk prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, their agents or employees, to dig holes or ditches in or otherwise destroy or deface any street, alley, lane, curb, gutter or sidewalk belonging to the City. But this shall not be construed to apply to any person, firm or corporation exercising their right or pursuing their work pursuant to any franchise or right granted by the City to erect poles, string wires or lay pipes over and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and lanes of the City. 
(Ord. 37 § 29, 1913) 
Chapter 9.22 - JUVENILE DAYTIME LOITERING AND TRUANCY 

9.22.010 - Purpose. 
    The City Council is concerned with the level of juvenile delinquency, juvenile graffiti activity, and juvenile crime in the City. The City Council finds that juveniles who are not exempt from compulsory education are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful and gang-related activities, and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime during daytime hours. The City Council believes that having an enforceable daytime loitering and truancy ordinance for juveniles who are not exempt from compulsory education requirements is critical to preserving the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 2-19-08) 
9.22.020 - Definitions. 
    "Emergency" means the unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or requirement for immediate medical care for another person. 
    "Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    "Juvenile" means any person under 18 years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to law. 
    "Parent" means a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. The term includes a court appointed guardian or other person 18 years of age or older authorized by the parent, by a court order or by a court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of that juvenile. 
    "Public place" means any place to which the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, highways, parks and the common areas of schools, hospitals, office buildings, transport facilities, shopping centers, and malls. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 2-19-08) 
9.22.030 - Daytime loitering or truancy. 
    It is unlawful for any juvenile, who is subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuation education under state law, to remain in or upon any public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, or the premises of any establishment, vacant lots, or other place away from his or her place of residence, including any railway car, engine, truck or other vehicle without the consent of the owner or person rightfully in charge thereof during the hours and on days when the juvenile's school is in session. The provisions of this Section do not apply if: 
A.  The juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult having the care and custody of the juvenile; or 
B.  The juvenile is on an emergency errand directed by a parent, legal guardian or other adult having care and custody of the juvenile; or 
C.  The juvenile is going to or coming directly from his or her place of employment; or 
D.  The juvenile is going to or from a medical appointment; or 
E.  The juvenile is a student who has permission to leave the school campus for lunch or school related activity, and has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit; or 
F.  The juvenile is going to or coming from a compulsory alternative education program activity; or 
G.  The juvenile is attending or, without any detour or stop, going to or returning form an official school, religious, government-sponsored activity, or other recreational activity supervised by adults; or 
H.  The juvenile is attending or, without any detour or stop, going to or returning from an event or activity directly related to the medical condition of the parent or legal guardian; or 
I.  The juvenile is officially enrolled in home schooling; or 
J.  The juvenile is exempt by law from compulsory education or compulsory continuation education; or 
K.  The juvenile is authorized to be absent from his or her school pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, or any other applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 2-19-08) 
9.22.040 - Parental or guardian responsibility. 
    It is unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of any juvenile to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, to allow the juvenile to be in violation of Section 9.22.030 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 2-19-08) 
9.22.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 9.24 - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

9.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The City Council finds that a juvenile curfew ordinance is necessary and desirable because the protection of minors warrants a higher degree of governmental regulation. This higher degree of regulation is premised upon the peculiar vulnerability of children and minors' inability to make critical decisions in an informed and mature manner. The City recognizes a compelling interest in preserving the safety of the community generally and providing a higher degree of protection for its minors specifically during nighttime hours. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 2, 9-22-97) 
9.24.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are applicable to this Chapter: 
    "Curfew hours" means the period from 10:00 p.m. any night until 6:00 a.m. the following morning. 
    "Emergency" means unforeseen circumstances or a situation that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, an automobile accident, fire or explosion, natural disaster or any condition requiring immediate action to prevent bodily injury or loss of life. 
    "Establishment" means any privately-owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    "Guardian" means (a) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the minor; or (b) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    "Minor" means any person under 18 years of age. 
    "Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. 
    "Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of a minor. 
    "Responsible adult" means a person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    "Public place" means any place the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highway, common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
    "Remain" means to (a) linger, stay or be present; or (b) fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer, the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 2, 9-22-97) 
9.24.030 - Offenses. 
    It is unlawful for: 
1.  Any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours, or 
2.  Any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours, or 
3.  Any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly permit a minor to remain in or upon the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 2, 9-22-97) 
9.24.040 - Defenses. 
A.  It is a defense to prosecution of the above offenses that the minor was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or by a responsible adult; 
2.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or responsible adult, without detour or delay; 
3.  In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel; 
4.  Engaged in employment, or going to or returning home from employment, without detour or delay; 
5.  Involved in an emergency; 
6.  On the sidewalk adjacent to the minor's resident, providing the minor is not otherwise violating the law; 
7.  Attending an official school, religious or other adult supervised recreational activity sponsored by the City, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor, or going to or returning home from such an activity, without detour or delay; 
8.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right to assembly; 
9.  Emancipated pursuant to law. 
B.  It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.24.030(3) above, that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 2, 9-22-97) 
9.24.050 - Enforcement. 
    Before taking any enforcement action hereunder, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in a public place or on the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or detain a minor under this ordinance unless the officer reasonably believes an offense has occurred and based upon the minor's response(s) and other circumstances, no defense hereunder appears present or applicable. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 2, 9-22-97) 
9.24.060 - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Any person who violates the offenses described in this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
1.  A first violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00; 
2.  A second violation within one year is punishable by a fine not exceeding $200.00; 
3.  Each additional violation within one year is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 2, 9-22-97) 
Chapter 9.26 - REPEAT CURFEW/DAYTIME LOITERING VIOLATORS 

9.26.010 - Purpose. 
    The City Council finds and determines that juveniles who are repeatedly detained and supervised by law enforcement personnel for violating curfew, truancy and daytime loitering laws impose an extraordinary burden on the manpower and resources of the City's Police Department because juveniles taken into custody must be supervised in an unsecured area of the police station until they are released to a parent or guardian. Law enforcement personnel needed to supervise juveniles are then unavailable to carry out law enforcement duties in the field which decreases the level of police protection thereby decreasing public safety in the community. One purpose of this Chapter is to inhibit crime committed by juveniles at night and by truants during the day and to defray the reasonable costs that the City incurs to provide extraordinary law enforcement services to respond to, detain arid supervise repeat curfew, truant and daytime loitering violators. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 2-19-08) 
9.26.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    "Repeat curfew or daytime loitering violator" means any minor (1) who has been detained and taken into custody by City law enforcement personnel on more than one occasion in a 12-month period for violating Section 9.22.030 of this Code and (2) who has been adjudicated by the Riverside County Superior Court because said Court found it to be true that the minor violated Section 9.22.030 of this Code on more than one occasion in a 12-month period. 
    "Responsible party" means any parent, legal guardian, or other person in charge or control of a repeat violator. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 2-19-08) 
9.26.030 - Police service fee established-Debt to City. 
A.  A responsible party shall be liable to pay a police services fee whenever the City law enforcement personnel respond to, detain and supervise a repeat curfew, truant or daytime loitering violator. The City Council shall establish, from time-to-time, the amount of the police services fee by resolution. 
B.  The police services fee charged to a responsible party shall be a debt to the City by the responsible party. Any responsible party owing money to the City pursuant to this Chapter shall be liable in an action brought by the City in its own name to recover such amount, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 2-19-08) 
9.26.040 - Billing. 
    The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall notify the Finance Department in writing of (A) the name and address of the responsible party; (B) the date and time of the initial violation and the repeat violation of Section 9.22.030 of this Code; (C) the names of the law enforcement personnel who responded to, detained and supervised the repeat curfew, truant or daytime loitering violator; and (D) the date that the repeat curfew, truant or daytime violator was adjudicated by the Riverside County Juvenile Court for the repeat violation. The Finance Department will bill the responsible party for the police services fee. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 2-19-08) 
9.26.050 - Appeal. 
    Any responsible party who receives a bill from the Finance Department pursuant to this Chapter may, within 15 days after receiving such bill, file a written request with the City Clerk appealing the bill. The written appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and the specific factual basis for the appeal. The responsible party is deemed to have received the bill on the third day following the date the Finance Department caused the bill to be placed in the United States mail. The City Manager or his or her designee shall review any written appeal filed with the City Clerk pursuant to this Chapter and shall prepare written decision on the appeal within 30 days from the date that the written appeal is received by the City Clerk. All decisions by the City Manager or his or her designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 2-19-08) 
Chapter 9.28 - SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS 

9.28.010 - Prohibited acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons, either as owner, principal, agent, servant or employee, to barter, sell or give to any person under the age of 18 years, any tobacco, snuff, cigars, cigarettes or other article of which tobacco is the chief component material. 
(Ord. 37 § 34, 1913) 
Chapter 9.30 - DANGEROUS WEAPONS 

9.30.010 - Prohibition: Discharging weapons. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no person shall, within the City limits, shoot, fire or discharge, nor cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged: 
A.  Any rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol, cannon or other firearm of any kind; 
B.  Any air gun, air rifle or air pistol; 
C.  Any spring gun, spring rifle or spring pistol; 
D.  Any BB gun, pellet gun or any carbon dioxide or gas operated gun; 
E.  Any crossbow of any type, compound bow, or a bow more than three feet in length; 
F.  A sling for the purpose of throwing a rock, ball bearing or other missile; 
G.  Paint ball rifle or gun, or any spot marker rifle or gun. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 3-19-02) 
9.30.020 - Exceptions. 
    The prohibitions set forth in this Chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Peace Officers and military forces engaged in the performance of their duties; 
B.  Lawful self-defense, and the lawful defense of others and property; 
C.  Shooting ranges or other structures, facilities or clubs which are used for shooting or archery in the context of a recreational or sporting activity; 
D.  Starter and timing guns firing blank cartridges in shows, sporting events, athletic contests or other public performances, or signal cannons that do not discharge projectiles; 
E.  Minors engaged in lawful activities involving the use of dangerous weapons provided (i) such minor is under the direct supervision and control of a parent, guardian or responsible adult, or (ii) is at least 16 years of age and has the prior written consent of his or her parent or legal guardian, or (iii) the minor has the prior written consent of his or her parent or legal guardian and is on lands owned or lawfully possessed by his or her parent or guardian. 
F.  Property owners possessing a permit issued by the Chief of Police for the purpose of varmint, bird and other pest control for which no other reasonable means are available, upon application therefor and the payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be established from time-to-time by resolution or minute order of the City Council. Such permit shall apply for a specified period of time to a specific parcel or parcels of land, as designated by the Chief of Police, and he is authorized to impose such other restrictions and conditions as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Before any permit shall be effective, the applicant/permittee shall obtain and maintain, during the term of the permit, a policy of general liability insurance, in a form and amount satisfactory to the City Attorney, which names the City as an additional insured. Additionally, each permit shall include a provision obligating the permittee to unconditionally defend, indemnify and hold the City harmless from and against any and all claims, losses, damages, liability, obligations and expenses (including attorneys' fees) for injuries to any person or property that result directly or indirectly from the exercise of rights granted under the permit. No permittee shall have a vested right to a permit, and the Chief may, in his sole discretion, revoke the permit at any time. The permittee shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulations, and failure to do so shall result in immediate revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 3-19-02; Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 10-1-13) 
9.30.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
9.30.040 - Violation: Confiscation. 
    In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 9.30.030, a violator of this Chapter shall suffer the confiscation of the weapon. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 3-19-02) 
9.30.050 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 818, § 1, 3-19-02) 
Chapter 9.32 - POSSESSION OF FIREARMS ON CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED 

9.32.010 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this Chapter: 
A.  "City property" shall mean real property, including any buildings thereon, owned or leased by the City, and in the City's possession, or in the possession of a public or private entity under contract with the City to perform a public purpose including, but not limited to, real property owned or leased by the City, but does not include any "local public building" as defined in Penal Code, Section 171b(c), where the state regulates possession of firearms pursuant to Penal Code Section 171b. 
B.  "Firearm" shall mean any gun, pistol, revolver, rifle or any device, designed or modified to be used as a weapon, from which is expelled through a barrel a projectile by the force of an explosion or other form of combustion. "Firearm" does not include imitation firearms or BB guns and air rifles as defined in Government Code Section 53071.5. 
C.  "Ammunition" shall mean any ammunition as defined in Penal Code Section 12316(b)(2). 
(Ord. 952, 6/2/09) 
9.32.020 - Applicability. 
    This Chapter does not apply to the following: 
A.  A peace officer as defined in Title 3, Part 2, Chapter 4.5 of the California Penal Code (Sections 830 et seq.); 
B.  A guard or messenger of a financial institution, a guard of a contract carrier operating an armored vehicle, a licensed private investigator, patrol operator, or alarm company operator, or uniformed security guard as these occupations are defined in Penal Code Section 12031(d) and who holds a valid certificate issued by the Department of Consumer Affairs under Penal Code Section 12033, while actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment; 
C.  The possession of a firearm by an authorized participant in a motion picture, television, video, dance or theatrical production or event, when the participant lawfully uses the firearm as part of that production or event, provided that when such firearm is not in the actual possession of the authorized participant, it is secured to prevent unauthorized use; 
D.  A person lawfully transporting firearms or ammunition in a motor vehicle on City roads; 
E.  A federal criminal investigator or law enforcement officer; 
F.  A member of the military forces of the State of California or of the United States while engaged in the performance of his or her duty. 
(Ord. 952, 6/2/09) 
9.32.030 - Prohibition. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess on City property a firearm, loaded or unloaded, or ammunition for a firearm. 
(Ord. 952, 6/2/09) 
9.32.040 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances held in valid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are severable. 
(Ord. 952, 6/2/09) 
9.32.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 952, 6/2/09; Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 9.34 - GRAFFITI AND RELATED VANDALISM 

9.34.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to prevent graffiti and to promote its eradication and to prevent related vandalism, as they adversely affect property (both public and private), including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, paths, walks, streets, under/overpasses, bridges, trestles, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces which contain graffiti or are subject to graffiti related vandalism. It is the further intent of this Chapter to fight against blight, to preserve the value of property (both public and private) and to promote the security of the community, all of which are now being threatened by the spread of graffiti and graffiti related vandalism. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.020 - Definitions. 
    "Aerosol paint container." Any canister, can, bottle, container, or other receptacle which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye and/or any other pigmented substance which is and/or can be modified to contain pressure (or be pressurized) in order to impel, spray, eject and/or propel any such substance. 
    "Etchers." Any tool, device, and/or other mechanism including, but not limited to, any tool, device, and/or other mechanism commonly known as "glass etchers", "glass cutters", "metal etchers", "cutting instrument", "drill bits" or any other instrument that can be applied by pressure or any other contact with any surface including, but not limited to, glass, metal, plastic, concrete or any other surface which can cause any markings commonly known as graffiti or related vandalism (as defined above). 
    "Felt tip markers." Any implement commonly known as an indelible or permanent ink marker and/or marking pen and/or any similar implement which contains any pigmented substance including, but not limited to, ink or any other substance which cannot be easily and completely removed with water after said substance has dried; where the width of the marking is three-eighths of one inch or greater. 
    "Graffiti and related vandalism." Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, symbol, design and/or configuration of letters and/or numbers written, drawn, scribed, etched, scratched, marked, painted, stained, stuck on or adhered to any real or personal property surface (public or private), including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, under/overpasses, bridges, trestles, buildings, and/or any other structures or surfaces, regardless of the nature of the material of which the surface is composed. 
    "Graffiti implements." Aerosol paint containers, felt tip markers, paint sticks, etchers, gum labels, paint balloons, stamp or stamping devices, tips that can be attached to an aerosol paint container, nozzles that can be attached to an aerosol paint container, or spray actuators as defined in this Chapter. 
    "Graffiti implements or paraphernalia." Any substance or material such as, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, markers, paint sticks, etchers, gum labels, paint balloons, stamps or stamping devices; also including, but not limited to, spray actuators, tips (or nozzles) which can be applied to aerosol paint containers; any records of graffiti or related vandalism including, but not limited to, pictures, photographs, drawings, scrap books and/or other records depicting or illustrating any forms of graffiti or related vandalism (as described above). 
    "Gum label." Any substance consisting of a material such as, but not limited to, paper, fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl and/or any other similar material, where the material also contains one or more surfaces containing a substance such as, but not limited to, any material commonly known as an adhesive or glue, which can not be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts, including, but not limited to, decals, stickers, patches, stamps or labels. 
    "Paint balloon." Any canister, can, container, bottle or other receptacle including, but not limited to, anything commonly known as a balloon or other receptacle made of any material such as, but not limited to, latex, plastic, rubber, paper, glass or other material which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye or any other pigmented substance intended for the purpose of defacing any property, public or private, upon impact or contact of any surface including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, under/overpasses, bridges trestles, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces regardless of the material of the component. 
    "Paint stick." Any device which contains any substance, solid or liquid, including, but not limited to, any form of any substance commonly known as paint, stain, ink, chalk, wax, epoxy and/or any other similar substance that is not water soluble which can be applied to any surface by such means as applying pressure to and/or contacting any surface in such a way as to leave any visible mark measuring at least three-eighths of one inch at any point - otherwise described as graffiti or related vandalism (as described above), visible from a distance of 20 feet. Provided, however, that this definition of "paint stick" shall be limited to devices which create such a mark that is indelible or permanent in nature (and cannot therefore easily and completely be removed with water after the mark has dried). 
    "Pressurized container." Any can, bottle, spray device or other mechanism designed to propel liquid which contains ink, paint, dye or other similar substance which is expelled under pressure, either through the use of aerosol devices, pumps or similar propulsion devices. 
    "Spray actuator." Any object capable of being attached to an aerosol paint container for the purpose of spraying the substance contained therein. Common examples of a spray actuator include, but are not limited to, terms such as "spray tip", "nozzle" or "button". 
    "Stamp or stamping device." Any tool, device or implement which can cause upon impact or contact any mark (described above as graffiti or related vandalism) by means of ink, paint, stain or any other substance or material including, but not limited to, any device commonly known as a rubber stamp or similar device (whether manufactured, handmade or devised) which cannot be easily removed with water, for the purpose of defacing property, public or private. 
    "Supplier." Any person(s) or entity such as, but not limited to, any business, company, co-op, corporation, enterprise, manufacturer, organization, partnership, proprietor, retail or wholesale store or outlet which sells, trades, donates, gives or requisitions to the public in any capacity whatsoever, any graffiti implements. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.030 - Prohibition of graffiti and related vandalism. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to commit any overt act resulting in or attempting to result in the application of graffiti or the engaging in or attempting to engage in an act of related vandalism (as set forth above in Section 9.34.020) including, but not limited to, any of the following acts: 
1.  Any act such as drawing, scribing, etching, scratching, marking, painting, staining, sticking on or adhering to any real or personal property surface, public or private, including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, under/overpasses, bridges, trestles, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces. 
2.  Any act of participation in applying graffiti such as, but not limited to, conspiring to commit or assist in the applying of graffiti or engaging in or assisting in an act of related vandalism, including, but not limited to, acting as a "look-out", regardless of the fact the "act" was not actually witnessed. 
3.  Any person who knowingly allows any acts of graffiti or related vandalism to occur on or to any property over which he or she has control as owner, tenant or possessor and who thereafter fails to promptly report such acts to the proper authorities is guilty of being a principal to the crime. 
Exception: Any mural or work of art approved by the City through a design review or planning process and requiring proper permits prior to commencement of any work, shall not constitute graffiti. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, business, company, or other entity which owns or otherwise controls any building, sign, pole, vehicle, trailer, trash receptacle, wall, parking lot, walkway or any other structure or real property to knowingly allow or permit any graffiti or related vandalism to be placed on, or to take place on, any such structure or property where the graffiti and/or results of the vandalism are visible from any public right-of-way. 
C.  Graffiti and/or graffiti related vandalism which appears on property and/or structures where such graffiti or related vandalism is visible from a public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as provided for in Beaumont Municipal Code, Chapter 8.32. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.040 - Possession of graffiti implements, paraphernalia or spray actuator. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator with the intent of applying graffiti markings or engaging in related vandalism. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Any minor enrolled in any education class which requires otherwise legal possession of any graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator provided the minor is carrying written verification of any such requirements including color(s), size(s), and quantity, and written consent from his or her parent or lawfully designated custodian - dated and signed. 
2.  Any minor whose employment requires possession of any graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator provided minor is carrying written verification of any such job requirements including color(s), size(s), quantity, job information and purpose, and written consent from the employer - dated and signed. 
B.  It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to possess any graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator while in, on, at or about any public property, including, but not limited to, public parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreation facilities, schools, school district facilities, libraries, court houses, utility stations, storm drains or any other publicly owned, operated and/or maintained facility. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.050 - Prohibition of furnishing of graffiti implements or paraphernalia to a minor. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than the parent or lawfully designated custodian of the minor, to sell, loan, give, exchange or otherwise furnish any aerosol paint containers, paint sticks or etchers to any person under the age of 18 years without the advanced written consent (in possession) from the parent or lawfully designated custodian of said minor. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.060 - Commercial display. 
A.  It is unlawful for any supplier to display any graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator including any such tool, device, material or substance including, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, felt-tip markers, paint sticks and/or etchers, in such a way as to be accessible by anyone who is not an employee or other authorized personnel pending lawful distribution of said implement or product. In the absence of constant supervision or surveillance by responsible personnel, said graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator shall be kept in a locked area not accessible to members of the public but may be displayed in plain view of potential retail customers. 
B.  It is unlawful for any supplier to store, stock or display any graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator in such a way as to be handled (or be removable) by anyone who is not an employee or authorized personnel for purposes of demonstration, advertising or other display. In the absence of constant supervision or surveillance by responsible personnel, said graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator shall be kept in a locked area not accessible to members of the public but may be displayed in plain view of potential retail customers. 
C.  It is unlawful for any supplier to display any graffiti implement, paraphernalia or spray actuator outdoors in a nonpermanent structure or facility; unless displayed in an area under constant supervision or surveillance by responsible personnel or in a lock-up device, i.e., a locked metal, glass or other similar cage or case, securely fastened to the ground so as not to be able to be caused to slide, roll, be lifted or otherwise moved more than two inches in any direction. All lock-up devices shall maintain a minimum size as follows: height of 36 inches, width (or length) of 72 inches, depth of 18 inches, or greater, with no more than one opening side. 
D.  All suppliers doing business in the City of Beaumont shall display one or more signs stating substantially the following: 
Must Be 18 Years Of Age To Purchase. Must Have Valid I.D. To Purchase. Any Person Who Maliciously Defaces Real Or Personal Property With Graffiti Or By Related Vandalism Is Guilty Of A Misdemeanor Punishable By Fine, Imprisonment, Or Both, And May Also Be Held Responsible For Payment Of Restitution To The Victim. 
All signs must be at least ten inches by 16 inches, with letter size of at least one inch, and posted in a conspicuous place within three feet of said implement or product. 
E.  It shall be the joint and individual responsibility of the supplier, vendor, property owner, property manager, store manager and/or district manager or corporate officer to comply with any and all applicable sections of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.070 - Penalties for violation. 
A.  A violation of this Chapter is a misdemeanor or an infraction as hereinafter specified. 
1.  A violation when charged as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or up to six months in the County Jail, or both and/or community service to abate graffiti. For the purpose of community service, where the defendant is a minor, one parent or guardian shall accompany the minor in the performance of said service unless excused by the court upon a showing of good cause. Payment of any fine or completion of a jail term shall not relieve a person from the responsibility of correcting the violation. 
2.  A violation for a first time offense only, may be charged as an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00. Payment of any penalty herein shall not relieve a person from the responsibility for correcting the violation and the court may, in addition to any fine imposed or in lieu of imposing a fine, order the party to perform community service to abate graffiti. For the purpose of community service, where the defendant is a minor, one parent or guardian shall accompany the minor in the performance of said service unless excused by the court upon a showing of good cause. 
B.  As a part of any sentence imposed, the court may also order that restitution be paid to the victim by the admitted or convicted perpetrator and, in the case of a perpetrator who is a minor, by the minor's parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. 
C.  Upon conviction, the perpetrator and/or parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian may be required to enroll in and attend a diversionary program - possibly requiring liability waivers and/or payment towards all or a portion of the cost of the program, as such costs shall have been established by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Riverside. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.080 - Severability. 
    If any portion, provision, section, paragraph, sentence, or word of this Chapter is rendered or declared to be invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining portions, provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences, and words of this Chapter shall remain in full force and effect and shall be interpreted by the court so as to give effect to such remaining portions of the Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.090 - Chapter shall work in conjunction with state statutes and local ordinances. 
    This Chapter shall be interpreted so as to work with and in conjunction with (when and where applicable) any and all state and/or local ordinances relating to the control of graffiti and/or related vandalism, including, but not limited to, Sections 594, 594.1, 594.2, 594.3, 594.5, 594.6, 594.7, 594.8, 640.5, 640.6, 640.7, 640.8 of the California Penal Code; Section 1714.1 of the California Civil Code; Section 53069.3 of the California Government Code; and Beaumont Municipal Code, Section 8.32. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.100 - Reward for information. 
    The City Council determines that rewards for any information leading to the identification, apprehension and conviction of any person who has placed graffiti upon any public or private property within the City of Beaumont shall be in a range from $100.00 to $1,000.00, to be specifically determined by the City Manager or that person's designee, and the Chief of Police, or that person's designee, based on the severity of the crime. The identity of those seeking rewards shall be considered confidential and shall not be released to members of the public. The City Council reserves the right to require that the convicted offender reimburse the City for any reward paid, and place the responsibility for such reimbursement upon the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of any minor so convicted. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
9.34.110 - Graffiti implement sales license. 
A.  Beginning on July 1, 2007, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, display for sale, or otherwise make available for sale within the City of Beaumont any graffiti implement unless that person then holds a valid annual Graffiti Implement Sales License. A valid annual Graffiti Implement Sales License will hereinafter be referred to as a "GIS License." 
B.  Each GIS License shall cover an annual period that extends from the beginning of the day on July 1 until the end of the day on June 30 of the following year. A GIS License shall be obtained in advance (in the manner specified by this Chapter) by any person who intends to sell any graffiti implement during a particular annual period (or during any part of that annual period). 
C.  The issuing department for GIS Licenses will be the Office of Code Enforcement for the City of Beaumont. Upon the submission to Code Enforcement of a properly filled-out application for a GIS License (and the payment of the annual regulatory fee for a GIS License), the City shall issue a GIS License to the applicant. In order to obtain the issuance of a GIS License for a particular annual period, the applicant shall submit its application and pay its fee no earlier than the April I date (that is three months prior to the commencement of the annual period for which the GIS License is being requested) and no later than June 29 (of the annual period for which the GIS License is being requested). If a GIS License is issued after July 1 of the annual period for which the license is issued, it shall not have the retroactive effect of legalizing any unlawful act or omission (regarding graffiti implements) that may have occurred between July 1 and the date of license issuance. 
D.  The annual regulatory fees for GIS Licenses shall be used to fund the following activities and operations of the City: they shall be used to fund efforts to identify and compile a list of those individuals and companies that are selling or otherwise furnishing graffiti implements or paraphernalia (within the meaning of Sections 9.34.050 and 9.34.060 of this Chapter); they shall be used to fund efforts to compile a list of the stores and other locations from which graffiti implements or paraphernalia are being sold or otherwise furnished (within the meaning of Sections 9.34.050 and 9.34.060 of this Chapter); they shall be used to fund the monitoring of such sellers or furnishers in order to confirm that they are not selling or furnishing graffiti implements or paraphernalia to minors (without receiving the prior written consent of the parents or lawful custodians of those minors) within the meaning of Section 9.34.050 of this Chapter; they shall be used to fund the monitoring of such sellers or furnishers in order to confirm that they are storing, stocking, and displaying their stock of graffiti implements and paraphernalia in a manner that is inaccessible (within the meaning of Sections 9.34.060.A, Band C of this Chapter); they shall be used to fund the monitoring of such sellers or furnishers in order to confirm that they are properly displaying the sign that is required by Section 9.34.060.D of this Chapter; and they shall be used to fund the costs of administering the City's GIS License program. 
E.  By March 31, 2007, and by March 31 of each succeeding year, the Office of Code Enforcement for the City shall cause to be estimated (for the annual period beginning approximately three months later) the sum total of funds that will be necessary to fund the regulatory activities and operations described above in Section 9.34.110D, and it shall cause to be estimated (for the annual period beginning approximately three months later) the sum total of separate locations from which graffiti implements or paraphernalia will be sold, offered for sale, displayed for sale, or otherwise made available for sale. Under no circumstances shall the annual regulatory fee per location (for a GIS License) exceed a dollar amount that is equal to the number obtained by dividing the sum total of such estimated separate locations into the sum total of such estimated funds. If a person sells graffiti implements or paraphernalia, offers them for sale, displays them for sale, or otherwise makes them available for sale out of more than one separate location during a particular annual period, that person must submit an application for each and everyone of those separate locations, and that person must pay the annual regulatory fee for each and every one of those separate locations. 
F.  A violation of Section 9.34.110 of this Chapter is enforceable in the following manner: 
1.  A violation of Section 9.34.110 of this Chapter may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor. If charged as an infraction, such a violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation, a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. If charged as a misdemeanor, a violation of Section 9.34.110 of this Chapter is punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Payment of any fine or completion of any jail term shall not relieve a person from the responsibility of correcting the violation. 
2.  A violation of Section 9.34.110 of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. 
3.  A violation of Section 9.34.110 of this Chapter may be enforced through a civil action to recover the annual regulatory fee for a GIS License, for damages, for injunctive relief, or for any other civil remedy whatsoever. 
4.  All criminal, administrative, civil, and other remedies mentioned in Section 9.34.110 of this Chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
5.  Violations of Sections 9.34.030, 9.34.040, 9.34.050 or 9.34.060 of this Ordinance shall be governed by Section 9.34.070 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 2, 2-20-07) 
Chapter 9.36 - PANHANDLING, SOLICITING AND AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 

9.36.010 - Findings. 
    The City Council finds that the problems of panhandling, solicitation, and aggressive solicitation are among the most difficult and vexing faced by the City and that prior approaches have failed. 
    The City Council finds that aggressive solicitation in public and private places threatens residents' and visitors' safety, privacy and quality of life. The City Council desires to establish a policy that preserves citizens' right to enjoy public spaces free from fear and harassment while protecting the free speech rights of individuals and groups. 
(Ord. 943) 
9.36.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the terms used herein: 
A.  "Soliciting" or "panhandling" shall mean to approach with a request or plea, to ask for the purpose of receiving, to endeavor or obtain by asking or pleading, propositioning, or to entreat, implore or importune. Soliciting shall include the use of the spoken, written or printed word, bodily gestures, signs or other means, with the purpose of trying to obtain something, such as money, employment, business, signatures, or votes. 
B.  "Aggressive solicitation" shall mean: 
1.  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to such soliciting; 
2.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact, in the course of soliciting, with another person without that person's consent; 
3.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, causing the pedestrian or vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
4.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited; 
5.  Following the person being solicited. 
C.  "Public place" shall mean a place where a governmental entity has title, to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access including, but not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park or playground. 
D.  "Check cashing business" shall mean any person licensed by the Attorney General to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration pursuant to California Civil Code, Section 1789.31. 
E.  "Automated teller machine" shall mean a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries and mortgage and loan payments. 
(Ord. 943) 
9.36.030 - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
    No person shall engage in aggressive solicitation in any public place. 
(Ord. 943) 
9.36.040 - Prohibited solicitation and panhandling in specific locations. 
A.  No person shall solicit or panhandle within 30 feet of any entrance or exit of a bank, credit union, check cashing business or within 30 feet of an automated teller machine without the consent of the owner of the property or other person legally in possession of such business or machine. 
B.  No person shall solicit or panhandle an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located on any street or highway, on-ramp or off-ramp. 
C.  No person shall solicit or panhandle in any public transportation vehicle, or any public or private parking lot or structure. 
(Ord. 943) 
9.36.050 - Prior warning required. 
    Before any law enforcement officer may cite or arrest a person under this Chapter, the office must have first warned the person that his or her conduct is in violation of this Code and must give the person an opportunity to comply with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 943) 
9.36.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 943; Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
9.36.070 - Severability. 
    If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this law is held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, it shall in no way affect the validity of any remaining portions of this law. 
(Ord. 943) 
Chapter 9.40 - PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS 

9.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    Recreational use of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense and similar products commonly known as "synthetic drugs" has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, cannibalism and death. While State and Federal laws and regulations prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to escape the purview of these laws and regulations. The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide the City with reasonable measures to address the dangers to the community posed by synthetic drugs that are not regulated by State or Federal Law. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Business" such term, used alone, shall be held and construed to mean and include "business," "profession," "trade," "calling," "occupation," "show," "exhibition," or "game," and all kinds of calling carried on for profit or livelihood. 
B.  "Consume," "consuming" or "consumption" shall mean to ingest, inhale, inject, smoke or snort (insufflate). 
C.  "Distribute", "distributing" or "distribution" shall mean to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply, whether for monetary gain or not. 
D.  "Person" shall include any natural person, business, firm, company, corporation, public corporation, club, trust, partnership, association and/or similar organization. 
E.  "Possess," "possessing" or "possession" shall mean to have for consumption, distribution or sale in one's actual or constructive custody or control, or under one's authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority and/or power be exercised solely or jointly with others. 
F.  "Provide," "providing" or "provision" shall mean offering to distribute, to distribute, offering to sell or sell a product or substance to any person. 
G.  "Psychoactive bath salts" shall mean any crystalline or powder product that contains a synthetic chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. The term "psychoactive bath salts" includes without limitation: 
(1)  products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds: 
(a)  cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone), 4-methylmethcathinone (2- methylamino-1-(4-methylphenyl)propan-1-one),4-methoxymethcathinone(1-4methoxyphenyl)-2-(methylamino)propan-1-one),MDPV methylenedioxypyrovalerone), MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy-Nmethylamphetamine), methylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2 (methylamino)-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), flephedrone (4fluoromethcathinone), 3-FMC (3 fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2ethylamino- 1-phenyl-propan-1-one), butylone (J3-keto-Nmethylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), o-PPP (o pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MPPP (4'-methyl-a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP (3',4'-methylenedioxy-apyrrolidinopropiophenone), o-PVP (1-phenyl-2-(1-pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2-pyrrolidin-1-ylpentan-1-one); 
(b)  any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
(c)  any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed compounds; 
(d)  any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; or 
(e)  any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and 
(2)  products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names, including but not limited to: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night and White Lightning. 
The term "psychoactive bath salts" shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act ("UCSA") (Health & Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA's schedules of controlled substances (Health & Safety Code §§ 11053-11058), regulated by one of the UCSA's Synthetic Drug Laws (Health & Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the Federal Controlled Substances Act (the "CSA") (21 USC §§ 81 et seq.) or approved by the Food and Drug Administration ("FDA"). 
H.  "Psychoactive herbal incense" shall mean any organic product consisting of plant material that contains a synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. The term "psychoactive herbal incense" includes without limitation: 
(1)  products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds: 
(a)  cannabicyclohexanol (2-[(1 R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl)phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3yl)methanone), JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH200((1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone), HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)- 9-(Hydroxymethyl)- 6,6-dimethyl- 3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-((6a,7, 10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen- 1-01), CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) CP 47,497 (2-[(1 R,3S)-3hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl}phenol) or AM-2201 (1-[(5fluoropentyl}-1 H-indol-3-yl]-(naphthalen-1-yl)methanone); 
(b)  any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
(c)  any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; 
(d)  any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; or 
(e)  any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and 
(2)  products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke, PotPourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Stinger, Serenity, Fake Weed and Black Mamba. 
The term "psychoactive herbal incense" shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture, or preparation that is specifically excepted by the UCSA (Health & Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA's schedules of controlled substances (Health & Safety Code §§ 11053-11058), regulated by one of the USCA's Synthetic Drug Laws (Health & Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the CSA (21 USC §§ 81 et seq.) or approved by the FDA. 
I.  "Psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects" shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine, methylphenidate or amphetamines. 
J.  "Psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects" shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis. 
K.  "Sell," "selling" or "sale" shall mean to furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply for monetary gain. 
L.  "Synthetic drug" shall include psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive herbal incense, as those terms are defined hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.030 - Provision, sale and/or distribution of synthetic drugs prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the City of Beaumont. 
(b)  Merely disclaiming a synthetic drug as "not safe for human consumption" will not avoid the application of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.040 - Provision, sale and/or distribution of substances claimed or represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product that person is providing, distributing or selling is a synthetic drug within the City of Beaumont. 
(b)  To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the following evidentiary factors: 
(1)  The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as a crystalline or powder product being marketed as "glass cleaner"); 
(2)  The business providing, distributing or selling the product does not typically provide, distribute or sell products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as a liquor store selling "plant food"); 
(3)  The product contains a warning label that is not typically present on products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as "not for human consumption," "not for purchase by minors," or "does not contain chemicals banned by section 11357.5"); 
(4)  The product is significantly more expensive than products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as a half of a gram of a substance marketed as "glass cleaner" costing $50.00); 
(5)  The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine, methamphetamine or marijuana); or 
(6)  The products name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an illicit street drug (such as "Eight Ballz" or "Green Buddha"). 
(c)  Merely disclaiming a substance claimed or represented to be a Synthetic Drug as "not safe for human consumption" will not avoid the application of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.050 - Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to possess any synthetic drug within the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.060 - Public nuisance. 
(a)  It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the City of Beaumont. 
(b)  It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, distribution or sale of any synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the City of Beaumont. 
(c)  It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, distribute or sell any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug within the City of Beaumont. 
(d)  It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, distribution or sale of any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the City of Beaumont. 
(e)  To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a substance or product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the evidentiary factors set forth in Section 9.100.040(b) of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.070 - Summary abatement. 
    Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, cannibalism and death, any violation of this Chapter presents a grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but also to the public at large. If the Code Enforcement Officer, based on the facts then known. determines that a violation of this Chapter presents an imminent danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health or safety, then that violation is punishable by the summary abatement procedures set forth in Chapter 8.32 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.080 - Revocation of business license. 
    No person holding a validly issued City business license and owning or operating a business in the City may use that business to provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug or any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug. A violation of this Section by the holder of a validly issued City business license, shall constitute grounds for modification, suspension and/or revocation of said license in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.04 of this Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.090 - Penalties. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(a)  Separate Offense. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the City is committed, continued or permitted by any such person and he shall be punishable accordingly. 
(b)  Civil Remedies Available; Remedies Cumulative. In addition to the penalties provided in this Section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated by the City by civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. All remedies herein are cumulative and non-exclusive. 
(c)  Administrative Citation. In lieu of issuing a criminal citation, the City may issue an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.17 of this Municipal Code, to any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining a violation of this Chapter. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the City from also issuing a citation upon the occurrence of the same offense on a separate day. 
(d)  Additional Penalties; Costs of Abatement. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the City from pursuing the remedies made applicable hereto elsewhere in this Municipal Code or under State law, including but not limited to, as applicable, denial or revocation of certificates of occupancy and injunctive relief. In any administrative or criminal proceeding involving the abatement of a public nuisance, the City shall also be entitled to recover its full reasonable costs of abatement, including, but not limited to, investigation, analysis and prosecuting the enforcement against the guilty party, upon submission of proof of such cost by the City. 
(e)  Public Nuisance Remedies. The prevailing party in any proceeding associated with the abatement of a public nuisance as provided herein, shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys' fees incurred in any such proceeding, where the City has elected, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees. In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City in the action or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.100 - Seizure of evidence. 
    Any product(s) or substance(s) possessed, provided, distributed or sold in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be seized by the enforcing officers and removed and stored in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.110 - Exclusions. 
(a)  This Chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds which have been approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by California law, including without limitation, intoxicating chemical compounds that are specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Health & Safety Code § 11000 et seq.). chemical compounds that are specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Health & Safety Code § 11000 et seq.). 
(b)  This Chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances which are prohibited by State or Federal law, including without limitation, California Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5, 11401 and the Federal Controlled Substances Act. 
(c)  This Chapter shall not be deemed to prescribe any act which is positively permitted, prohibited or preempted by any State or Federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
9.40.120 - Severability. 
    If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction or preempted by State or Federal legislation, such decision or legislation shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City Council declares that it would have passed this Chapter and each and every subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to any such decision or preemptive legislation. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 2-19-13) 
Chapter 9.41 - FIREWORKS 

9.41.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meaning as used herein: 
A.  "Dangerous fireworks" has the same meaning ascribed to it under Section 12505 of the California Health and Safety Code and includes all of the following: 
(1)  Any fireworks which contain any of the following: 
(a)  Arsenic sulfide, arsenates, or arsenites; 
(b)  Boron; 
(c)  Chlorates, except: 
(i)  In colored smoke mixture in which an equal or greater amount of sodium bicarbonate is included; 
(ii)  In caps and party poppers; 
(iii)  In those small items (such as ground spinners) wherein the total powder content does not exceed four grams of which not greater than 15 percent (or 600 milligrams) is potassium, sodium, or barium chlorate, 
(d)  Gallates or gallic acid; 
(e)  Magnesium (magnesium-aluminum alloys, called magnalium, are permitted); 
(f)  Mercury salts; 
(g)  Phosphorus (red or white except that red phosphorus is permissible in caps and party poppers); 
(h)  Picrates or picric acid; 
(i)  Thiocyanates, 
(j)  Titanium, except in particle size greater than 100-mesh, 
(k)  Zirconium; 
(2)  Firecrackers; 
(3)  Skyrockets and rockets, including all devices which employ any combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge; 
(4)  Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire into the air; 
(5)  Chasers, including all devices which dart or travel about the surface of the ground during discharge; 
(6)  Sparklers more than ten inches in length or one-fourth of one inch in diameter; 
(7)  All fireworks designed and intended by the manufacturer to create the element of surprise upon the user. These items include, but are not limited to, auto-foolers, cigarette loads, exploding golf balls, and trick matches; 
(8)  Fireworks known as devil-on-the-walk, or any other firework which explodes through means of friction, unless otherwise classified by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to this chapter; 
(9)  Torpedoes of all kinds which explode on impact; 
(10)  Fireworks kits; 
(11)  Such other fireworks examined and tested by the State Fire Marshal and determined by the State Fire Marshal, with the advice of the State Board of Fire Services, to possess characteristics of design or construction which make such fireworks unsafe for use by any person not specially qualified or trained in the use of fireworks. 
B.  "Exempt fireworks" has the same meaning ascribed to it under Section 12508 of the California Health and Safety Code and means any special item containing pyrotechnic compositions which the State Fire Marshall, with the advice of the State Fire Advisory Board, has investigated and determined to be limited to industrial, commercial, agricultural use, or religious ceremonies when authorized by a permit granted by the authority having jurisdiction. 
C.  "Fire Marshall" means the Riverside County Fire Marshall or his or her authorized representatives. 
D.  "Fireworks" has the same meaning ascribed to it under Section 12511 of the California Health and Safety Code and means any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. The term "fireworks" includes, but is not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, model rockets, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs and fireworks kits. 
E.  "Fireworks kits" has the same meaning ascribed to it under Section 12512 of the California Health and Safety Code and means any assembly of materials or explosive substances, which is designed and intended by the seller to be assembled by the person receiving such material or explosive substance and when so assembled would come within the definition of "fireworks." 
F.  "Police Chief" means the Chief of Police of the City of Beaumont or his or her authorized representatives. 
G.  "Public display of fireworks" means an entertainment feature where the public or a private group is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of dangerous fireworks. 
H.  "Pyrotechnic operator" means any licensed pyrotechnic operator who, by examination, experience, and training, has demonstrated the required skill and ability in the use and discharge of fireworks as authorized by the license granted. 
I.  "Pyrotechnic special effects material" means a low explosive material, other than detonating cord, commonly used in motion picture, television, theatrical or group entertainment production for which a permit from the chief is required for use or storage. 
J.  "Safe and sane fireworks" has the same meaning ascribed to it under Section 12529 of the California Health and Safety Code and means any fireworks which do not come within the definition of "dangerous fireworks" or "exempt fireworks." 
( Ord. No. 1101, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-2018 ) 
9.41.020 - Prohibition. 
A.  General. No person shall have in his or her possession, or keep, store, use, shoot, discharge, set off, ignite, explode, manufacture, sell, offer to sell, give or transport any fireworks, dangerous fireworks, or safe and sane fireworks, except for use as agricultural and wildlife fireworks or for use in a public display of fireworks pursuant to a permit obtained under the provisions of Sections 12640-12654 of the California Health and Safety Code and this chapter. 
B.  Manufacturing Prohibited. The manufacturing of fireworks, dangerous fireworks, or safe and sane fireworks is prohibited except under special permits as required by local and state regulations by the Fire Marshall and the Police Chief. 
C.  Pyrotechnic Special Effects Material. A permit is required to manufacture, compound, store or use pyrotechnic special effects material. Permit application shall be made to the Fire Marshall and the Police Chief. A permit shall be granted only to a State Fire Marshall licensed pyrotechnic operator. 
( Ord. No. 1101, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-2018 ) 
9.41.030 - Displays. 
A.  General. Permits are required to conduct a public display of fireworks. Permit application shall be made to the Fire Marshall and the Police Chief not fewer than 14 days prior to the scheduled date of the display. The permit application shall include a diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged; the location of buildings, highways and other lines of communication; the lines behind which the audience will be restrained; and the location of nearby trees, telegraph or telephone lines and other overhead obstructions. At the time of permit application, the Fire Marshall shall be consulted regarding the requirements for standby fire apparatus. 
B.  Supervision. Public display of fireworks operations shall be under the direct supervision of a pyrotechnic operator. The pyrotechnic operator shall be responsible for all aspects of a display related to pyrotechnics. 
C.  Bond Required. The permittee shall furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the Fire Marshall and the Police Chief for the payment of damages which could be caused either to a person or persons or to property by reason of the permitted display and arising from acts of the permittee, agents, employees or subcontractors. 
( Ord. No. 1101, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-2018 ) 
9.41.040 - Exception. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports or for use by military organizations. 
( Ord. No. 1101, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-2018 ) 
9.41.050 - Seizure and enforcement. 
A.  The Fire Marshall and his or her authorized representatives and the Police Chief and his or her authorized representatives are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Fire Marshall and his or her authorized representatives and the Police Chief and his or her authorized representatives shall have the authority to seize, take, and remove any fireworks, dangerous fireworks, and safe and sane fireworks. The Fire Marshall and his or her authorized representative and the Police Chief and his or her authorized representative may charge any person whose fireworks are seized pursuant to this section, a reasonable amount which is sufficient to cover the cost of transporting, storing, handling, and disposing of the seized fireworks. 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in chapter 1.16 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
D.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement remedies of chapters 1.16 (General Penalty) and 1.17 (Administrative Code Enforcement) of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
E.  Nothing in this chapter shall be intended to limit any of the penalties provided for under the California Health and Safety Code or Penal Code with regard to the sale, use, possession, delivery, or transportation of dangerous fireworks or all of these, nor any other civil or criminal remedies available to the City, Fire Marshall and his or her authorized representatives, or the Police Chief and his or her authorized representatives. 
( Ord. No. 1101, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-2018 ) 
TITLE 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapter 10.04 - ENACTMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS BY RESOLUTION 

10.04.010 - Authority to enact certain regulations by resolution. 
    Under the provisions of Division 11 of the State of California Vehicle Code of 1959, as amended, the designation of "through highways," "Stop intersections," "speed zones," and the designation of parking lanes, parking zones, and crosswalks, and such other regulation of the flow of traffic as may be deemed necessary shall hereafter be enacted by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.06 - CURB MARKINGS 

10.06.010 - Curb colors. 
    The following curb colors shall only be used within the City, and the colors indicate as follows: 
A.  Red indicates no stopping, standing or parking, whether the vehicle is attended or unattended, except that bus may stop in a red zone marked or signposted as a bus loading zone. 
B.  Yellow indicates stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight. 
C.  White indicates stopping for either of the following purposes: 
1.  Loading or unloading of passengers; 
2.  Depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox. 
D.  Green indicates time limit parking during the hours or times specified on signs posted therefor. 
E.  Blue indicates parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of disabled persons and disabled veterans. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.06.020 - Penalty for violation. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.06 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.08 - PARKING 

10.08.010 - Unlawful to park in certain places. 
A.  The Chief of Police is authorized to prohibit stopping, standing, or parking and to place signs or curb markings at any of the following places when such prohibition as indicated by a traffic investigation will alleviate dangerous, hazardous traffic conditions, facilitate the full use of the roadway or serve the convenience of the public: 
1.  At any place within 25 feet of the intersection of two or more highways, streets and/or roads; 
2.  At any place within 25 feet of a railroad grade crossing; 
3.  Adjacent to either side of a crosswalk or driveway entrance for a distance not to exceed 25 feet from either side of such crosswalk or driveway; 
4.  Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant when it has been determined unless otherwise marked. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.020 - Parking in designated "No Parking at Any Time" areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any area of City Hall property designated with signs prohibiting parking at any such time. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.030 - Parking within designated stalls only. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on top of or across pavement markings that designate parking stalls. Parking shall only be permitted within such designated stalls on City Hall property. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.040 - Parking in reserved parking spaces for emergency/police vehicles on shopping center properties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a non-emergency or non-police vehicle in any parking space within commercial and retail centers, including shopping centers, that is designated by a sign or other marking as being reserved solely for parking emergency and police vehicles. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.050 - Prohibition against parking within yard areas. 
    Except as provided in Chapter 10.10, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within front yard or side yard open space areas and landscaped areas including, without limitation, lawns and groundcover. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.060 - Prohibition against parking on City right-of-way adjacent to pavement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the unpaved portion of any City-owned right-of-way adjacent to the paved portion of a public street. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.070 - Temporary no parking. 
    Whenever the Chief of Police determines that traffic congestion or traffic hazard is likely to result from the parking of vehicles in the vicinity of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or during the construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any street, or for any reason, he may place or cause to be temporarily placed, signs temporarily prohibiting the parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.075 - Camping or sleeping in motor vehicles prohibited. 
    Except as provided in Section 10.08.076, it shall be unlawful for any person to camp or sleep in any motor vehicle in any public place in the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the next day. 
(Ord. 1006, 11-1-11) 
10.08.076 - Permitted sleeping area. 
    Sleeping in a motor vehicle shall be permitted in the Civic Center parking lot between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. 1006, 11-1-11) 
10.08.080 - Use of streets for storage of vehicles. 
A.  No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than 72 consecutive hours. 
B.  In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street for more than 72 consecutive hours, the Police Chief or any member of the Police Department or any member of City Code Enforcement may remove such vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements specified in Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.090 - Obstruction of official traffic signs or devices. 
    It is unlawful for the driver, owner, or operator of any vehicle to park or leave standing any vehicle which blocks or obstructs any official traffic sign or device. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.08.100 - Penalty for violation. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.08 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.10 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND UTILITY TRAILER PARKING AND STORAGE 

10.10.010 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this Chapter, the term recreational vehicle is defined to be and to include: 
1.  A trailer, of any length, width or weight including, but not limited to, any boat trailer, camp trailer, trailer coach, "fifth wheel" trailer, pickup track camper or house car, horse trailer, personal water craft, off-road and all-terrain vehicle trailers, whether attached to the tow vehicle or otherwise; 
2.  A motor home including, without limitation, converted tracks or buses. 
B.  Utility trailer is defined as a trailer of any width, length or weight and which is utilized for transporting goods, equipment, business and commercial tools and equipment, vehicles, yard waste, refuse and rubbish. 
C.  Stored means continuously parked in the same location for more than 72 hours. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.10.020 - Parking prohibition. 
A.  No person shall park any recreational vehicle in or on any public right-of-way, including a street, sidewalk or alleyway. 
B.  No person shall park a utility trailer in any of the following locations: 
1.  In or on any public right-of-way, including a street, sidewalk or alleyway; or 
2.  In or on the front yard setback unless on an approved all weather surface. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.10.025 - Overnight parking restriction on commercial, retail and shopping center properties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a recreational vehicle on a commercial, retail, or shopping center property for more than 12 hours in any seven-consecutive-day period when such property is posted with a sign at each entrance thereof providing notice of this parking restriction, unless such person first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police. Only one permit shall be issued in any seven-day period. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.10.030 - Exceptions to parking prohibition. 
A.  Motor homes, and recreational and utility trailers that are attached to a tow vehicle, may be temporarily parked on a street or alley for the purpose of loading, unloading, servicing or visiting adjacent property, for a period not to exceed 72 hours. 
B.  Except as provided in subparagraph C below, motor homes, and recreational and utility trailers that are not attached to a tow vehicle, may be temporarily parked on a street or alley for any purpose, for a period not to exceed two hours. Recreational and utility trailers that are not attached to a tow vehicle may, in the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, be towed 24 hours after the first violation. 
C.  Recreation and utility trailers that are not attached to a tow vehicle may be temporarily parked on a street or alley for any purpose, for a period not to exceed 72 hours pursuant to a permit issued by the Police Department. Each such permit shall be prominently displayed on the trailer. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.10.040 - Storage of recreational vehicles and utility trailers. 
A.  A recreational vehicle or utility trailer shall only be stored on property owned by the owner of the recreational vehicle or utility trailer or on property where the registered owner resides. 
B.  A stored recreational vehicle or utility trailer shall bear a current vehicle registration, if required by state law. 
C.  A recreational vehicle or utility trailer may be stored within the front yard provided that the recreational vehicle or utility trailer is stored on a slab of impervious material, such as concrete, brick, or other type of all weather surfaces. 
D.  The storage of recreational vehicle or utility trailer, or any part thereof, in, on, or overhanging, any public right-of-way, including a street, sidewalk or alleyway, is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.10.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.10 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.12 - PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 

10.12.010 - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "commercial vehicles" is defined to be any dray, truck, wagon, cart, automobile or other traffic vehicle carrying or used in transporting goods, merchandise, lumber, machinery, oil, dirt or any article of trade or commerce. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.12.020 - Parking near schools prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park, stop or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, a commercial vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley within the corporate limits of the City within 500 feet of any school building, school yard or other premises used in connection with public schools, except for the purpose of delivering goods, wares or merchandise, and then only while such delivery is being made. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.12.030 - Parking on public streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-ways and on residential property. 
A.  Except as provided for in subsections B, C and D below, and subject to the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 10.12.040, 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing, or allow to be parked or leave standing, any commercial vehicle consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, semi-trailer or a combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds, upon any street, highway, alley, public right-of-way or residential property within the City. 
2.  It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any commercial vehicle consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, semi-trailer or a combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds, to allow such vehicle to remain standing upon any street, highway, alley, public right-of-way or residential property within the City. 
3.  It is unlawful for any person to park, or allow to be parked, any trailer which has been detached from a truck tractor or truck, or which is not in itself capable of being driven, upon any street, highway, alley or public right-of-way within the City. 
4.  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing within 100 feet of any street intersection, or within 100 feet of any official traffic control device, any vehicle which is ten feet or more in height, including the height of any load thereon. 
5.  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any street, highway, alley, or public right-of-way within the City, any commercial vehicle consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, trailer, semi-trailer or combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds, so that any part of such vehicle is within 30 feet of any driveway opening, other than the driver's own driveway. 
6.  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any street, highway, alley, or public right-of-way within the City, any commercial vehicle consisting of a truck tractor, motor truck, trailer, semi-trailer or combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds, so that any part of such vehicle is within 50 feet of any part of any other truck tractor, motor truck, trailer, semi-trailer or combination thereof. 
B.  Commercial truck tractors, motor trucks, semi-trailers or combination thereof, exceeding a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds, may be parked on public streets, highways, alleys, public rights-of-way, or residential property as follows: 
1.  On designated truck routes for a period of time not exceeding two consecutive hours; 
2.  While making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any property adjacent to or abutting upon streets or highways which are not designated truck routes; 
3.  When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the ongoing performance of a service to, or on, a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked or left standing; 
4.  The restrictions and prohibitions set forth in subsection A(1), (2) and (3) of this section shall not apply to commercial vehicles which have valid and effective permits issued pursuant to section 10.12.040. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply: 
1.  In the community industrial land use district; and 
2.  To commercial vehicles operated by government agencies, public and private utilities and licensed contractors engaged in the installation, maintenance or repair of any public property, utility or roadway. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.12.040 - Permits. 
A.  Any owner or operator of a vehicle or property which is subject to this Chapter may apply to the Chief of Police or his/her designee for, and the Chief of Police or his/her designee may issue, a permit for an exemption from the restrictions and prohibitions of Section 10.12.030(A)(1) through (3). 
B.  Permits shall expire one year after the date of issuance. Applications for renewal of a permit shall be submitted at least ten days prior to the expiration date of the then-current permit. 
C.  Permits, if issued to nonresident visitors, shall expire three days after the date of issuance. Not more than three nonresident visitor permits may be issued to any one person in any 12-month period of time. 
D.  Permits shall be nontransferable and shall apply only to the particular property or location described in the application, and the privileges granted therein shall be limited to the term of the permit. 
E.  The Chief of Police or his/her designee may revoke any permit issued hereunder prior to the permit's expiration date upon a determination that good cause exists for such revocation. Good cause for revocation is established by a finding that the permittee, or any person operating a permitted vehicle with the permittee's consent, has violated one or more of the provisions of this Chapter or any other provision of this Code or of state law relating to the operation, licensing, maintenance or parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.12.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.12 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.16 - PARKING ON GRADES 

10.16.010 - Prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stand or park the vehicle upon any street, the grade of which exceeds three percent, without setting the brakes thereon and blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.16.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.16 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.20 - PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS 

10.20.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    The purpose of this Chapter, together with any resolution adopted as set forth in this Chapter, is to implement the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 22507.8, et seq., to provide appropriate and adequate parking for disabled persons. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.20.020 - Parking in spaces designated for disabled person prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle in a stall or space designated for disabled persons and disabled veterans pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 22511.7 or 22511.8, unless the vehicle displays either a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 22511.5 or 22511.9. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, block, or otherwise bar access to those parking stalls or spaces except as provided in Subdivision A. 
C.  Subdivisions A and B apply to all off-street parking facilities owned or operated by the State, the City of Beaumont or any other local governmental authority, and to any privately-owned off-street parking facility. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.20.030 - Removal of vehicles not displaying distinguishing placard for disabled persons. 
    The owner or person in lawful possession of a designated off-street parking facility, after notifying the Police Department, may cause the removal, from a stall or space designated for disabled persons in such facility to the nearest public garage, of any vehicle not displaying one of the distinguishing placards or license plates specified in Vehicle Code Sections 22511.5 or 22511.9 if there is posted immediately adjacent to, visible from, such stall or space, or, if there is posted, in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the off-street parking facility, not less than one inch in height, a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the following: Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued to physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.20.040 - Chapter does not restrict other privileges granted to disabled veterans. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to restrict the privilege granted to disabled veterans by Section 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code and to disabled persons by Section 22511.5 of said Code. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.20.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.20 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.22 - REGULATION OF PARKING FOR THE STREET SWEEPING 

10.22.010 - Prohibit parking to facilitate street sweeping. 
    Not withstanding any other parking regulation to the contrary, it is unlawful to park or leave parked any vehicle on any street or portion thereof during the hours and on the day or days of the month designated for street sweeping, except commercial vehicles making pick-ups or delivers. 
(Ord. 1040) 
10.22.020 - Designated areas for street sweeping. 
    The Planning Director is authorized to determine the designated areas for street sweeping on a Citywide basis. The schedule of street sweeping shall provide for approximately one-half of a designated area to be swept in the morning and the remaining half of the designated area to be swept in the afternoon. The Planning Director shall cause signs to be posted that read "No Parking," in appropriate locations in accordance with section 22507.6 of the California Vehicle Code. Such signs shall state the day and time that restrictions are in effect and shall be posted at entrances to subdivisions, tracts, housing developments and other locations as required by section 22507.6 of the California Vehicle Code. 
    The Planning Director is authorized to determine the locations of and to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, signs designating the hours during which, and day or days of the month on which, parking is prohibited in order to permit City equipment, or City contracted equipment, to sweep the streets. 
(Ord. 1040) 
10.22.030 - Violation of parking restrictions. 
A.  Upon first violation for parking within a restricted parking area properly identified by the required posted signs, a parking citation may be issued by a Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer. 
B.  Upon a second and consecutive violation of this chapter within a 12-month period involving the same vehicle, the parking citation may be issued and the vehicle towed at the registered owner's expense. 
(Ord. 1040) 
Chapter 10.28 - OFF-ROAD USE OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES 

10.28.010 - Prohibition. 
    No person shall drive a motorized vehicle off-road on lands belonging to or occupied by another without having in his or her immediate possession and, upon request of a peace officer, displaying written permission from the owner of such lands, his or her agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof; but this section shall not apply to a person having lawful business with the owner or agent in lawful possession. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.28.020 - Exempt locations. 
    This Chapter shall not apply on public or private lands expressly set apart for the use of motorized vehicles with permission of the owner of such lands pursuant to any zoning permit or other permit required by law. This Chapter shall not apply upon any public highway, street, road or alley. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.28.030 - Exempt vehicles. 
    This Chapter shall not apply to farm vehicles used for agricultural purposes, vehicles being used for grading or construction purposes, vehicles being used for governmental purposes or golf carts being used on golf courses. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.28.040 - Limitations. 
    The lawful operation of any motorized off-road vehicle is subject to the following additional limitations: 
A.  Operation of such vehicles shall only be conducted between 9:00 a.m. and one-half hour before sunset, unless a shorter period is stated in any written permission given by the landowner/agent. 
B.  Operation of such vehicles shall not be conducted within 500 feet of an occupied dwelling, church, assembly hall, school, office, medical facility, recreation facility or other facility occupied by human beings; nor within 500 feet of a barn, stable, other structure or pasture used for the keeping of animals. 
C.  Operation of such vehicles shall be confined to the property for which written permission has been obtained. 
D.  The vehicle being operated must be of the type or types identified in the landowner/agent's written permission. 
E.  The permittee shall at all times while operating such vehicles have in his possession a current and valid letter of permission and shall present it upon request to a law enforcement officer, or agent or employee designated by the City Manager to enforce this Chapter, for verification of the right to operate vehicles on the property. 
F.  The vehicles operated by the permittee shall at all times be equipped with spark arrestors and muffler systems in good operating condition. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.28.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.28 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.30 - PARKING OF VEHICLES, VESSELS AND PLACEMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY FOR SALE 

10.30.010 - Display of vehicles and other property for sale prohibited. 
    Except as provided in Section 10.30.020, no person shall park or place a vehicle or vessel or other personal property upon a public or private street, parking lot or any public or private property for the purpose of displaying such vehicle, vessel or other personal property for sale, hire or rental. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.30.020 - Exceptions. 
A.  Section 10.30.010 shall not apply if the real property is lawfully zoned by the City for such purpose, the vendor is duly licensed to transact such business at that location, and the vendor owns or has lawful possession of said real property or has written permission in his or her possession from the owner or person in lawful possession of the real property to vend the vehicle(s), vessel(s) and/or personal property at that location. 
B.  Section 10.30.010 shall not prohibit any person from displaying for sale a vehicle, vessel or other personal property on private residential property provided the person owns or occupies the residential property on which it is displayed for sale, unless such display constitutes a nuisance. 
C.  Section 10.30.010 shall not prohibit any person from placing a vehicle or vessel advertised for sale on the public street provided: 
(1)  Such placement does not violate this Chapter, which Chapter authorizes the removal of unattended vehicles from City streets, highways and alleys under circumstances specified therein; and 
(2)  Such advertising sign is not more than 10" × 12" and includes the name, address and telephone number of the seller; and 
(3)  The person advertising the vehicle or vessel for sale is the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel in accordance with Sections 505 and 9850, et seq. of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.30.030 - Evidence that property is offered for sale. 
    The parking or placing of any vehicle or vessel or other personal property with a sign or other advertising device thereon or proximate thereto, indicating such vehicle or vessel or other personal property is for sale, hire or rental, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vehicle, vessel or other personal property was parked or placed for the purpose of displaying the same for sale, hire or rental. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.30.040 - Evidence of violation. 
    In any prosecution for violation of this Chapter against the registered owner of a motor vehicle or vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the complaint or citation was in violation of this Chapter, together with proof that the defendant named therein was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel was the person who placed the vehicle or vessel at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.30.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.30 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.32 - OVERSIZE VEHICLES 

10.32.010 - Permit required. 
A.  Every person or entity, hereafter called "person" or permittee," except as otherwise provided in this chapter, is required to obtain a permit from the Chief of Police or his/her designee, before he moves or causes to be moved any load along or across any City street. "Load" means any object or thing, including a vehicle or combination of vehicles which, when traveling along or across any City street, is required to have a special permit pursuant to the Vehicle Code, and includes, but is not limited to, any oversize or overweight vehicle, house, vessel, machine, equipment, transformer, tree, boat, airplane, and mobilehome. 
B.  It is not intended that the Chief of Police or his/her designee issue a permit to move any load when the weight and/or size of the load plus the weight and/or size of the vehicle or other equipment exceeds limitations of the Vehicle Code, except where it is impractical to change the physical characteristics of the load. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may issue a permit to move such load, where he has determined that it is not in conflict with the public interest to do so. 
C.  The fact that an oversize vehicle is duly registered does not imply that a permit must be issued, or exempt from such load from the necessity of securing a permit to operate on any City street. The permits must be secured and in possession of the operator before the vehicle may be legally operated. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.020 - Obstruction of Chief of Police or his/her designee prohibited. 
    A person shall not obstruct the Chief of Police or his/her designee in making any inspection to determine compliance with the conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.030 - Who constitutes permittee. 
    Whenever this chapter requires a permittee to perform any work, take any action, or be liable for any fees, or costs, such requirement applies to any person who commences any work or movement for which a permit is required whether such person obtains a permit or not. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.040 - Permit display required. 
    The permittee shall make the permit available for inspection by any peace officer or other public officer or employee having responsibility for safety or maintenance of the City streets. Each permit for moving must be in or attached to the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers. In cases where a building or structure is moved in more than one section at the same time, on each section on which the original permit is not attached there shall be affixed a true copy of the original permit. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.050 - Permit cancellation. 
    The Chief of Police or his/her designee for cause may cancel a permit unless the permitted activity is commenced within the time specified and is diligently prosecuted to completion. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.060 - Facilities relocation-Requirements and costs. 
    The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the City streets which are within the limits of his activity. The permittee shall not interfere with any such existing public or private facility without the consent of its owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be arranged for by the permittee, to be done by its owner or to the satisfaction of its owner. The cost of moving publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.070 - Compliance with all matters in relation to permit or City streets required. 
    Every permittee shall obey 'and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule of the Chief of Police or his/her designee in the matters specified in the permit, or other matters relating to the permitted use of a City street, and shall do everything necessary to secure compliance therewith by officers, agents, and employees of the permittee. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.080 - Regulations for protection of public required-Copies available. 
A.  The Chief of Police or his/her designee may cause to be prepared regulations for use in compliance with this Chapter. The regulations shall make such requirements as are necessary to protect the public and cause the public the least possible inconvenience, provide for appropriate methods of protecting surface, subsurface, and overhead utilities within a City street or adjacent thereto, provide for protection of private and public property adjacent to City streets; provide for any necessary temporary relocation of any utilities or other property within a City street; provide for repair, at the expense of the permittee, of any improvement which is damaged by reason of an act of permittee; whether or not such an act is in accordance with his permit, provide a method of designating which City streets are to be used, and at what time, for the movement of particular loads, and provide for the collection of permit fees and for the collection and disbursement of any deposit which may be required. 
B.  The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall maintain copies of said regulations in this Chapter for inspection by the public and for distribution to the public, which may be sold at cost. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.090 - Permit application-Forms. 
    The application for a permit shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police or his/her designee, on the forms provided or approved by him. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.100 - Permit application-Agreement signature for liability. 
    On each application the applicant or his agent shall sign a statement that the applicant agrees or preserves and saves harmless the City, its officers, and employees, from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as the proximate result of his activities pursuant to the permit applied for, including wrongful or accidental health. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.110 - Permittee to protect all improvements-Damages repaired. 
    The permittee shall protect all street improvements, and other facilities within the City streets by methods satisfactory to their owners. An owner has the right to support or protect any of its facilities at the sole expense of the permittee. In case any street or other facility is damaged, it may be repaired by the permittee, under the supervision of the owner at the permittee's expense. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.120 - Permit term. 
    Each permit shall specify the duration of the permit. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may extend the time, in which event the permit shall be so endorsed. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.130 - Repetitive use permits-Requirements. 
    Repetitive use permits, renewable periodically, may be issued to cover more than a single move. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may revoke such permit if the permittee fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a repetitive use permit does not relieve the permittee from making such reports of activity under the repetitive use permit as may be required by the Chief of Police or his/her designee and for paying for inspections, repairs and other acts incurred by the Chief of Police or his/her designee due to the permittee's activity. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.140 - Non-transferability. 
    Permits issued under the authority of this chapter are nontransferable. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.150 - Fees, insurance or bonds-Set by resolution. 
    The City Council shall from time to time by resolution establish fees for the issuance of permits and the minimum amounts of insurance or bonds to be required by the Chief of Police or his/her designee in conjunction with the issuance of permits. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.160 - Costs-Payment by permittee. 
    Except as other-wise provided, the permittee shall pay for all the City's costs relating to a permit, including but not restricted to, the following: 
A.  The permit issuance fee; 
B.  Engineering, inspection, transportation and tests; 
C.  Repairing or restoring the City streets and altering, removal, replacement and repair of all appurtenant facilities including utilities to the same or equal condition as they were before damage as a result of the permittee's activities; 
D.  Furnishing and/or maintaining any lights, barricades, or warning devices; 
E.  Alteration, removal, replacement, and/or repair to traffic signals and devices, the removal of temporary and/or permanent traffic stripes and any other expense for traffic control; 
F.  Removing or remedying any hazardous conditions and tree trimming. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.170 - Issuance fees and charges deposited. 
    Issuance fees and charges collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.180 - Issuance fee-Exempt organizations. 
    The following shall be exempt from paying the permit issuance fee: the United States, this state, any county, any city, any school district, and other district organized under state law, and any permittee who has previously paid such a fee in connection with a state and/or county permit relative to the move for which the permit is being sought. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.190 - Costs charged to permittee-Which costs applicable. 
    Whenever any costs are to be charged to a permittee and no other method for the calculation of such costs is specified, such costs are the actual costs including applicable indirect cost in accordance with current practice for charging for work performed for the public. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.200 - When permit issued for which inspection is made by governmental agency. 
    The Chief of Police or his/her designee may issue a permit without any inspection fee or deposit for work which will be inspected by a qualified government agency which will furnish evidence that the work will be inspected and will comply with standards required by the City. If an applicant receives such a permit and the government agency fails to make the inspection or fails to file the evidence as required, the Chief of Police or his/her designee may inspect the work and the permittee shall pay the actual cost of such inspection and any remedial work. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.210 - Deposit-Requirements. 
    Every applicant for a permit, other than public entity organizations listed in Section 10.32.180, shall be required to provide a cash deposit or other adequate security as determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, to guarantee payment of fees, costs and charges due or which may become due under this Chapter whenever, in the opinion of the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the City will incur costs in conjunction with a particular permit not reasonably covered by the permit fee, or if the permittee does not fulfill all of the permit requirements, or where the nature of the particular application is such that it can reasonably be anticipated that the City will suffer costs in conjunction with the move. Agencies exempt from such deposits are not relieved of payment of all costs incurred by the City by reason of a move. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.220 - Deposit-Form. 
    A cash deposit may be in the form of a special deposit for each permit or in the form of a general cash deposit to be maintained as security for all the permits issued to an applicant. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.230 - Deposit-Other types of security. 
    In lieu of deposit the Chief of Police or his/her designee may accept from an applicant other types of security such as a surety bond and other approved security. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.240 - Deposit-Deduction of fees and costs. 
    The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall bill the permittee or deduct from the deposit made or maintained by the permittee for all fees and costs chargeable under this chapter. The remainder of any deposit shall be refunded. A permit issuance fee may be refunded when a permit has been issued as a result of error not made by the permittee. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.250 - Building permit required prior to applying for permit. 
    Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary contained in this chapter prior to the issuance of any permit by the Chief of Police or his/her designee as provided for in this chapter, any applicant for such a permit shall first obtain from the building inspector a building permit whenever such a permit is otherwise required by applicable law. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.32.260 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.32 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.36 - BICYCLES 

10.36.010 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this Chapter: 
    "Bicycle" shall mean a device upon which any person may ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain or gears, and having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement. 
    "Bikeway" means all facilities that provide primarily for bicycle travel. For purposes of this Chapter, bikeways shall be categorized as follows: 
1.  Class I bikeways, such as a "bike path," which provides a completely separated right-of-way designated for the exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians with cross flows by motorists minimized. 
2.  Class II bikeways, such as a "bike lane," which provide a restricted right-of-way designated for the exclusive use of bicycles with vehicle parking and pedestrians prohibited, but with cross flows by pedestrians and motorists permitted. Class II bikeways shall either (a) be posted with "No Parking" signs, or (b) the adjacent curb shall be painted red. 
3.  Class III bikeways, such as an on-street or off-street "bike route," which provide a right-of-way designated by signs or permanent markings and shared with pedestrians or motorists. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.020 - Designation of bikeways. 
    The streets or portions of streets designated for class II and class III bikeways and the days and times of such designations shall be established by resolution of the City Council, and such bikeways shall be marked and signed appropriately. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.030 - Restrictions on riding in roadways. 
A.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
B.  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast. 
C.  Whenever a class I bikeway has been provided, bicycle riders shall use the bike path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.040 - Riding on sidewalks prohibited. 
    Except for authorized police bicycle patrols, no person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk adjacent to a bikeway, unless signs are erected permitting use of such sidewalk by bicycles. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.050 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle, as defined in Section 231 of the Vehicle Code without having attached thereto a California bicycle license, upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of this City. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.060 - License; issuance. 
    The Police Department of this City is authorized and directed to obtain original bicycle license plates and renewal license plates from the California Department of Motor Vehicles and to issue the same at the Police Department. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.070 - License; condition of bicycle. 
    The bicycle shall be equipped and maintained as provided for in Section 21201 of the Vehicle Code at all times when operated in the City, and before a license can be issued. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.080 - License; effect. 
    Licenses, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycle, for which said license has been issued, upon all the streets, alleys and public highways, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, in the City. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.090 - License plate and registration. 
    The City shall provide, for a fee, a California bicycle license and maintain registration records as provided in Division 16.7 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.100 - License; bicycle attachment. 
    The plate shall be attached to the frame of the bicycle below the seat on the seat post portion of the frame. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.110 - License plate removal. 
    The plate shall not be removed. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.120 - License; recordation. 
    The Police Department shall maintain registration records. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.130 - License; notification of bicycle destruction. 
    It shall be the duty of every license holder to notify the Police Department within ten days of the destruction of the bicycle. The registration card shall be returned to the Police Department at that time. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.140 - Fees; initial purchase and renewal. 
    The initial license fee shall be $1.50 and shall be renewed every 36 months thereafter upon payment of a renewal fee of $1.50. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.150 - Fees; penalty for late renewal. 
    A penalty of $1.00 shall be paid for the late renewal of the license. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.160 - Fees; payment. 
    All licenses shall be payable in advance to the Chief of Police or his/her designee, who is designated as the license collector for all fees dues under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.170 - Fees; transfer. 
    Pursuant to sections 10.36.200 and 10.36.210 of this Chapter, a bicycle license may be transferred when the ownership of said bicycle is transferred and a fee of $0.50 shall be paid for the registration of such transfer. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.180 - Dealer; secondhand dealer purchase report. 
    All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are required to make a weekly report to the Police Department, giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and frame number thereof, and the number of the license plate attached thereto, if any. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.190 - Dealer; report of sale. 
    All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are required to make a weekly report to the Police Department, giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and frame number thereof, and the number of the license attached thereto, if any. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.200 - Registration transfer; report. 
    It is the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle, to report such sale or transfer by returning to the Police Department the registration card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom said bicycle was sold or transferred; and such report shall be made within ten days of date of said sale or transfer. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.210 - Registration transfer; application. 
    It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration thereof within ten days of the date of such transfer of registration. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.220 - Impoundment. 
    In addition to the penalty hereinabove set forth, the Police Department, or any of the members thereof, may impound any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and retain possession of same until the license provided for herein obtained by the owner of such bicycle. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.230 - Citation; issuance. 
    The Police Department may issue a citation to any person who operates a bicycle in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.36.240 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.36 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.38 - SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLER-SKATING 

10.38.010 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Ordinance only, the following definition shall apply: 
A.  "Roller skates" shall mean and include any footwear or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used by the wearer in moving, including in-line skates known as "roller blades". The definition of these terms shall include a single roller skate, or parts thereof, used by the wearer in moving. 
B.  "Skateboard" or "skateboards" shall mean and include any board of any material which has wheels attached to it where such wheels may be used for movement or propulsion. 
C.  "Official sign" shall mean and include a sign which meets the specifications set by the Beaumont Police Department and which prohibits, authorizes or otherwise regulates the operation of roller skates and/or skateboards. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.38.020 - Designated areas. 
    The City Council may, from time to time, designate by resolution certain areas for the use of roller skates and skateboards. Such areas shall be posted with official signs that shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
A.  That skateboarding and roller-skating is permitted in the designated area; 
B.  That such activities are permitted only on specified days of the week and hours during such days; 
C.  That all skaters and skateboarders shall wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads pursuant to California Health and Safety Code, Section 25906; 
D.  That no skateboarding or roller-skating shall be permitted between sunset and sunrise the following day unless the designated area is adequately lighted; 
E.  That no roller skater or skateboarder shall impair his or her hearing, vision or mental faculties by, for example, wearing headphones, mask or hood, or using drugs or alcohol; 
F.  That users do so at their own risk, and shall assume unconditional responsibility for the safety of themselves, other skaters and passersby; 
G.  That the designated area must be kept clean and that any debris or other material left by the users of the designated area will result in the revocation of the privilege to use the designated area for roller-skating and skateboarding purposes. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.38.030 - Skateboarding or roller-skating on private property. 
    No person shall ride, propel, or in any manner operate a skateboard or roller skate on, along or over any privately owned property in the City where the owner, manager or other person in charge has prohibited the same. 
    The prohibition set forth in this Section shall not apply until notice has been provided by means of official signs placed in locations and in sufficient numbers so that they are reasonably likely to be seen by those engaging in the prohibited activities. For purposes of this Section, "private property" shall be deemed to include property owned by other public agencies within the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.38.040 - Skateboarding or roller-skating as a nuisance. 
    No person shall use a skateboard or roller skates within or on an area designated for such activities by the City Council in a manner which creates a nuisance. For purposes of this Section, "nuisance" is defined as an activity which: 
A.  Violates the rules and regulations set forth on official signs posted at the designated area; or 
B.  Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists; or 
C.  Generates loud or unreasonable noise. 
D.  May not install or place any type ramp or rails in the public right-away or street. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.38.050 - Parents of roller skate/skateboard riders. 
    The parent of any child, and/or guardian of any ward, shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.38.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.38 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.40 - TRAINS BLOCKING INTERSECTIONS 

10.40.010 - Prohibited acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to operate or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.40.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.40 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.42 - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

10.42.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall apply: 
    "Alternative transportation modes" means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking. 
    "Applicable development" means any new development project that is determined to meet or exceed the employment threshold using the criteria contained in this ordinance. An applicable development also includes developments which are owned and/or managed as one unit, such as a business park or shopping center that also meets or exceeds the employment threshold. 
    "Bicycle facilities" means any capital improvements which would benefit an employee who rides a bicycle to their worksite, including shower facilities, locker facilities, bicycle parking, etc. 
    "Change of use" means a development or facility space of a lessee which has altered its initial use to another use not related to the previous. (Example: office space changes its use to a retail store). 
    "Developer" means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing this ordinance as determined by the property owner. 
    "Employee" means any person employed by a firm, person(s), business, educational institution, non-profit agency or corporation, government agency or other entity which employees 100 or more persons at a single worksite. 
    "Employment generation factors" refers to factors developed for the use by the jurisdiction for protecting the potential employment of any proposed development project. 
    "Employer" means any person(s), firm, business, educational institution, government agency, non-profit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs 100 or more persons at a single work site, and may either be a property owner or tenant of an applicable development project. 
    "Employment threshold" means the minimum changes made to establish a transportation demand management and trip reduction plan at an applicable development project to a level which satisfies this Chapter. 
    "Minimum standards" means the minimum changes made to establish a transportation demand management and trip reduction plan at an applicable development project to a level which satisfies this Chapter. 
    "Mixed-use development" means new development projects that combine any land uses one with another. 
    "New development project" means any non-residential project being processed where some level of discretionary action by a decision making body is required. 
    "Peak period" means those hours of the business day between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday, which TDM strategies such as this Chapter identify as the priority period for reducing work related vehicle trips. 
    "Property owner" means the legal owner of the applicable development and/or its designee (i.e. developer). 
    "Rideshare facilities" means any capital improvements which would benefit an employee who rideshares to the worksite, including on-site amenities, preferential parking, and rideshare drop-off areas at the entrance of the worksite. 
    "Site development plan/permit" means a precise plan of development that may be subject to public hearing before the Planning Commission and/or City Council. 
    "Transit facilities" means any capital improvements which would benefit an employee who uses any form of transit to travel to the worksite, including transit stops, shelters, bus turnouts, park and ride lots, and other transit amenities. 
    "Transportation Management Association" means a voluntary entity of employers, property owners and other interested parties who share a mutual concern for local transportation problems. TMA's have the ability to collectively pool participants' resources to address these issues. A TMA must still satisfy the goals established for individual employers pursuant to this Chapter. 
    "Transportation Demand Management" means the implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TOM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle such as carpools, vanpools, and transit; reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips or shifts in the time of vehicle commutes to other than peak periods. 
    "Worksite" means a building, or group of buildings, located within the jurisdiction which are in physical contact or separated solely by a private or public roadway or other right-of-way, and which are owned or operated by the same employer (or by employers under common control). 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This Chapter shall apply to all new development projects and/or change of use projects that are estimated to employ a total of 100 or more persons as determined by the methodology in this Section below: 
B.  For purposes of determining whether a new development project is subject to this Chapter, the total employment figure will be determined as follows: 
1.  Employment projections developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by the Planning Director; or 
2.  Employment projections developed by the applicant, using the following employee generation factors by the type of use. 
Land Use Category Gross Sq. Ft./Employee Retail/Commercial 500 Office/Professional 250 Industrial/Manufacturing 525 Hospital 300 Hotel/Motel 8-1.2 employees/room  
The employment projection for a development of mixed use or multiple uses shall be calculated on a case by case basis based upon the proportion of development devoted to each type of use. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.030 - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions, the following uses and activities shall be specifically exempt from this Chapter: 
A.  Development projects expected to employ fewer than 100 persons. 
B.  Temporary construction activities on any affected project, including activities performed by engineers, architects, contract subcontractors and construction workers. 
C.  Other temporary activities, as defined in the City Development Code, or as authorized by the City when such temporary activities shall discontinue at the end of the designated time period. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.040 - Minimum standards. 
A.  All applicable new developments (non-residential developments which employ 100 or more persons) which are owned and managed as one unit shall submit a Transportation Demand Management Plan prepared by a traffic engineer, transportation planner or other qualified professional identifying the traffic impacts associated with the proposed project and including design recommendations and mitigation measures, as appropriate, to address on and off site project impacts. Said TDM Plan shall comply with AQMD Regulation XV requirements and shall have the goal of achieving a vehicle occupancy rate (VOR) of 1.3. The Plan shall also indicate specific strategies and guidelines to reduce the amount of trips and increase the amount of non-vehicular transportation. 
B.  All property owners of applicable new development (non-residential development and/or changes of use shall be subject to the required capital improvement standards as specified in this Section. These standards must all be addressed to realize if they are applicable to their development. These required standards may be used to achieve the vehicle occupancy rate of 1.3. Property owners of all applicable developments shall include in their project Site Development Plans provisions to address each of the following capital improvements: 
1.  Transit facilities (on and off site); 
2.  Bicycle facilities; and 
3.  Rideshare facilities. (See options in Section 10.42.040(D) for specific capital improvement strategies) 
C.  The TDM Plan also includes operational standards that shall be implemented within 60 days after occupancy of the development by an employer. Operational standards are standards which employers, TMA's or a managing office of a development administered as one unit are required to implement to achieve the goals of AQMD's Regulation XV program. 
D.  These options may be included in the property owner TDM Plan to fulfill both the capital improvement standards and the operational standards: 
1.  Alternate work schedule/flex-time; 
2.  Telecommunicating: Establish telecommunicating or work at home programs to allow employees to work at home or at a satellite work center; 
3.  Bicycle facilities: Provide bicycle parking facilities equal to five percent of total required automobile parking spaces; and preserve two percent of the gross floor area for employee locker and shower facilities; 
4.  On-site employee housing and shuttles: Provide affordable on-site housing and shuttles to and from the housing areas and the work areas; 
5.  Preferential parking for carpool vehicles; 
6.  Information center for transportation alternatives; 
7.  Rideshare vehicle loading areas; 
8.  Vanpool vehicle improvements; 
9.  Bus stop improvements; 
10.  On-site child care facilities; 
11.  Availability of electrical outlets for recharging of electric vehicles; 
12.  On-Site amenities such as cafeterias and restaurants, automated teller machines and other services that would eliminate the need for additional trips; 
13.  Airport shuttle service to hotels and spas; 
14.  Contributions to funds providing regional facilities such as park and ride lots, multi-model transportation center, and transit alternatives in the area; IS. Incentives for mass transit usage including provision of a bus pass, additional pay, flex-time or other; 
15.  Implementation of a parking fee; 
16.  Restriction of business hours; 
17.  Restrict delivery hours; 
18.  Provide a direct pedestrian path from the closest transit stop into the facility; 
19.  Contribute up to $1.00/square foot to a housing subsidy fund so that affordable housing can be created closer to the employer; 
20.  Resort/hotel areas develop rideshare and shuttle programs; 
21.  Create golf cart circulation systems; 
22.  If an applicable development is on a current transit route, provide a transit stop, shelter, trash barrels, benches, shade and wind protection, and bus turnouts; 
23.  If an applicable development is not located on a current transit route, contribute to a fund which will be used to provide transit amenities; 
24.  If an applicable development is not located on a major arterial, statements 22 and 23 should be considered; 
25.  Provision of a bicycle lane; and 
26.  Provide other creative or innovative strategies to reduce vehicle trips. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.050 - Processing time limits. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Director or Designee to inform the applicant of a transportation demand management review application, and that the determination of completeness of such an application be within 30 days of receipt. Once the application is complete, the Planning Director shall either approve or deny the application within 60 days or forward the application to the Planning Commission for their approval, assuring that the application is processed expediently (no more than 90 days). 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.060 - Filing procedure and evaluation. 
A.  A request for TDM approval shall be made through application forms provided by the Planning Department. The application for such approval shall be filed with the Planning Director within 30 days of receipt. 
B.  A processing fee shall be paid at the time the completed application is filed with the Planning Department. The fee shall be as established in the Planning Department Fee Schedule. 
C.  An application for TDM shall be supplemented by plans and other pertinent information to adequately portray all applicable aspects of a proposal. 
D.  The Planning Director shall review applications and arrive at recommendations or approvals as appropriate, by considering aspects of a conformance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.070 - Renewal/review for compliance. 
A.  Each employer to which this Chapter applies shall submit to the Planning Director for review copies of all plans and reports submitted to the AQMD pursuant to requirements of Regulation XV. The Planning Director shall cooperate with the AQMD to assure that all TDM Plans comply with current AQMD Requirements. The City of Beaumont shall cooperate with the AQMD in enforcement action. 
B.  The Code Enforcement Officer shall also review any approved TDM Plans for compliance if complaints about the TDM Plan and its non-compliance are recorded to the City. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.080 - Fee for initial review and program monitoring. 
    For purpose of meeting its obligations under this Chapter, the City Council of the City of Beaumont may set fees deemed necessary to review and monitor TDM Plans. (See Planning Department Fee Schedule). The following fees shall be imposed on the subject property owner(s): 
1.  A trip reduction/TDM Plan Review Fee as determined in the Planning Department Fee Schedule at the time of initial project application submission to the Planning Department; 
2.  A trip reduction/TDM Plan Renewal/Review for Compliance Fee as determined by the Planning Department Fee Schedule at the time of initial review by the Planning Department. 
This shall be a fixed fee charge to all applicable developments for the purpose of defraying the costs of processing and reviewing the trip reduction/TDM Program. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.090 - Enforcement and penalties. 
    For purposes of ensuring that applicable developments comply with the provisions of this ordinance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, following written notice to subject property owner(s), initiate enforcement action(s) against such property owner(s) or designee(s) which may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Withholding issuance of a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy; 
2.  Non-compliance infraction; 
3.  Issuance of a stop work order. The Code Enforcement Officer may also penalize for non-compliance in other ways in his/her discretion. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.42.100 - Appeals. 
A.  An appeal may be made by the property owner(s) or designee(s) of any applicable development regarding decisions made by the Planning Director on provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Such appeals may be reviewed by the City Council for resolutions, who must act on such appeals within 30 days of such filing. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.44 - TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES 

10.44.010 - Delegation of authority. 
    The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to temporarily close any City street or public way, or portions thereof, as provided for herein. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.44.020 - Temporary closure. 
    Any street or public way, or portions thereof, may be temporarily closed for celebrations, parades, local special events, and other purposes when, in the opinion of the City Manager or his/her designee, the closing is necessary for the safety and protection of persons who are to use such portions of the street or public way during the temporary closing. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.44.030 - Posting signs. 
    Upon determining to close any street or public way, or portions thereof, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause signs, stanchions, barriers, vehicles or other devices to be placed at a location or locations which will give notice to the public indicating that such street or public way or portion thereof is closed to vehicular traffic. All signs shall be placed no later than 72 hours prior to the closure of the street. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.44.040 - Operating a vehicle on closed street. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle upon a street or public way, or any portion thereof, that is temporary closed by order of the City Manager or his/her designee unless such person is expressly authorized to do so. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.44.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter 10.44 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
Chapter 10.50 - GOLF CART TRANSPORTATION 

10.50.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The City Council has been informed and advised that alternate forms of clean, non-polluting transportation, such as golf carts, are essential to maintain good air quality and the overall environmental quality of the City. The purpose of this golf cart transportation plan is to encourage the increased use of such transportation, and to establish rules and regulations for the operation of golf carts in the City. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.50.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the definitions respectively ascribed to them in this Section. Whenever any words or phrases used in this Chapter are not defined but are defined in the California Vehicle Code and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
A.  "City" means the City of Beaumont. 
B.  "Golf cart" means an electric powered motor vehicle having not less than three wheels in contact with the ground and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less which is designed to be and is operated at not more than 25 miles per hour and is designed to carry golf equipment and not more than two persons, including the driver. (CVC Sec. 345) 
C.  "Golf cart travelways" means all publicly-owned facilities that accommodate golf cart travel. There shall be four categories of golf cart travelways: 
1.  "Golf cart routes" mean certain specified residential streets and alleys that are posted with speed limits of 25 miles per hour or less and are shared with pedestrians, bicyclists and other motorists. Golf Cart Routes shall, from time-to-time, be designated by resolution of the City Council. (CVC Secs. 345 and 515) 
2.  "Golf cart lane" means a portion of the public roadway that is designated by signs and pavement markings for golf cart travel, to allow golf carts to travel adjacent to automobile traffic but within a separate striped space. Bicyclists may share golf cart lanes if there is not a separate bicycle lane on the roadway. Golf cart lanes shall, from time-to-time, be designated by resolution of the City Council. 
3.  "Golf cart shared path" means a right-of-way adjacent to motor vehicle travel lanes, designated for shared use by golf carts, pedestrians and bicyclists, with cross traffic by motor vehicles minimized. Golf cart shared paths shall, from time-to-time, be designated by resolution of the City Council. 
4.  "Golf course cart crossing zones" means locations on public streets for use by golf carts to cross, at any time other than during darkness, on any street, other than a state highway, which has a posted speed limit of 45 miles per hour or less and which is immediately adjacent to a golf course. Golf course cart crossing zones shall from time-to-time, be designated by resolution of the City Council. (CVC Sec. 21115.1) 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.50.030 - Design criteria for golf cart travelways. 
A.  Generally: Golf cart travelways shall only be used by permitted golf cart operators between thirty minutes prior to sunrise and thirty minutes after sunset. Operation of golf carts during hours of darkness is strictly prohibited. 
B.  Design Criteria for Golf Cart Routes: Golf cart routes shall be designated parallel to local streets having a maximum posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour. All golf cart route transitions between routes and other golf cart travelways shall be clearly marked. Golf cart routes shall be shared with pedestrians, bicycles, and motorists. 
C.  Design Criteria for Golf Cart Lanes: Golf cart lanes shall be designated parallel to local streets having a maximum posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour. The Lanes shall be no more than six feet wide measured from the adjacent lip of gutter to the inside of the painted line, have a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet from overhead obstructions, have a smooth paved or concrete surface, and be separated from vehicle travel lanes by one solid four-inch wide white line. On approaches to intersections golf cart lanes should end with "dashed" cart lane lines beginning 200 feet from the intersection. Golf cart lanes shall be designated by appropriate pavement legends and signs posted along the route in conformance with this Chapter. 
D.  Design Criteria for Golf Cart Shared Paths: Golf Cart Shared Paths shall be separated from motor vehicle traffic by an elevated path at least six inches above the traffic lane, be a minimum of six feet in width in each direction, have a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet from overhead obstructions, have an improved hardened surface capable of weights of up to 1,300 pounds, and be constructed with a maximum grade of ten percent% and a radius of curvature of not less than 15 feet. Such Paths shall be designed for golf carts to be safely operated at speeds of up to 15 miles per hour unless otherwise posted, and shall clearly designate all transitions to other golf cart travelways. 
1.  Two-way golf cart shared paths shall have a minimum width of 14 feet with a center lane stripe plus a one foot shoulder on each side (total right-of-way of 16 feet). 
E.  Design Criteria for Golf Cart Crossing Zones: Except as approved by the City Council, and designated by adequate signs, markings, and other safety features, the City shall only permit golf cart crossings at signal or stop sign controlled intersections. Golf carts shall only cross such intersections within the right-hand travel lane adjacent to any marked crosswalk. Crossings shall be designated by appropriate signs in conformance with this Chapter, including a warning sign 200 feet in advance of the crossing, as well as signs at the crossing. Crossings shall to meet minimum Caltrans Highway Design Manual sight distance requirements. 
F.  Design Criteria for State Highway and Local Street Crossings: The City shall only permit golf cart crossings on State highways, and local streets with posted speed limits greater than 25 miles per hour, at fully-controlled intersections improved with stop signs or signals. Golf carts shall only cross such intersections within the right-hand travel lane adjacent to any marked crosswalk. No marked crossings, other than those for bicyclists and pedestrians, will be provided. Crossings shall be designated by appropriate signs in conformance with this Chapter, including a warning sign 200 feet in advance of the crossing, as well as signs at the crossing. Crossings shall to meet minimum Caltrans Highway Design Manual sight distance requirements. 
G.  Design Criteria for Signs and Pavement Markings: Except in gated communities, all golf cart routes, lanes, and paths shall be identified with signs and/or pavement markings spaced not more than 300 feet apart, in each direction. All golf cart travelway transitions and travelways shared with bicycles and pedestrians shall also be identified with signs and pavement markings. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.50.040 - Minimum design criteria for golf carts. 
    The following minimum design criteria shall be required to be met for golf carts proposed to be operated on golf cart paths, lanes, routes, and crossings. 
A.  Golf carts shall be electrically powered. 
B.  Golf carts shall be of a shape and size that conforms to industry standards for manufactured golf carts. 
C.  Golf carts shall present an unobstructed view to the rear from the driver's seat. 
D.  Golf carts shall have a covered operator and passenger compartment 
(Ord. 969, 6/2010) 
10.50.050 - Minimum safety equipment requirements for golf carts. 
    Golf carts shall have the following minimum safety equipment: 
A.  Brake lights, conforming to CVC 24603; 
B.  Front and rear turn signal indicator lights, conforming to CVC 24952 and 24953; 
C.  Either left side and right side mirrors, left side and rear view mirrors, or a multidirectional cross bar rear mirror, conforming to CVC 26709; 
D.  Head lamps, conforming to CVC 24400 and 24410, except the minimum mounting height shall be 16 inches; 
E.  Tail lights, conforming to CVC 24600; 
F.  Reflectors, conforming to CVC Section 24607; 
G.  Parking brake, conforming to CVC 26450; 
H.  Horn conforming to CVC 27000; 
I.  Windshield, conforming to CVC 26700; 
J.  Seat belts, for both driver and passenger position, in a two-point lap belt mounting, conforming to CVC 27315; 
K.  A golf cart locking device to prevent unauthorized movement and theft; 
L.  A backup buzzer. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.50.060 - Golf cart operator safety criteria. 
    The following safety criteria for operators are the minimum criteria set and adopted by the City Council: 
A.  Golf cart operators shall be at least 18 years old and have a valid driver's license. 
B.  Golf cart operators shall comply with the financial responsibility requirements established by the Calif. Vehicle Code, Section 16000 et seq. 
C.  Golf cart operators shall maintain golf carts in a safe condition, ensure that it is safely loaded, and shall ensure that an unobstructed view to the rear is maintained at all times while in operation on travelways. 
D.  Each golf cart operator and passenger shall wear a seatbelt at all times. 
F.  Golf cart operators shall comply with all of the rules of the road that pertain to automobiles, and shall not operate a cart under the influence of intoxicants. 
G.  Golf carts shall bear a valid City golf cart permit while in operation on travelways. Possession of a valid City golf cart permit does not authorize travel on public streets not designated by the City Council as golf cart routes and lanes. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.50.070 - Golf cart permit. 
    No golf cart shall be operated on golf cart travelways without bearing a valid City-issued golf cart permit. Prior to the issuance of a golf cart permit, the following shall be required: 
A.  Operators shall attend a training presentation describing the requirements of the City Golf Cart Transportation Program; 
B.  An equipment inspection of the golf cart by the City or its authorized agent; 
C.  Payment of an annual permit fee in an amount established from time-to-time by Resolution of the City Council to allow the City to recover a portion of the cost of inspection, enforcement and golf cart facility maintenance. It shall be the operator's responsibility to ensure that the golf cart permit shall be renewed every July, at which time each golf cart shall be re-inspected; and 
D.  A current permit decal showing proof of compliance shall be visibly posted on the left rear fender of each permitted golf cart. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.50.080 - Golf cart parking facilities. 
    Efficient use of golf cart transportation is dependent upon convenient access to the golf cart circulation system at both ends of local trips. This access is provided via the golf cart parking facilities which should be made available for golf carts at home and at local destinations, such as retail centers, parks and other recreation facilities, medical offices, and educational facilities. 
    Recognizing the potential for extensive golf cart use, floor plans for residences should feature options for dedicated golf cart parking facilities, including a dedicated electric outlet for recharging electric golf carts. 
    In order to promote golf cart travel, golf carts should be given preferential parking at all golf-cart accessible public and private facilities, including retail centers, parks and other recreational facilities, medical offices, and educational facilities. Parking spaces shall comply with Chapter 17.06, Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards, in the City of Beaumont Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
10.50.090 - Penalty for violation. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating any provision of this Chapter 10.50 shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Sections 1.17.200 et seq., or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.010. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be in the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Beaumont Municipal Code Section 1.16.040. 
(Ord. 953, 9-1-09) 
TITLE 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapter 12.04 - OFFICIAL STREET PLAN 

12.04.010 - Purpose-Adoption. 
    In order to promote, coordinate and secure orderly and efficient, economical and consistent development plans and improvements, and in order to serve the public health, welfare and safety of the City, precise plan lines for the reservation of future rights-of-way and an official plan of streets and highways are hereby adopted to be hereafter known as the official plan of streets and highways of the City. 
(Ord. 325, § 1, 1961) 
12.04.020 - Incorporation of map. 
    The official plan of streets and highways is set forth on the map published concurrently, made a part of, and attached to, the ordinance codified in this Chapter and on which is shown by appropriate symbol the official plan of streets and highways of the City. 
(Ord. 325, § 2, 1961) 
12.04.030 - Amendment or adoption procedure to conform to statutory law. 
    The procedure for preparing and adopting additions to or amendments of all or any portion of the official plan of streets and highways, or adopting a precise plan of streets and highways, shall conform to the provisions of Title 7, Government Code Chapter 1, Conservation Code Chapter I, Conservation and Planning Law. 
(Ord. 325, § 3, 1961) 
12.04.040 - Proceedings for establishing precise plan lines. 
A.  Proceedings for the establishing of precise plan lines and for the rights-of-way along any portion of streets or planned streets in the City may be initiated by the City Council, the planning commission of the City or by petition. Descriptions of the streets or portions of streets along which such precise plan lines are sought to be established shall be given and shall be accompanied by a sketch or map showing the streets and lot line or lines and the proposed rights-of-way lines and the distances thereof from the established centerline or existing line or regularly established property line or surface and subsurface buildings and structures. 
B.  Before any action shall be taken by the City Council concerning proposed precise plan lines for future rights-of-way, the matter shall be referred to the planning commission of the City for a report and recommendation. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing and shall give notice of the time and place thereof by publishing notice thereof at least once in a newspaper of general circulation of the City, and by causing notices to be posted along the planned rights-of-way in front of each block where such precise plan lines are proposed to be established, and if any block is over 500 feet in length, such notices shall be posted not more than 500 feet apart along the planned right-of-way. Upon completion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall submit its report and recommendation to the City Council forthwith concerning the matter. 
(Ord. 325, § 4, 1961) 
12.04.050 - Proceedings for amendments or additions. 
    Additions to or amendments of the official plan of streets and highways by precise plan shall be adopted by ordinance in the manner prescribed by law. 
A.  Each such amendatory ordinance shall contain as a part thereof a detailed map of the streets or highways project or projects made the subject of such amendment, provided, that, for purposes of legal publication a suitable reduced scale map may be used. 
B.  Precise plans for streets and highways, when adopted, pursuant to this Chapter, shall in each separate case be consecutively numbered as an item under this subsection of this section. 
C.  Before the adoption of any such precise plan lines as authorized in this chapter, the City Council shall pass a resolution of intention designating the precise plan line or lines to be established, which the resolution shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the City. 
D.  A copy of the resolution shall be posted conspicuously along the streets in front of each block where such precise plan lines are proposed to be established, if any block is over 500 feet in length, a copy of the resolution shall be posted not more than 500 feet apart along the streets where such plan lines are proposed to be established. 
E.  The resolution shall contain a notice of the day, hour, place, when and where any and all persons having any objections to the establishment of the proposed precise plan line or lines may appear before the City Council and present any objections which they may have to the proposed precise plan line or lines as set forth in the resolution of intention. 
F.  The time for hearing shall be not less than 15 nor more than 30 days from the date of the adoption of the resolution of intention, and the publication and posting of the resolution shall be made at least ten days before the date of the hearing. 
G.  At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections and protests to the establishment of the proposed precise plan line or lines, any person having any interest in any land upon which the precise plan lines are proposed to be established, may file with the City Clerk a written protest or objection against the establishment of the precise plan line or lines designated in the resolution of intention. Such protest must be in writing and delivered to the City Clerk not later than the hour set forth for the hearing, no other protest or objection shall be considered. 
H.  All opponents may appear before the City Council at the hearing in person or by counsel and be heard in support of their protest or objection. 
I.  At the time set for hearing or any time to which the hearing may be continued, the City Council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests or objections so made, and its decision shall be final and conclusive. The City Council shall have the power and jurisdiction to sustain any protests or objections and abandon the proceeding, or to deny any and all protests or objections, and order, by ordinance, the establishment of the precise plan line or lines described in the resolution of intention, or to order the same established with such changes or modification as the City Council may deem proper. 
J.  After the adoption of the resolution of intention and prior to the time the ordinance establishing a precise plan line or lines in such proceedings becomes effective, no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building or structure between any proposed precise plan lines and the street lines, and any permit so issues shall be void. 
K.  From and after the taking effect of any ordinance establishing any precise plan line and lines, it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct any building or structure within the space between the street lines and the precise plan lines so established, and the building inspector shall refuse to issue any permit for any building or structure proposed to be erected within such space, any permit so issued shall be void. 
(Ord. 325 §5, 1961) 
12.04.060 - Existing buildings, utilities or other installations. 
    If buildings, utilities or other installations exist within reserved areas as set forth in Section 12.04.050, on the effective date of any ordinance codified in this chapter, or on the effective date of any item subsequently adopted under the provisions of this chapter, such nonconforming buildings, utilities or other installations may continue with reasonable maintenance but shall not be enlarged or replaced. 
(Ord. 325 §6, 1961) 
12.04.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300.00, or by imprisonment in the City jail for a period not exceeding 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. If such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense, for every day during any portion thereof, any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, they shall be punishable for it as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 325 §8, 1961) 
Chapter 12.08 - PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

12.08.010 - Adoption of standard specifications. 
    The most current editions of the following specifications are hereby adopted as the standard specifications for all public works within the City: 
A.  For Streets: Riverside County Ordinance No. 461; 
B.  For Flood Control Facilities: The Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District's Standards for Flood Control Facilities. 
C.  For Sanitary Sewer Facilities: The Eastern Municipal Water District's Standards for Sanitary Sewer Facilities. 
D.  For All Other Public Works: The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, edited by the Southern California Chapter of the American Public Works Association and the Associated General Contractors of America; 
    Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the above-listed standard specifications, most current editions thereof, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this Chapter, as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 827, 2002) 
12.08.020 - Copies on file. 
    Three copies of the standard specifications for public works adopted in Section 12.08.010 shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 827, 2002) 
12.08.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any individual violating any provision of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. Such individual shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted. Any individual convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be: (1) guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; (2) guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance provision and perpetrated by the same individual. The third and any additional violations on the same ordinance and perpetrated by the same individual shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or six months in jail, or both. Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Payment of any penalty herein shall not relieve an individual from responsibility for correcting the violation. Any person who removes any notice of order posted, as required in the Chapter, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 827, 2002) 
Chapter 12.12 - EXCAVATIONS 

12.12.010 - Definitions. 
    "Highway" or "street" means a right-of-way within which improvements are constructed for the conveyance of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and includes all highways, streets roads and alleys. The rights-of-way and improvements shall be in conformity with the Engineering Department Standards and Specifications. Improvements include, but are not limited to, paved roadway, curb, gutter, sidewalk, landscaping, utilities and survey monuments. 
(Ord. 544 §10, 1982) 
12.12.020 - Administration of chapter. 
    Subject to the control of the City Council, there is delegated to the City Engineer the administration of the use of City streets for excavations and encroachments, the maintenance, planting and removal of trees, and the issuance, modification and revocation of permits for such uses. 
(Ord. 544 §1, 1982) 
12.12.030 - Permit-Previously issued. 
    Any permit issued prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue in force as if issued pursuant to this chapter, and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, unless and until and to the extent that such permit shall be revoked, modified or superseded pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 544 §11, 1982) 
12.12.040 - Permit-Required for encroachments and excavations. 
    No person, including firm, corporation, public district, public agency or political subdivision, shall make any excavation in, or construct, install or maintain any improvement, structure or encroachment in, on, over or under, any City street or the right-of-way thereof without first obtaining from the City Engineer a permit therefor, or maintain the same without such permit or in violation of the terms or conditions thereof. 
(Ord. 544 §2(part),1982) 
12.12.050 - Permit-Issuance. 
    Such a permit shall be issued by the City Engineer only upon written application therefor, and payment of the required fee or fees. Such permit shall be issued only if the applicant is a public service agency having lawful authority to use the right-of-way or street for the purpose specified, or the owner of an easement for such purpose within the street right-of-way, or if the City Engineer is satisfied that the use proposed is in the public interest and that there will be no substantial injury to the highway or impairment of its use as the result thereof, and that the use is reasonably necessary for the performance of the functions of the applicant. 
(Ord. 544 §2(part), 1982) 
12.12.060 - Permit-Revocable and conditional. 
    Every such permit shall be revocable and the uses and installations there under shall be subordinate to any prior right of the City to use the right-of-way for public road purposes. Every such permit shall be conditional upon the right of the City to require the permittee to relocate or remove the structure or encroachment at the permittee's expense for the benefit of the City or to relocate or remove the structure or encroachment at the permittee's expense, where in the opinion of the City Engineer such action is reasonably necessary to avoid a crossing conflict, for the benefit" of any public district, public agency or political subdivision, or of any other person or agency having a right to use the City street for the purpose proposed; but the acceptance of a permit shall not be deemed a waiver by the permittee of any contractual or statutory right against any party for reimbursement of the expense of such removal or relocation. 
(Ord. 554 §2(part), 1982) 
12.12.070 - Permit-Subject to certain conditions. 
    Every such permit shall be subject to such conditions as the City Engineer determines are necessary to assure the safety of the traveling public and the restoration of the surface of the street and the foundations thereof, and of the portions outside the traveled roadway. 
(Ord. 554 §2(part), 1982) 
12.12.080 - Permit-Surety bond or deposit required. 
    The City Engineer may require such surety bond or deposit of money as in his judgment may be necessary to secure performance of the conditions of the permit and the replacement or restoration of the surface and the subsurface of the street and the right-of-way, and any survey monuments or other improvements that may have been disturbed. 
(Ord. 554 §2(part), 1982) 
12.12.090 - Permit-Application. 
    Each application for a permit under this chapter shall be in writing in the name of the person or agency owning the encroachment and controlling the excavation and shall be signed by such person or agency or by his or its agent authorized in writing. The application shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City Engineer and shall contain or be accompanied by such information as he may require. Each permit shall be in writing, signed by the City Engineer or his representative, on a form to be furnished by him. 
(Ord. 554 §5, 1982) 
12.12.100 - Permit-Application-Fees. 
    The permit fees and inspection fees required by this chapter shall be paid at or after the time the application is filed, but in any event before the permit is issued. The fees for permits, which shall not be refundable, and for inspections shall be as contained in Chapters 15.08 and 15.20. The City Engineer may waive the inspection fee when in his opinion the public safety or convenience does not require inspection of an excavation or encroachment. 
(Ord. 554 §6, 1982) 
12.12.110 - Work arranged done by City Engineer-Failure by permittee-Expense and costs. 
    The City Engineer may, where convenient to road work he has programmed, or for other reasons of City convenience, arrange to do the work of replacement to pavement or restoration of the roadway at the expense of the permittee. If any permittee fails to refill "any excavation or to restore the City street or right-of-way to its condition prior to the excavation, the City Engineer shall have the right to perform the work and collect in the name of the City the cost thereof. 
(Ord. 554 §2(part), 1982) 
12.12.120 - Exceptions. 
    An excavation or encroachment may be made without first obtaining a permit for repair or replacement of a facility previously installed only when necessary for the immediate protection or preservation of life or property; and, provided, that such a permit is obtained on the first business day thereafter; and, provided further, that the excavation is made in such manner as to give full protection to the users of such street and the City. 
(Ord. 554 §3, 1982) 
12.12.130 - Tree removal. 
    No person, firm, corporation, public district, public agency or political subdivision 'shall remove or severely trim any tree planted in the right of- way of any City street without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer to do so. Such permit shall be issued without fee, if the City Engineer is satisfied that such removal or trimming is in the public interest or is necessary for the improvement of the right-of-way or the construction of improvements on adjacent land. He may impose such conditions as he deems reasonable or necessary, including requirements for the work to be done only by a qualified tree surgeon or tree trimmer actually engaged in that business, and for bond, insurance or other security to protect person and property from injury or damage. The provisions limiting trimming of trees shall not apply to any public utility maintaining overhead power or communication lines pursuant to franchise, where necessary to prevent interference of a tree with such installation. A permit for removal of a tree may be conditioned upon its relocation or replacement by one or more other trees of a kind or type to be specified in the permit. 
(Ord. 554 §4, 1982) 
12.12.140 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following shall be exempted from payment of the permit fee for an extension or encroachment: 
1.  Street improvements under special assessment or improvement district proceedings conducted by the City Council; 
2.  Public utility and public service facilities installed pursuant to specific contract with the City and under the control thereof. 
B.  The following shall be exempted from payment of the inspection fee for an excavation or encroachment: 
1.  A public utility which holds and at the time of application for the permit has held for at least five years a franchise from the City or the state authorizing" the use of public highways for: 
a.  A public utility installation not involving excavation in a City street or right-of-way other than as usual and necessary for the installation of poles, guys and anchors at locations entirely outside of the traveled portion of the right-of-way or established sidewalks, improved or unimproved, or 
b.  For a public utility installation involving only a bell hole excavation to install, repair or replace a consumer service connection; 
2.  Street improvements under special assessment or improvement district proceedings conducted by the City; 
3.  Public utility and public service facilities installed pursuant to specific contract with the City and under the control thereof. 
C.  Subdivision improvements to be constructed pursuant to agreement with the City are exempt from the chapter. 
(Ord. 554 §7, 1982) 
12.12.150 - Blanket permits. 
    The City Engineer may issue to any applicant a blanket permit for a series of excavations or encroachments of the same type or types. This provision shall be broadly applied, to reduce administrative costs of both City and applicant. 
(Ord. 554 §8, 1982) 
12.12.155 - Waiver of fees for nonprofit public utilities district. 
A.  Upon receipt of written request by any nonprofit utilities district, the City Engineer may waive any fees for permits issued to said district. Any full or partial denial of any requested waiver shall be made in writing, and the district may at either of the two regularly scheduled City Council meetings following the date of the written denial, appeal the denial to the City Council. The grant or the denial of the waiver by the City Council at a regularly noticed meeting shall be deemed final. 
B.  This waiver shall not apply to any expenses or fees normally charged under this section which are solely attributable to work performed only on the project of said district. 
(Ord. 614 §I, 1985) 
12.12.160 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person who does any act for which a permit is required by this chapter without first obtaining such permit, or who, having obtained such a permit, violates any term or condition thereof and thereby jeopardizes or injures person or property, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to deprive any person of any civil right or remedy he may have against a violator of this chapter, nor to deprive the City of any cause of action which it may have against such violator, regardless of any prosecution or conviction under this section. 
(Ord. 554 §9, 1982) 
Chapter 12.16 - UTILITY UNDERGROUNDING 

12.16.010 - Definitions. 
    Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
B.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
C.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated services. 
D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area of the City within which poles, overhead wires' and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.16.030. 
E.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 496 §1, 1978) 
12.16.020 - Public hearing by the City Council. 
A.  The City Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least 15 days prior to the date thereof. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. 
B.  Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Manager shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Ord. 496 §2, 1978; Ord. 570 §9, 1983) 
12.16.030 - Designation of area as underground utility district. 
    If, after any such public hearing the City Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within the designated area, the City Council shall by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground" installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 496 §3, 1978) 
12.16.040 - Continuance of overhead facility work prohibited- Exception. 
    Whenever the City Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.16.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.16.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 496 §4, 1978) 
12.16.050 - Emergency or unusual circumstances. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed 30 days, without authority of the City Manager in order to provide emergency service. The City Manager may grant special permission on such terms as the City Manager may deem appropriate in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 496 §5, 1978) 
12.16.060 - Types of facilities exempt. 
    This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any City facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Manager; 
B.  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of overhead structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from/one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 496 §6, 1978) 
12.16.070 - Notification of affected utilities and owners of real property. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
B.  Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 496 §7, 1978) 
12.16.080 - Underground construction required according to rules, regulations and tariffs on file. 
    If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within the district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 496 §8, 1978) 
12.16.090 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.16.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.030 the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
B.  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears and 'must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Beaumont. If notice if given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises the City Clerk shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
C.  The notice given by a City Clerk to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the City Clerk will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
D.  If upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Manager shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the City Manager may in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the City Manager he shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The City Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
E.  The City Clerk shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing, such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this chapter for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the City Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
F.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the City Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
G.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the City Council the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City Clerk and the City Clerk and the City Council is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. 
(Ord. 496 §9, 1978) 
12.16.100 - Removal of City-owned equipment. 
    The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.030. 
(Ord. 496 §10, 1978) 
12.16.110 - Extension of time for removal. 
    In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to section 12.16.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 496 §11, 1978) 
12.16.120 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 12.20 - TREES 

12.20.010 - City superintendent-Inspection and order of removal. 
    The City Street Superintendent may inspect any and all trees, shrubs and plants, which are in any street, or which, standing on any private property, overhang or project into any such street, to determine whether any of the same, or any part thereof, appear to be dead, liable to fall, dangerous, or an obstruction to such public travel on any such street. The City Street Superintendent may cause the same or such parts thereof as are dead, liable to fall, dangerous, or an obstruction to such public travel, to be cut down, and if in any such street, to be removed there from. 
(Ord. 286 §1, 1957) 
12.20.020 - Notice to owner-Exception-Occasion to contest. 
A.  Except in case of manifest public danger and immediate necessity, no such trees or shrubs standing on any private property, from the duty to keep trees and shrubs upon private property shall be wholly cut down or removed unless ten days' notice in writing of its intention to cause the same to be done shall be given by the City Street Superintendent to the owner or occupant of the estate nearest such tree or shrub. 
B.  If the owner or occupant of such private property, within seven days after the giving of such notice, files with the City Street Superintendent his objection in writing to such removal, such tree or shrub shall not be cut down or removed, unless the City Street Superintendent gives the owner or other proper person who has been given such notice, a reasonable opportunity to be heard in support of such objection and shall thereafter approve in writing, the removal of the same, if such objection is not sustained. 
(Ord. 286 §2, 1957) 
12.20.030 - Liability. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the City, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property, under his control, together with sidewalks and parkways, in front of such private property, in a safe condition. 
(Ord. 286 §3, 1957) 
12.20.040 - Maintenance of trees. 
    The owner of lots fronting on any portion of a public street, or if the area between the property line and the street is maintained as a park or parking strip, shall maintain any trees thereon in such condition that the trees will not endanger persons or property, and which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of public streets. 
(Ord. 286 §4, 1957) 
12.20.050 - Notice of dangerous trees-Delivery. 
A.  When any tree or part thereof appears to be dead, is liable to fall, is dangerous, or is an obstruction to public travel, whether or not the tree or shrub is on any private property and overhangs or projects on any street, or is in any street or any public grounds of the City, the City Street Superintendent shall by notice in writing notify the owner or person in possession of the property to cut down, trim or remove the tree or shrub. 
B.  The notice mentioned in subsection A of this section may be given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or to the person in possession of the property, or by mailing a postal card, postage prepaid, to the person in possession of such property, or to the owner thereof at his last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment rolls of the county. 
(Ord. 286 §§5, 6, 1957) 
12.20.060 - Notice of dangerous trees-Contents. 
    The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and may further specify that if the tree or shrub is not cut down, trimmed, or removed within ten days after notice, the City Street Superintendent may perform such work, and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the property upon which such tree or shrub is located. 
(Ord. 286 §7, 1957; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 1-5-2016 ) 
12.20.070 - Removal by City. 
    If the tree or shrub is not cut down, trimmed, or removed as required by the notice, the City Street Superintendent may forthwith perform such work. 
(Ord. 286 §8, 1957; Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 1-5-2016 ) 
12.20.080 - Notice of cost. 
    Upon completion of the work, the City Street Superintendent shall cause notice of the cost thereof to be given in the manner specified in this chapter for the giving of notice to perform the work, which notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the City Council will hear and pass upon a report by the City Street Superintendent, of the cost of the work together with any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any person liable to be assessed for the cost of the work. 
(Ord. 286 §9, 1957) 
12.20.090 - Assessment against property. 
    Upon completion of the work the City Street Superintendent shall prepare and file with the City Council, a report specifying the work which has been done, the cost thereof, a description of the real property upon which the tree was located, and the assessment against the parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. 
(Ord. 286 §10, 1957) 
12.20.100 - Hearing. 
    Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the City Street Superintendent, together with any objections which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the work of cutting down, trimming, or removing any tree or shrub. Thereupon, the City Council shall make such modifications in the report as it may deem just after which, by resolution, the report as submitted or as modified shall be confirmed. The decision of the City Council on all protests and objections shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 286 §11, 1957) 
12.20.110 - Special assessment and lien. 
    The cost of cutting down, trimming any tree or shrub may be assessed by the City Council against the parcel of property upon which same is located, and such cost so assessed if not paid within five days after its confirmation by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the parcel of property, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof, which lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest thereon is paid, or until discharged. 
(Ord. 286 §12, 1957) 
12.20.120 - Recording of lien. 
    The City Council after confirmation of the report of the City Street Superintendent, may order a notice of lien to be delivered to the county auditor, who shall enter the amount thereof on the county assessment book opposite the description of the particular property, and the amount shall be collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties, together with all other taxes against the property. Thereafter the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest, and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as provided for ordinary City taxes. 
(Ord. 286 §13, 1957) 
12.20.130 - Private arrangement. 
    The City Street Superintendent may cut down, trim, or remove any trees in any street, or which overhang any street, by private arrangement for reimbursement with the owner of the lot or parcel of land upon which, or fronting upon which the trees are situated. 
(Ord. 286 §14, 1957) 
12.20.140 - Hedges on corner lots. 
    Owners or occupants of any corner lot or premises in the City shall keep all hedges, and growth in the nature of hedges, at the corner of intersecting streets, whether on the sidewalk or within the lot or premises, so trimmed that the height thereof shall not exceed three feet above the curb level for a distance of 30 feet measured horizontally in any direction from the point of intersection of the property lines at street corners. 
(Ord. 286 §15, 1957) 
Chapter 12.24 - PARKS-HOURS 

12.24.010 - Hours designated. 
A.  No person shall be or remain in any public park (see attachment to ordinance codified in this chapter) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day to 6:00 a.m. of the next succeeding day. 
B.  This section shall not be applicable to any person who is present in said park performing duties relating to employment by the City. 
C.  The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall be authorized to close any City park whenever, in his best judgment, it is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the community. No person shall be in or remain in any public park after having been informed that such park has been closed by order of the Chief of Police or his designee. 
(Ord. 518 §1, 1980) 
12.24.020 - Exception. 
    The exception to the above shall be when an organization or group has reserved the pavilion for an organized function. This exception does not apply to subsection C of Section 12.24.010. 
(Ord. 518 §3, 1980) 
12.24.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 12.28 - BUILDING NUMBERING 

12.28.010 - Numbering by owner-Base lines. 
    All buildings having a frontage on any street or avenue in the City shall be numbered by the owner, agent or occupant thereof as provided in this chapter as follows: California Avenue shall form the base line for numbering all east and west streets and avenues and the southern City limit shall be the base for all streets running north and south. Odd numbers shall be assigned to the south side of the streets and west side of the avenues, and all numbers shall alternate in regular numerical order. In all blocks ten feet shall be allowed to each number. 
(Ord. 9/12/1913 (part); Ord. 24 §1, 1913) 
12.28.020 - East, west, north and south numbering-Numbers designated. 
    For the purposes of numbering on streets and avenues, the buildings shall be counted from the base lines; thus streets running east or west of California Avenue shall be designated as East or West and the north and south streets and avenues shall be numbered running north. The first number allotted in each first block shall be 101 and the first number in the second block shall be 201 and the first number in each succeeding block shall commence with a new hundred. The number on each building shall be so placed as to be easily read. 
(Ord. 9/12/1913(part); Ord. 24 §2, 1913) 
12.28.030 - Previously erected buildings--Provisions for buildings erected subsequent to passage of ordinance. 
    All buildings now erected shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter by January 1, 1914. All buildings erected after January 1, 1914 shall be numbered within 30 days of the time of their completion. The owner, agent or occupant of any such building shall ascertain the proper number from the superintendent of streets of the City. 
(Ord. 24, § 3, 1913) 
12.28.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 12.30 - MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 5, 2016 , amended Ch. 12.30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12.30, §§ 12.30.010-12.30.150, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 879, § 1, adopted April 5, 2005. 

12.30.010 - Duty of property owners to maintain sidewalks. 
    The owners of lots or portions of lots adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area between the property line of the lots and the street line, including parking strips, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right, shall repair and maintain such sidewalk areas and pay the costs and expenses therefor. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.020 - Liability for injuries to the public. 
    The persons required by Section 12.30.010 to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a duty to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and non-dangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property owner or person in possession of such property to maintain the sidewalk area in a non-dangerous condition as required by Section 12.30.010, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the owner or occupier shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injury. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.030 - Notice to repair. 
    When the City becomes aware that any portion of the sidewalk area is out of repair or pending reconstruction and in condition to endanger persons or property or in condition to interfere with the public convenience and the use of such sidewalk area, the Superintendent of Streets or "Director" shall notify the owner or person in possession of the property fronting on that portion of such sidewalk area so out of repair, to repair the sidewalk area. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.040 - Manner of giving notice. 
    Notice to repair may be given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or to the person in possession of the property facing upon the sidewalk area so out of repair, or by mailing a postal card, postage prepaid, to the person in possession of such property, or to the owner thereof at his last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment rolls of the City or the County of Riverside or to the name and address of the person owning such property as shown on the records of the office of the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.050 - Mailing and posting of notice. 
    The postal card shall contain a notice to repair the sidewalk area so out of repair, and the Director shall, immediately upon the mailing of the notice, cause a copy thereof printed on a card of not less than eight inches × ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. In lieu of posting a copy of the mailed notice on the property as provided in this section, the Director may, but not less than seven days nor more than ten days after the mailing of the first postal card notice, mail an additional postal card, postage prepaid, marked "Second Notice" to the person to whom the first postal card notice was addressed. The second notice shall otherwise contain the material required by this Chapter, but shall not extend the time for commencing repairs specified in Section 12.30.060. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.060 - Contents of notice. 
    The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and how it is to be done, and shall further specify that if the repair is not commenced within two weeks after notice is given and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the Director may make such repair, and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the property. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.070 - Repair by the Director on default of property owner. 
    If the repair is not commenced and prosecuted to completion with due diligence, as required by the notice, the Director may forthwith repair the sidewalk. Upon the written request of the owner of the property facing the sidewalk so out of repair, as ascertained from the last equalized assessment roll, or as shown in the records of the office of the City Clerk, the Director may repair any other portion of the sidewalk fronting on the property that is designated by the owner. The Director shall have the power to prescribe the form of the written request. The cost of repair work done by request pursuant to this Section shall be a part of the cost of repairs for which, pursuant to this Chapter, subsequent notices are given, hearings are held and assessment and collection procedures are conducted. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.080 - Appeal of notice. 
    The notice may be appealed as an administrative citation pursuant Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.090 - Assessment of costs against property; time for payment. 
    The cost of the repair may be assessed by the City against the parcel of property fronting upon the sidewalk upon which such repair was made, and such costs so assessed, if not paid within 15 days after an invoice is sent, shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel of property, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof, which lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest thereon is paid, or until it is discharged of record. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.100 - Filing of notice of lien; form and contents. 
    The Director may file a lien in the office of the County Record of the County of Riverside. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.110 - Operation and effect of recording notice of lien; foreclosure. 
    From and after the date of recording of the notice of lien, all persons shall be deemed to have had notice of the contents thereof. The notice of lien may include claims against one or more separate parcels of property, whether contiguous or not, together with the amount due, respectively, from each such parcel. The statute of limitation shall not run against the right of the City to enforce payment of the lien. If any such lien is not paid the City may file and maintain an action to foreclose such lien in the same manner and under the same procedure, so far as applicable, as that under which delinquent bonds are foreclosed under the Improvement Act of 1911 (Streets and Highways Code, Section 5000 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.120 - Alternative method of collection; addition to tax bill. 
    As an alternative method of collection of the amount of the lien, the Director, after confirmation of the report of the Director, may order the notice of lien to be turned over to the Riverside County Auditor, who shall enter the amount thereof on the County Assessment Book opposite the description of the particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property. The notice of lien shall be delivered to the Riverside County Auditor before the date fixed by law for the delivery of the Assessment Book to the Riverside County Board of Equalization. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
12.30.130 - Time for payment of assessments. 
    The City Manager may, in its discretion, determine that the payment of assessments of $100.00 or more may be made in annual installments, not to exceed five, and that the payment of assessment so deferred shall bear interest at six percent per year on the unpaid balance. Interest shall begin to run on the thirty-first day after the confirmation of the assessment. In the event any installment is not paid when due, the entire balance of the assessment shall become due and payable and shall be collected either by way of a foreclosure action or added to the property tax bill. 
( Ord. No. 1065, § 1(Exh. A), 1-5-2016 ) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BEAUMONT, CA 
____________ 
VOLUME II 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
TITLE 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapter 13.04 - SEWAGE DISCHARGES 

13.04.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows: 
A.  "B.O.D." (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
B.  "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
C.  "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
D.  "Combined sewer" means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
E.  "Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from handling, storage and sale of produce. 
F.  "Industrial waste" means the waste arising from, or associated with, an industrial operation. Such operation shall be understood to include production, processing, packing or canning of fruits, vegetables, meat or beverages, laundering of clothes in public laundries or public self service laundries, production of fertilizers, keeping of livestock and operation of dairies, production or dyeing of textiles, production of soap or other detergents or chemicals, plating of materials, processing or reclamation of refuse and kinds of manufacturing and other similar operations. Waste not comparable in composition and volume to normal domestic sewage shall be considered to be industrial waste, except as described in this chapter. It includes the washing of equipment, or spaces used in industrial operation, unless otherwise provided for. It does not include wastewater from the operation of restaurants, hotels, schools, hospitals, vehicle service stations, wash racks, garages, and establishments for regeneration of water softening apparatus, or places of retail business; and does not include the wastewaters from lunchrooms, toilets, or washrooms in industrial establishments. 
G.  "Inspector" means the building inspector, street superintendent, or such other person or persons as shall be designated by the City Council to implement this Chapter. 
H.  "Interceptor" means an approved structure designed to temporarily slow down or retain the sewage from the premises immediately prior to discharge into the public sewer to permit the separation of material deleterious to the operation of the sewage system and treatment plant. 
I.  "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, both ditch, lake, or any other body of surface water or groundwater. 
J.  "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
K.  "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-quarter of an inch in any dimension. 
L.  "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and into which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
M.  "Sewage sewer" or "storm drain" means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
N.  "Storm sewer" or "storm drain" means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
O.  "Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
P.  "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. 329 §1, 1961) 
13.04.020 - Unlawful discharges. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, polluted cooling water or polluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
B.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the inspector. Unpolluted commercial and industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the inspector and after receiving waste discharge requirements from State of California Regional Water Control Board No. 8 to a storm sewer, combined sewer, natural outlet or sanitary sewer. 
C.  Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall discharge any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
1.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
2.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
4.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; 
5.  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feather, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works; 
6.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; 
7.  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
8.  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; 
9.  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
D.  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having: 
1.  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or 
2.  Containing more than 300 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
3.  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section 13.04.020 having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review and approval of the inspector. Where necessary in the opinion of the inspector, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
a.  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 300 parts per million by weight; or 
b.  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 13.04.020, or 
c.  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the inspector and of the Water Pollution Control Commission of the state, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing. 
(Ord. 329 §2, 1961; Ord. 522 §1, 1981; Ord. 958; 10/20/09) 
13.04.030 - Special restrictions-Vehicle servicing stations. 
A.  Any station maintained for the servicing or repair of roadway vehicles shall install and maintain a sand and oil interceptor within two months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Wastewaters from toilets shall not be allowed to pass through this interceptor, but all wastewaters arising from the servicing and repair of vehicles shall pass through this interceptor before discharge to a public sewer of the City. 
C.  If the service station does not include facilities for the washing of more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have an operating fluid capacity of not less than six cubic feet and an accessible effective water surface not less than four square feet. "Accessible effective water surface" is here understood to mean a surface which is easily accessible for cleaning and which at the time will retain oil floating on the surface of water passing through the trap under conditions of use. 
D.  If the service station has facilities for washing more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have an operating fluid capacity of at least 12 cubic feet and an accessible effective water surface of at least six square feet, and shall be as much larger than this as is necessary so that a seven-day accumulation of sand and oil will not together fill more than 25 percent of the fluid capacity. 
E.  The interceptor shall be designed so as to retain any oil and grease which will float and any sand which will settle. It shall be watertight and structurally sound and durable. It shall be easily accessible for cleaning and also for inspection of the inspector. 
(Ord. 329 §3, 1961) 
13.04.040 - Interceptors-Used previous to these provisions. 
    Any interceptor legally and properly installed at a vehicle service station before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified in Section 13.04.030, provided such interceptor is effective in removing sand and oil and is so designed and installed that it can be inspected and properly maintained. If the City building inspector finds either by engineering knowledge or observation, that an interceptor is incapable of retaining adequately the sand and oil in the wastewater flow from a service station, he shall condemn such interceptor and declare that it does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 329 §4, 1961) 
13.04.050 - Interceptors-Information on file. 
    The City building inspector shall maintain a file, available for public use, of suitable designs of sand-and-oil interceptors. This shall be for informational purposes. Installation of an interceptor of a design shown in this file, or of any design meeting the size requirements set forth in this chapter shall not impute any liability to the City for the adequacy of the interceptor under actual conditions of use. It shall not relieve the owner or proprietor of responsibility for keeping sand and oil out of the sewer. If his interceptor is not adequate under the conditions of use, he shall construct one which is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose. 
(Ord. 329 §5, 1961) 
13.04.060 - Interceptors-Meeting standards required to approve plumbing of station. 
    The building inspector shall not approve the plumbing of a vehicle servicing or repairing station if it does not have a sand-and-oil interceptor meeting the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 329 §6, 1961) 
13.04.070 - Interceptors-Proper maintenance required. 
    The sand-and-oil interceptor of a vehicle servicing station shall be properly maintained. It shall be cleaned as often as is necessary to assure that sand and oil do not accumulate in sufficient amount to impair the efficiency of the interceptor, or in such amount that sand and oil will pass out with the effluent. When an interceptor is cleaned, the accumulated sediment and floating material shall be removed and legally disposed of otherwise than to a sewer. An interceptor is not considered to be properly maintained if for any reason it is not in good working condition. It is not considered to be properly maintained if sand and oil accumulations total more than 25 percent of the operating fluid capacity. The owner of any service station, the lessee or sublessee, if there be such, and the proprietor, operator or superintendent of such station are individually and severally liable for any failure of proper maintenance of such interceptor. 
(Ord. 329 §7, 1961) 
13.04.080 - Special restrictions-Water treatment waste. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or persons to discharge or cause to be discharged from any establishment, industry or apparatus used for commercial regeneration of potable water treating units, or of replaceable elements of water treating equipment, any waste containing in excess of 0.36 pounds of chloride ion per kilogram of softening capacity regenerated, or to discharge any quantities of other water-treating wastes which may cause or contribute to difficulties in operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer system or sewage treatment service. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person or persons to discharge or cause to be discharged from any establishment, industry or apparatus used for regeneration of water treating equipment or for treating of all or a portion of water used by the person or persons, any waste containing more than 0.20 pounds of chloride ion per kilogram of softening capacity regenerated, or to discharge any quantities of other water-treating wastes which may cause or contribute to difficulties in operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer system or sewage treatment works. This section does not apply to use of individual residential water softening units when regeneration is performed at the residence where the unit is located. 
(Ord. 329 §8, 1961) 
13.04.090 - Commercial apparatus to regenerate ion-exchange water softeners. 
    Any person desiring to install, enlarge, or replace any apparatus to regenerate ion-exchange water softeners in a commercial regeneration establishment shall submit to the inspector a letter describing the intended installation or alteration and describing the arrangements which will serve to prevent the improper discharge of the wastewater, including installation and operation of recording monitoring devices simultaneously recording the conductivity and rate of flow of waste discharge or other means of ascertaining compliance with Section 13.04.080. Within ten days, the inspector shall reply, stating whether or not the disposal arrangements are adequate to insure against the addition of excessive mineral salts to the sewage or the ground. No person shall regenerate an ion-exchange water softener or elements thereof, in a commercial regeneration establishment unless he has a letter from the inspector approving as satisfactory the proposed arrangements for disposal and monitoring of the wastewaters. Such apparatus may be operated only so long as the method of wastewater disposal is as approved by the inspector. Alteration in the method of disposal may be made only after communication to the inspector and receipt of a letter of approval as in the first instance. 
(Ord. 329 §9, 1961) 
13.04.100 - Water treatment apparatus-Inspection and reports. 
    A person installing or operating a water treatment apparatus of the kind described in Section 13.04.080 shall make such apparatus accessible to the inspector for inspection, and shall make such reports as the inspector may request as to the operation of the apparatus. 
(Ord. 329 §10, 1961) 
13.04.110 - Water treatment apparatus-Exemptions. 
    Any water treating apparatus which has a rated capacity less than five gallons in an eight-hour period shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Multiple units installed to supply water to the same points of use shall be considered as a single apparatus for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. 329 §11, 1961) 
13.04.120 - Waivers. 
    If wastewater contains or may contain the constituents which will cause it to fail to conform to any of the requirements set forth in this chapter for sewage or industrial waste discharges, but if the inspector finds that the discharge will not cause harm to the sewerage system nor unreasonable or inequitable burden in operation of the system, and that it will not cause deterioration of the quality of the sewage effluent of the City, then he may grant approval for discharge to the sewer with waiver or modification of the requirement which would not be met. In this letter of approval he shall include a statement regarding the requirement that is waived with reasons as to why the waiver is reasonable. A copy of this letter shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 329 §12, 1961) 
13.04.130 - Discharge to storm drains, pits and lands. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into any storm drain or stormwater-channel or natural watercourse, whether currently carrying water or not, into any pipe or waterway leading to such drain, channel or watercourse, or which will cause expense to the City in maintaining the proper functioning of same, or which will cause public nuisance or public hazard or which will cause detrimental pollution of natural surface or subsurface waters. 
(Ord. 329 §13, 1961) 
13.04.140 - Prohibited disposal. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge or cause to be deposited or discharged into any sump which is not impermeable or into any pit or well, or on to the ground, or into any storm drain or watercourse any material which by seeping underground or by being leached or by reacting with the soil can cause such alterations of usable underground waters as to be detrimental and as to be beyond the range of the effects of ordinary-nonindustrial land uses on underground waters into which such wastes may seep, or which will violate any requirements of the State Water Pollution Control Board. 
(Ord. 329 §14, 1961) 
13.04.150 - Appeals. 
    Any person may appeal a decision of the inspector in respect to the provisions of this chapter, to the City Council. Action of the City Council shall be final insofar as the authority of the City is concerned. 
(Ord. 329 §15, 1961) 
13.04.160 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 13.08 - SEWER SYSTEM 
VIII. - Enforcement, Damages and Penalties 
I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

13.08.010 - Interpretations. 
    If ambiguity arises concerning the application of or the meaning and intent of this chapter, the City Manager shall ascertain pertinent facts concerning the matter and set forth in a written opinion his findings and the application and interpretation. The opinion shall be forwarded to the City Clerk for filing as an administrative interpretation of this chapter. Thereafter the administrative interpretation shall govern the matter until and unless changed by' subsequent administrative interpretation or by an amendment to this chapter. 
(Ord. 416 §806, 1970) 
13.08.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the meanings set out in this section: 
A.  "An accessible sewer" means a public sewer which is within a public right-of-way or sewer easement adjacent to or crossing the property. 
B.  "Adjusted ground floor area" for a one-floor building is the same as the adjusted total floor area. For multiple-story buildings, any area of any floor above the lowest floor shall be added insofar as its projection to the level of the lowest floor adds any amount to the adjusted area contributed by lower floors. 
C.  "Adjusted floor area" means the total area within the outside walls of a building, additive for multiple floors, but with these adjustments: 
1.  A room serving essentially for the sheltering of motor vehicles shall be excluded, provided it has no sewer drain; 
2.  An area of screened porches shall be reduced by one-half, provided it has no sewer drains; 
3.  A roofed but unenclosed and unscreened area or areas overhung by roofs, shall be included as porches, excluding, however, the roofed area determined by lines parallel to the edge of the roof and within six feet horizontally therefrom. 
D.  "Building sewer" means the drain from the building plumbing to the property line. 
E.  "Charges" means all future charges after date of adoption of this chapter shall be from time to time fixed by resolution of the City Council. 
F.  "City manager" means the City Manager of the City, or the person engaged by the City and authorized to perform the duties assigned to the City Manager in this chapter. The term includes his deputies and representatives. 
G.  "Floatable oil and grease" means the oil and grease floating to the surface of a sample of the water when it is retained for one hour in a quiescent condition in a vessel with vertical walls, filled to a depth of 30 centimeters. 
H.  "Industrial wastewater" means the sewage from an industrial process. Such processes shall be understood to include, but are not limited to, processing of petroleum or petroleum products, processing or canning of foods or beverages except for foods consumed on the premises; keeping of livestock and operation of dairies; production of detergents or chemicals; cleaning of tanks, tank trucks, or barrels; chemical and electro-chemical finishing of metals; operation of laboratories; processing or reclamation of refuse, all kinds of manufacturing; and other similar operations. It includes the washing of equipment or spaces used in industrial operations. It does not include the sewage from toilets, washrooms, or kitchens in industrial establishments, or the sewage from the operations of restaurants, hotels, schools, hospitals, laundries, vehicles service stations, garages, wash racks, or retail stores. 
I.  "Owner," used in reference to a parcel of real property, means the holder of legal title to that property, or the administrator, lessee, proprietor, or other person who can act responsibly to construct buildings or facilities on or for that property. 
J.  "Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group, and includes the plural as well as the singular. 
K.  "Public sewer" means a main line sewer dedicated to public use and owned by the City and available to receive connections from buildings. 
L.  "Service lateral" means the drain designed or intended to convey sewage from the building sewer to the public sewer. 
M.  "Sewage" means water that has been polluted or contaminated by use in a residence, institution, industrial establishment, business or recreational building, and includes, but is not limited to, any wastewater collected by the plumbing drains of any building. The meaning is not intended to include rainwater or irrigation water except insofar as such waters become polluted by admixture with sewage from buildings. 
N.  "Sewage works construction fund" means the fund that has been established for the purpose of the extension and expansion of sewers and sewage treatment facilities. 
O.  "Sewerage system of the City" means a system of sanitary sewers, pump stations, treatment plants, and other appurtenant facilities owned by the City, whether located within the City limits or outside. 
(Ord. 416 Art. 1, 1970) 
II. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

13.08.030 - General policy. 
    It is unlawful for a person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property any human fecal matter, garbage, or other objectional waste. It is unlawful to discharge to the ground or to a natural watercourse any sewage, including, but not limited to, domestic or industrial wastewater or other polluted water, in a manner that would create a hazard or nuisance or that would impair the usefulness of groundwater or surface water. 
(Ord. 416 §201, 1970) 
13.08.040 - Private facilities. 
A.  Where connection to a public sewer is not required under other provisions of this article, an owner may with written permission from the City Manager construct private sewage disposal facilities conforming to the requirements of the Plumbing Code and the health officer. 
B.  A private sewage disposal facility must be under the same ownership as the property served. Neither the disposal facility nor the property served shall be separately sold. 
(Ord. 416 §202, 1970) 
13.08.050 - Conditions requiring connection to public sewer. 
A.  No building for human use shall be constructed in the City without proper toilet facilities complying with the requirements of other applicable ordinances, regulations, and laws. If any part of a new building is constructed within 200 feet from a public sewer accessible to the parcel of property, the building shall be connected to the sewer. The City Manager may grant a temporary deferment of the requirements to connect if future construction of a nearer or more easily accessible sewer is anticipated. 
B.  If the City Manager finds that a nuisance is arising from the private disposal of sewage, he shall notify the owner. The owner shall take all necessary steps to abate the nuisance, and shall within 60 days connect to a public sewer if one is accessible to the property and is within 200 feet of the building where the sewerage originates. Enlargement of an existing private disposal facility shall not excuse an owner from the requirement to connect. If a private disposal facility is removed or rendered inoperative, the work and manner of abandonment shall be nuisance free and in accordance with the requirements of the Plumbing Code and the health officer. 
C.  The pumping of a cesspool or septic tank in excess of three times in a one-year period, or the rising or overflowing or substantial risk of rising, or overflowing of sewage on the surface of the ground, or the unsanitary disposal of any wastewater is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 416 §203, 1970) 
III. - POLICY ON OWNERSHIP AND ON CONNECTIONS TO THE PUBLIC SEWERS 

13.08.060 - Sewers within the City. 
    Sewers and appurtenances constructed in any part of the City, served or to be served by a sewerage system of the City, but excluding building sewers and service laterals, shall be deeded to the City before being placed in use. 
(Ord. 416 §301, 1970) 
13.08.070 - Sewers outside the City or assessment district in City. 
    Before any sewer outside the City or any sewer outside an assessment district in the City shall be connected to the sewer system of the City, it shall be deeded to the City including all upstream sewers and appurtenances except service laterals and building sewers; provided, however, the City may make a contract with a responsible operator of such outside sewer systems whereby the City will upon proper compensation, receive into its system the sewerage collected by the outside system. 
(Ord. 494 §2, 1978: Ord. 416 §302, 1970) 
13.08.080 - Access only by permit. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make a connection with or opening into, or alter or disturb any part of the sewerage system of the City, or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining written permission from the City Manager, and paying any required charges. 
(Ord. 416 §303, 1970) 
13.08.090 - Multiple connections. 
A.  The City Manager will permit two or more separately owned properties to use a common connecting pipe to a public sewer; provided, that it can be shown that the proposed connection is adequately sized for the several properties. 
B.  If two or more separately owned properties wish to use a single connection to the sewer, any pipeline used jointly by them shall be in a public right-of-way or in a sewer easement made in favor of the City to provide access for maintenance. The joint portion of the connection shall be deeded to the City, and become part of the City sewerage system. 
(Ord. 416 §304, 1970) 
13.08.100 - Owner bears connection cost. 
    The costs for construction of a service lateral and for the making of a connection to a public sewer including applicable administration and inspection fees shall be borne by the owner of the property served or other person acting on his behalf. The fees will be paid to the City with the signed service application. 
(Ord. 416 §305, 1970) 
13.08.110 - Maintenance of sewer laterals. 
    The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the service lateral. If there is a failure of a service lateral not remediable by use of rodding tools, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to call this to the attention of the City. As a public service, the City may, at its own expense, make the necessary repairs. 
(Ord. 416 §306, 1970) 
IV. - USE OF CITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM 

13.08.120 - General policy. 
    It is unlawful for a person to discharge into the sewer unnecessary quantities of water or solids beyond the reasonable requirements of a home, business, industry, or other lawful user. It order that the sewerage system may be used efficiently and equitably and in the public interest, the use of the sewers shall be subject to the restrictions set out in this article. 
(Ord. 416 §401, 1970) 
13.08.130 - General limitations of sewer use. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for a person to discharge or to cause to be discharged into a public sewer or to an opening leading to a public sewer any of the following: 
A.  Earth, rock, concrete, glass, metal filings or metal objects, or other materials which will not be carried by the sewage stream, or any object which will cause clogging of a sewage pump or sewage sludge pump; 
B.  Garbage which has not first been shredded so that no particle is more than one-quarter inch in mean diameter; 
C.  Solid or semisolid material such as garbage, trimmings, cuttings, offal, or other wastes produced in the processing of meats, fruits, vegetables, foodstuffs, or similar material except garbage produced in the preparation of, or residues from, meals served on the premises; 
D.  Substances which may produce strong odors in the sewers or sewage treatment plant; 
E.  Compounds which may produce strong odors in the sewers or sewage treatment plant; 
F.  Overflow from a septic tank or cesspool, or any liquid or sludge pumped from a cesspool or septic tank, except at such place and in such manner as may be prescribed by the City Manager; 
G.  Stormwater or runoff from any roof, yard, driveway, or street; 
H.  Unpolluted water or water sufficiently pure so that it can be discharged into available natural watercourses or storm drains, except as approved by the City Manager; 
I.  Material which will cause damage to any part of the sewerage system or abnormal sulfide generation or abnormal maintenance or operation costs of the sewerage system or which may cause any part of the sewerage system to become a nuisance or a menace to public health, or a hazard to workers, or which will cause objectionable conditions at the final point of disposal of the sewage. 
(Ord. 416 §402, 1970) 
13.08.140 - Water softeners. 
A.  Permit Required for Installation. It is unlawful for any party to install or use a home-regenerated water softener or other ion-exchange water treatment device having provisions for on-site regeneration unless he holds a valid permit from the City for such installation. 
B.  Permit Required to Sell. It is unlawful for anyone to offer home-regenerated softeners for sale or to solicit an owner or occupant of a property in the City to purchase such a unit except where the purchaser holds a valid permit for such installation. The penalties against a party making such a sale shall include the requirement that he remove the illegally installed unit and that his business license be suspended. 
C.  Permit Requirements. A permit is required for the installation, replacement, enlargement, or continued use of an ion-exchange water treating device, except for rental units regenerated elsewhere. A permit may be granted only if the operation will meet one of the following qualifications: 
1.  The average content of dissolved minerals in the total sewage flow from the property, including the wastewater from the ion-exchange device, does not exceed the average mineral content of the water supply by more than 200 milligrams per liter; or 
2.  None of the regenerating chemicals will be discharged to the sewerage system or to the earth, but shall be removed and disposed of in a manner specifically approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
D.  Permit Application. A person desiring a permit for. the installation, enlargement, use or regeneration of an ion-exchange water treating device shall apply to the City Manager and shall submit information to support claims that the proposed operation will conform to one or both of the qualifications of subsection C of this section, and such other information as the City Manager may require. The applicant shall pay a fee of $10.00 at the time of application. No fee shall be required if the application is only to continue an operation existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The fee is for application processing, and is not refundable. 
E.  Application Evaluation and Conditions. If the City Manager finds that the information furnished by an applicant for a permit is sufficient to show that the operation will meet at least one of the qualifications of subsection C of this section, he shall issue the permit. The permit shall state the conditions that the holder must submit periodic reports to the City Manager. The required frequency of the reports and the information to be supplied shall be as determined by the City Manager and as stated in the permit and shall be such as are considered necessary to ascertain conformance to the qualifications of subsection C of this section. The requirements may include a provision that the holder shall install facilities for convenient sampling of the wastewater stream and a holding tank sized to retain up to 48 hours of the wastewater flow. 
F.  Revocation for Cause. A permit obtained on the basis of fraudulent or deceptive information is null and void. If the holder of a permit violates any term or condition of the permit or any provisions of this chapter, the permit shall be revoked by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 416 §403, 1970) 
13.08.150 - Septic tank and cesspool cleaning and brine industrial hauling. 
A.  A person shall not discharge the cleanings from septic tanks, cesspools, or chemical toilets to a sewerage system of the City unless he holds a valid permit to do so. Application for a permit shall be made to the City Manager. The permit shall be granted and shall remain valid only so long as the applicant: 
1.  Maintains a deposit of $100.00 with the City; and 
2.  Utilizes suitable equipment for the sanitary conveyance of the pumping on the public roads, and dumps at prescribed place; and 
3.  Does not violate operating conditions laid down by the City Manager; 
B.  Each tank truck or other conveyance shall be maintained in good condition, with tight covers to prevent the leaking or spilling of sewage or sludge, and with adequate discharge hoses, so as to not cause any spillage around dump manhole. 
C.  A permit to discharge cleanings from septic tanks or other sewerage facilities shall not be construed to permit the discharge of cleanings from grease or oil traps, salty wastes, or industrial wastes in any amount, or any other wastes forbidden by other provisions of this chapter. 
D.  For each truck load of septic tank or cesspool pumping discharged to a sewerage system of the City, the discharger shall pay the City the sum of $15.00 on a monthly accounting, and shall also submit names and addresses of the owners of the septic tanks pumped. 
E.  Any unpaid obligation for payment for discharges shall be a lien against the deposit specified in subdivision 1 of subsection A of this section. The deposit may be forfeited, in whole or in part, toward the satisfaction of any penalties or damages assessed by the City in connection with the licensed operation. 
F.  The permittee may surrender this permit at any time and reclaim the unencumbered amount of his deposit. If the permittee fails to use suitable equipment maintained in a sanitary condition, or otherwise conducts an unsatisfactory operation, or if he does not pay all discharge within 30 days of the due date, the City Manager shall revoke the permit and order the unencumbered amount of his deposit returned. If permittee discharges at unauthorized times or places or falsifies reports of the number of truck loads discharged or otherwise defrauds or seeks to defraud the City, the City Manager shall revoke his permit and declare his deposit forfeited. A person who has had a permit revoked may not again be licensed by the City for a period of at least one year thereafter. 
(Ord. 416 §404, 1970) 
13.08.160 - Traps for sand, grease and oil. 
A.  Restaurants. A restaurant or other food service establishment in the City shall be required to comply with the provisions of Chapter 13.09 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
B.  Vehicle Service Stations or Garages. A vehicle service station or garage maintained for the servicing or repair of motor vehicles shall install and maintain a sand and grease interceptor, but all wastewaters arising from the servicing and repair of vehicles shall pass through it before discharge to a public sewer of the City. If the service station or garage does not include facilities for the washing of more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have an operation fluid capacity not less than nine cubic feet and an accessible effective water surface not less than five square feet. "Accessible effective water surface," for purposes of this chapter, means a surface which is easily accessible for cleaning and which, at the same time, will retain oil floating on the surface of the water passing through the trap under conditions of use. If wastewater enters the interceptor by way of a floor grate, the grate shall be over only one end, with the effluent pipe at the opposite end, and a partition between. If the wastewater enters by way of a pipe terminating below the surface, the partition is not required. The interceptor shall be designed to retain any oil and grease which will float and any sand which will settle. It shall be watertight and structurally sound and durable. It shall be easily accessible for cleaning and for inspection. 
C.  Carwash Establishments. A carwash establishment equipped to wash several autos at one time shall have a sand and grease interceptor with an operating fluid capacity not less than 100 cubic feet and a water surface not less than 30 square feet. The interceptor shall also be sufficiently large to permit a seven-day accumulation of sand and oil which will not, together, fill more than 25 percent of the fluid capacity. 
D.  Existing Traps. An interceptor legally and properly installed at a vehicle service station or carwash establishment before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified in subsections Band C of this section, provided such interceptor is effective in removing sand and oil and is so designed and installed that it can be inspected and properly maintained. If the City Manager finds that an interceptor is incapable of retaining adequately the sand and oil in the wastewater flow from a service station or carwash establishment, he shall give the proprietor a written notice requiring that an adequate interceptor be installed within sixty days. If an adequate interceptor is not installed within sixty days, the City Manager may disconnect the property from the sewer. 
E.  Approved Designs. The City Manager may maintain an information file, available for public use, of acceptable designs of sand and grease interceptors. Installation of an interceptor of a design shown in this file, or of any design meeting the size requirements set forth in this chapter shall not impute any liability to the City for the adequacy of the interceptor under actual conditions of use. It shall not relieve the owner or proprietor of responsibility for keeping sand and oil out of the sewer. If his interceptor is not adequate under the conditions of use, he shall construct one which is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose. 
F.  Maintenance of Traps. A sand and oil interceptor required by this chapter shall be properly cleaned and maintained to assure that the accumulations of sand and oil do not impair the efficiency of the interceptor, or pass out with the effluent. An interceptor will not be considered properly maintained if sand and oil accumulations total more than 25 percent of the operating fluid capacity. 
(Ord. 416 §405, 1970; Ord. 958; 10/20/09, § 2) 
13.08.170 - Industrial wastewaters. 
A.  Industrial Waste Permit Required. No person shall discharge industrial wastewaters into the sewer system of the City unless he holds an industrial waste disposal permit from the City Manager. In special cases, industrial wastes may be discharged pursuant to a special use permit as provided in Section 13.08.330. 
B.  Permit Application. To obtain an industrial waste disposal permit, application shall be made to the City Manager. The application shall show the kind and size of the industrial operation producing the wastewater, the quantity and characteristics of the wastewater, detailed plans for any pretreatment facilities designed to prevent discharge of improper materials into the sewer, and such other information as required by the City Manager. The applicant shall pay a filing and processing fee of $25.00. No fee shall be required if the application is only to continue an operation existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
C.  Permit Issuance. If the City Manager finds that the quality of the water and the facilities for discharge to the sewer conform to the requirements of the ordinance codified in this chapter and other ordinances of the City, that the pretreatment facilities are adequate, and that sewer capacity is available, he shall issue the permit. The permit shall state the nature of the industry and the nature and amount of flow which the permittee may discharge into the sewer and shall include any restrictions which the City Manager finds necessary in order that the sewerage system may serve its intended purpose. A temporary permit may be issued pending application evaluation. 
D.  Amended Permits. If the permittee alters pretreatment facilities or alters connections to the sewer, or seeks to discharge wastes in excess of the amounts for which a permit has been issued or wastes of a different kind, he shall apply to the City Manager for an amended permit. 
E.  Non-transference of Permits. Permission to discharge industrial wastewaters to the City system cannot be transferred with change of ownership or tenancy of a property or industrial operation. A new owner or lessee must make application for a permit to discharge, which permit will normally be granted if the industrial waste discharge remains within the limits of the previously existing permit. If in the City Manager's opinion, the change of ownership or tenancy involves a significant change in the quantity of the waste discharge, the application will be judged on its own merits, and a permit mayor may not be issued. 
F.  Industrial Waste Limitations. Except as provided in Section 13.08.330, no industrial waste shall be discharged to a public sewer unless it conforms to the requirements for all discharges to public sewers. No industrial wastewater flow exceeding 100 gallons in anyone day shall be discharged to a public sewer unless it conforms also to the following requirements: 
1.  The content of total oil and grease shall not average more than 100 milligrams per liter in any 24-hour period. 
2.  The content of floatable oil and grease shall not average more than 25 milligrams per liter in any 24-hour period. 
3.  The standard five-day biochemical oxygen demand shall not average more than 300 milligrams per. liter in any 24-hour period. 
4.  The suspended solids content shall not average more than 300 milligrams per liter in any 24-hour period. 
5.  The dissolved sulfide content shall at no time exceed 0.1 milligram per liter. 
6.  The pH shall at no time be below 6.0. 
7.  The concentration of hexavalent chromium shall at no time exceed 0.1 milligrams per liter and shall average not more than 0.05 milligrams per liter in any 24-hour period. 
8.  The concentration of copper shall at no time exceed five milligrams per liter and shall average not more than two milligrams per liter in any 24-hour period. 
9.  Any other constituents as called out and specific requirements set by the City Manager shall apply. 
G.  Sampling Manhole. Every discharge of industrial waste to a public sewer shall be routed through a manhole or sampling compartment approved or designated by the City Manager, which manhole or sampling compartment at all times shall be available and accessible to authorized City personnel. This structure shall be located in such a manner to allow easy access by the City Manager at all times and shall be built and maintained at the expense of the industry using it. The piping to and from the manhole or sampling compartment shall be so arranged that observation may be made of all of the industrial sewage flow without prior admixture of any wastewater from toilets, washrooms, kitchens, or lunchrooms and that the industrial sewage flow can be plugged off without impeding the flow of sewage from those other sources. 
H.  Monitoring. As conditions of issuing an industrial waste permit, the City Manager may require the permittee, at permittee's expense, to do any or all of the following: 
1.  Install a measuring device and report periodically measurements of flow to the City; 
2.  Install pH recording equipment with charts to be removed only by the City Manager; 
3.  Provide an impounding tank, equipped with mixing apparatus, sufficient to retain maximum 24-hour flow; 
4.  Provide for inspection and laboratory tests as may be required by the City Manager; 
5.  Report to the City Manager on the amount of materials processed by the industry. 
I.  Violations of Permit Conditions. An industrial waste discharge permit may be revoked for any of the following grounds: 
1.  Failing to comply with the provisions or conditions of the permit; 
2.  Failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or any other applicable ordinances or statutes governing the discharge of industrial liquid waste or wastewater into the sewerage system of the City; 
3.  Willfully supplying false or misleading information in the application; 
4.  Causing a nuisance in the operation of the sewerage system. 
J.  The City Manager shall give notice, in writing, specifying the manner in which there has been failure to comply with the provisions of conditions of the permit, or the manner in which the discharge constitutes as unreasonable burden in the operation of the sewerage system, and shall specify a time within which the discharger shall remedy the condition. If within the time specified in the notice, the condition is not remedied the City Manager shall revoke the permit and cause the industrial wastewater outlet to be plugged. 
(Ord. 416 §406, 1970; Ord. 523 §2, 1981) 
V. - CHARGES FOR CONNECTION TO AND FOR USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

13.08.180 - General policy. 
    The connection of a service lateral to a sewerage system of the City is contingent upon payment of permit and inspection fees, and, insofar as applicable, payment of a local sewering charge and a sewage treatment facility charge, and continued use of the sewer is contingent upon the payment of periodic sewer service charges, all as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.190 - Permit for connection. 
    A person desiring to make a connection to a public sewer of the City shall first apply to the City Manager for a permit. A non-refundable fee shall be paid with the application. The fee shall be based upon the average cost of processing each application and shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The application shall indicate the property to be served, the intended use of the property, and such other information as the City Manager may require. The City Manager will inform the applicant of the pertinent regulations, where the connection will be made, and amount of any applicable charges. The permit shall if not used within six months of the date of issue. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.200 - Inspection of connection. 
    The City will inspect the construction of service laterals and the making of connections of building sewers to service laterals or service laterals to the main sewer. Where it is necessary to cut a sewer to connect a lateral, this shall be done only with an approved cutting machine, and a special flanged stub shall be inserted into the cut hole and sealed in place to make the connection. A sewer shall be cut and stub placed only in the presence of authorized City personnel. No lateral or connection to a lateral, wye, or sewer shall be covered over until inspected and approved. If found covered over before inspection it shall be uncovered at the expense of the responsible party. The applicant shall notify the City 48 hours in advance of the time when inspection is required. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.210 - Inspection fees. 
A.  Inspection fees for the following inspections shall be paid in the amounts set for each such inspection by resolution of the City Council in effect at the time the inspection fee is paid. 
1.  For inspection of a connection to an existing lateral at or near the property line; 
2.  For inspection of construction of a lateral and connection to an existing wye on the main sewer; 
3.  For inspection of construction of a lateral and the cutting and connecting to a main sewer; 
4.  For inspection of special construction or construction under unusual conditions. 
B.  The inspection fee shall be paid at the time of permit application. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.220 - Local sewerinq payment requirements. 
A.  A parcel of property shall not be connected to a sewerage system of the City until a public sewer has been constructed for the use of such property at the expense of a developer, owner, or other interested party, or a local sewering payment has been made to the City or the property has been obligated for such payment. 
B.  Except where sewering assessments are levied against properties under assessment district proceedings, the local sewering payment shall be set by resolution of the City council. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.230 - Payment for less than entire parcel. 
    Payment may be made for less than the whole of a large parcel of property, subject to these conditions: 
A.  The amount of such partial payment shall not be less than $2,000.00; 
B.  The part of the property to which such payment applies shall be clearly delineated and recorded with the City; and 
C.  The remainder of the parcel shall abut not less than 100 feet of a street or right-of-way in which there is or may later be an accessible sewer, with an average depth not less than 100 feet from such street or easement. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.240 - Sewage disposal facility payment required. 
    A parcel of property shall not be connected to a sewerage system of the City until a sewage treatment and disposal facility has been constructed to serve the property, or the property has acquired an equity in a treatment and disposal facility by payment of a sewage disposal facility payment on behalf of such property. "Sewage disposal facility," as used in this section, includes trunk sewers beyond the point where they are accessible for service connections and land for the treatment plant site. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.250 - Amount of sewage disposal facility payment. 
    The following sewage disposal facility charges shall be based on the intended use of the property and shall be calculated as follows: 
(a)  For permanent single family residence (SFR) the sewer connection/capacity fee shall be a fixed rate per Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU) as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  The connection/capacity fee for new non-SFR customers connecting to the City's sewer system, shall be calculated based on a multiple of EDUs based on the individual flow and strength characteristics of the new customer pursuant to a resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987; Ord. No. 1087, § 1, 6-20-2017 ) 
13.08.260 - Buildings of multiple uses. 
    A restaurant in a building used also for non-restaurant-related functions shall have the area pertaining to the restaurant treated separately in calculating the sewage disposal facility charge. The City Manager may distinguish other separate uses within a building when such distinction will enhance the equity of the charge. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.270 - Multiple buildings on a parcel. 
    When a parcel of property is connected to the sewer, all buildings except those having no plumbing fixtures in them shall be treated as though connected to the sewer. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.280 - Sewage treatment facility payment is asset of land. 
    An amount paid as a sewage treatment facility charge is a credit or asset pertaining to the land, and is inseparable therefrom. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.290 - Changes in land use. 
    If a building or the use of a building on a parcel of property is changed in a way that would make the sewage disposal facility charge greater than the amount credited to that property, the owner or user shall pay to the City the difference between the existing credit and the larger charge calculated on the basis of the enlarged facilities and/or altered use. The additional charge shall be invoiced along with the next sewer service charge following such change and shall be collectible by the same means. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.300 - No refund for reduced use. 
    If a building or the uses of a property are changed in a way that would make the connection charge less than the amount already credited, no refund shall be made, but the amount credited shall remain a credit to that property against any new facilities constructed in the future. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.310 - Pre-existing sewage treatment facility credit. 
A.  A parcel of property shall receive credit for sewage treatment facility payment previously paid for the property if the building(s) has been demolished or damaged for more than one year. 
B.  If there is destruction of one or more buildings by fire, act of God, or demolition, the destroyed building(s) may be replaced in kind on the same parcel of property within one year of the date of the incident without paying a sewage treatment facility payment. If replacement is made after one year, Section 13.08.310A. is effective. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.320 - Sewer service charges. 
    For each calendar month that a property is connected to a sewerage system of the City, a monthly charge for the following shall be paid as set by resolution of the City Council: 
A.  For permanent single or multi-family residences; 
B.  For mobile home parks, trailer parks and R.V. parks for each mobile home space, trailer space or R.V. space; 
C.  For schools; 
D.  For properties except schools delivering more than 100,000 gallons of sewage in a month; 
E.  For all other properties. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.330 - Special services. 
A.  General Policy. A waste for which discharge to a sewerage system of the City is prohibited by other provisions of this chapter may nevertheless be received into the sewerage system as a special service if the City Manager ascertains that the only detriment to the sewerage system will be increased maintenance and operation costs. 
B.  Payment for Special Service Discharges. A person desiring to discharge wastes to the sewer under the provisions of this section shall apply to the City Manager for permission. The City Manager shall estimate the added financial burden due to the proposed discharge, and shall propose terms under which the discharge will be accepted, including payments to be made to the City. The applicant shall make the proposed discharge only upon receipt of written permission of the City Manager, and only under the terms laid down. If the proposal is to make more than a single discharge or a discharge continuing on more than a single day, or if the charges may exceed $500.00, the City Manager shall submit the proposal, together with his recommendations, to the City Council, and shall grant permission only on terms approved by the Council, except that he may grant permission without Council approval in an emergency situation involving the public interest. 
C.  Revocation or Alteration. The City Manager may revoke permission for such discharges or alter the terms if it is found that the discharge is permanently damaging the system or causing the sewage treatment plant effluent to violate the requirements of the Regional Water Control Board, and he shall revoke the permit if the discharger violates its terms. An alteration of terms shall require the approval of the City Council if the altered terms are such that they would require Council approval as terms for a new operation. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.340 - Charges for part of month. 
    A property connected to the sewer and supplied with water for ten days or more in any calendar month shall be treated as though connected for the whole month and shall be obligated for the sewer service charge for that month. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.350 - Multiple occupancy buildings. 
    If a building has multiple occupants, the owner or proprietor shall be responsible for payment of the sewer service charge for the entire building. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.360 - Billing. 
    Every two months, on or before the first of the month, the City shall mail to the owner of each parcel of property or the occupant or the person who has made himself responsible for payment of bills for water service to the property or to any or all of them, the bills for sewer service charge for the preceding two-month period. The owner of property is responsible for all sewer service charges for service provided for his/her property. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.370 - Delinquencies. 
    If a bill is unpaid 30 days after the due date on said bill, the City shall thereupon assess a ten percent late penalty on the total amount outstanding and an additional ten percent of the overdue balance including previous penalties shall be charged 30 days after each due date until all outstanding charges have been paid in full. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.380 - Property liens for delinquencies. 
A.  Each year the Treasurer of the City shall record with the County Tax Collector a list of all delinquent charges and penalties thereon, and shall include in each such list the amount of each charge and the penalty thereon plus an administrative fee established by resolution of the City Council, a description of the real property upon which the same is a lien, and the name of the City. All delinquent charges, penalties and administrative fees when so recorded shall constitute a lien upon the real property served by the sewerage system, except that no such lien shall be created against any property owned by a public corporation. 
B.  The fees provided for in subsection A of this section may hereafter be amended and shall constitute a civil debt due to and owing the City. In addition to, but not in limitation of the foregoing, the fees provided for in said ordinance and resolution shall constitute a lien assessed against the property and shall be collected in accordance with Section 5473, et al., of the Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
13.08.390 - Sewage works construction fund. 
    The sums received in payment for local sewering charges shall be used for sewage plant maintenance and operation costs and capital improvements if desired. The sums received for sewage treatment facility charges shall be placed in a fund designated sewage works construction fund. It is intended that this fund shall be used for capital improvements for the sewage collecting and disposal facilities. Money from this fund may be used to provide an equitable degree of reimbursement to builders who have constructed sewage works and have dedicated them to the City. 
(Ord. 648 §2, 1987) 
VI. - REGULATION OF SEWER CONSTRUCTION BY DEVELOPERS 

13.08.400 - Construction standards for private sewerage facilities. 
    All sewage facilities constructed in the City on private property and not connected to a public sewerage system shall be constructed to comply with, at a minimum, and notwithstanding all other requirements of the City, with the most recent editions of the California Plumbing and Building Codes. 
(Ord. 958, 10/20/09 § 3) 
13.08.410 - Public sewerage facilities. 
    No public sewer or sewer appurtenance shall be constructed in the City except in accordance with plans approved by the City Manager. No sewer or system of sewers and appurtenances outside the City shall be connected to a sewerage system of the City unless built in accordance with plans approved by the City Manager, or until the City Manager ascertains that the system is built according to good engineering practice and that it will not occasion abnormal operating and maintenance costs. 
(Ord. 416 §602, 1970) 
13.08.420 - Plans for private construction of sewers to be deeded to the City. 
A.  A person proposing to construct sewerage facilities within or outside the City, which facilities are to be deeded to the City, shall prepare plans and specifications according to good engineering practice and within the guidelines set forth elsewhere in this Chapter. 
B.  The City manager may set standards for sizes of sheets, scales, required information, etc. The City Manager shall approve the plans if they conform to the requirements of this Chapter, to other design criteria of the City as set by the City Manager, and to good engineering practice. If they do not conform, he shall return the plans with explanations, after which the applicant may correct them and return them to the City. 
(Ord. 416 §603, 1970) 
13.08.430 - Requirements of other authorities. 
A.  General Conditions. Approval by the City Manager of plans for sewers to be built by a private builder shall not be construed as relieving the builder from the responsibility for constructing a structurally and functionally adequate facility within the requirements of all authorities exercising jurisdiction. Among the regulations that must be observed are ordinances and regulations of the County, particularly regarding separation between water supply and sewerage facilities, and regulations of the County Road Department and the California State Highway Department regarding work in the roads under their respective jurisdictions. 
B.  In Unincorporated Areas. The sewer design requirements of the County are applicable in unincorporated areas; provided, however, that for sewers to be connected to a sewerage system of the City, the specific requirements set forth in Sections 13.08.500 through 13.08.610 shall supersede the County requirements in all respects in which the City requirements are stricter than those of the County. 
(Ord. 416 §604, 1970) 
13.08.440 - Plan checking fee. 
A.  An applicant for approval of plans for construction of sewerage facilities shall pay the City for the checking of plans and specifications. The basic fee shall be calculated on the basis of an estimate, made by the City Manager, of the dollar value of the construction. In making this estimate, the City Manager shall use reasonable unit costs and estimating schedules, and no adjustment shall be made if the actual construction cost differs from the value estimated by the City Manager. The basic fee rate shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Promptly upon receipt of plans, the City Manager shall determine the basic fee and shall notify the applicant, and no action shall be taken on the plans until receipt of the fee. An applicant may, if he wishes, make a deposit in advance sufficient to cover the fee. Any excess of such deposit above the amount of the fee will be returned to the applicant after approval of plans or after discontinuance of the application. If the applicant makes substantial changes, other than corrections requested by the City Manager, in plans that have been returned by the City Manager, or if he makes more than one re-submittal of corrected plans, additional payments shall be required. For each re-submittal with substantial changes initiated by the applicant and requiring extra work in plan checking, and for each re-submittal after the first re-submittal, an additional fee equal to one-half the basic fee shall be required. 
(Ord. 648 §3, 1987) 
13.08.450 - Subdivision sewers. 
    Where a developer builds sewers, the properties of the developer served by those sewers shall be exempt from payment of a local sewering charge. If he builds a sewage treatment plant, his properties served by it shall be exempt from the sewage disposal facility charge except insofar as an additional payment may be required for changed use in accordance with Section 13.08.290. 
(Ord. 416 §606, 1970) 
13.08.460 - Connection of subdivision sewers to City sewerage system. 
    A developer who constructs sewers to be connected to an existing sewerage system of the City shall pay the sewage disposal facility charge for not less than 25 percent of the lots to which sewers are available before the connection to the City system is made, and shall pay the charge for each additional lot before it is either sold or occupied. 
(Ord. 416 §607, 1970) 
13.08.470 - Reimbursement. 
    A builder or developer may need to construct an off-site sewer to reach existing City sewers, or he may be required by the City to build a sewer of greater size than the minimum eight-inch size. The builder shall be entitled to partial reimbursement in fair proportion to the area of property served when other properties join in the use of an off-site sewer. 
(Ord. 416 §608, 1970) 
13.08.480 - Inspection. 
A.  A contract for construction of sewers by a private party shall state that the City will appoint an inspector to observe the work, and that he shall have authority to reject materials and equipment not conforming to plans and specifications, to stop the work if it is not proceeding according to plans and specifications, to determine when the work is completed, and to exercise such other powers as normally accompany these functions. 
B.  For the inspection services mentioned in subsection A of this section, either within or outside the City, the builder shall pay the City at a rate as set by resolution of the City Council and based upon the cost of construction. If construction is done by a contractor under a separate contract covering the supplying of materials and services for a complete job for the specific work inspected by the City Manager, the cost of construction shall be the amount paid to the contractor under the terms of said contract. Otherwise, the cost of construction shall be considered to be the estimated sum that would be paid to a contractor for construction under such a contract. 
(Ord. 648 §3, 1987) 
13.08.490 - As-built drawings. 
    Before the new sewers of new facility is placed in use, as-built drawings shall be submitted to the City, reflecting all known changes from the original plans; provided, however, that the City Manager may authorize use of the system under terms that adequately assure the City of as-built information within 30 days. 
(Ord. 416 §610, 1970) 
VII. - DESIGN CRITERIA FOR SEWERS WITHIN CITY 

13.08.500 - General policy. 
    The approval by the City Manager of plans for construction of sewers by private developers shall be based upon good engineering practice and upon the standards set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. 416 §701, 1970) 
13.08.510 - Pipe materials. 
A.  General Requirements. Materials shall be chosen for their strength, durability, and ease of maintenance, with due consideration for dead and live loads, beam strength, and resistance to corrosion. Pipe joints shall be selected to provide entrance of roots and groundwater, and sufficient flexibility to adjust to the trench bedding. Joints shall be non-rigid, and the joint sealer shall be restrained against lateral and axial movement. 
B.  Acceptable Materials. The following pipe materials are acceptable for construction of sewers: 
1.  Extra-strength vitrified clay pipe; 
2.  Asbestos cement pipe; 
3.  Non-reinforced concrete pipe; 
4.  Reinforced concrete pipe; 
5.  Cast iron pipe; 
6.  Steel pipe; and. 
7.  Plastic pipe. 
C.  Materials Required for Certain Conditions. Gravity sewers having slopes less than the standard minima specified in Section 13.08.550 shall be made only of clay pipe or of other corrosion-resistant material approved by the City Manager. Clay or other corrosion-resistant pipe shall also be used for sewers downstream from sewers of substantial slope, to a point where, in the judgment of the City Manager, there is no longer a substantial danger of corrosion due to septicity of the sewage. Cast iron or steel pipe shall be used where the sewer may be subjected to physical forces that would threaten the integrity of other materials and, generally, for sewers aboveground, but shall not be used otherwise. Clay pipe, non-reinforced concrete pipe, and plastic pipe shall not be used aboveground unless encased. 
D.  Pipe Strength Class. The drawings shall show the acceptable type or types of bedding, the maximum allowable trench width at the top of the pipe, and the strength class shall be sufficient so that the properly installed pipe will not be endangered, as calculated according to good engineering practice. 
E.  Pipe Size. The minimum pipe diameter for public sewers shall be eight inches. 
F.  Testing and Final Acceptability of Material. The City Manager will require such tests and certifications as he deems necessary to show that the specified materials are being used on the work. Notwithstanding prior factory or yard inspection, the City Manager will have the right to reject any damaged or defective materials found on the job which in his opinion will affect the durability of the installation, and may order its removal from the site. 
(Ord. 416 §702, 1970) 
13.08.520 - Alignment. 
    Sewers shall be laid on a straight alignment and grade between manholes, except that curved sewers may be used subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum Radius. Minimum radius shall be 100 feet; 
B.  Minimum Invert Slope. Minimum invert slope shall be 0.01 except that sewers with a radius of 200 feet or more will have the same requirements as straight sewers; 
C.  Total Deflections. The total of all deflections due to curves in the sewer between any two manholes shall not exceed 60 degrees; 
D.  Maximum Deflection. Maximum deflection at any joint shall be as recommended by the manufacturer, but in case more than three degrees. 
(Ord. 416 §703, 1970) 
13.08.530 - Location. 
A.  Basic Requirement. Sewers shall not be located in the parkway or within four feet of the curb except with special permission of the City Manager. On divided highways, a separate sewer shall be installed to serve each side of the highway. 
B.  Parallel to Other Utilities. The sewer centerline shall not be closer than ten feet horizontally to the centerline of any parallel waterline nor five feet to the centerline of a gas line or other utility except with special permission of the City Manager. 
C.  Curved Streets. In curved streets the sewer shall in general, parallel the street curvature, at least to the extent of avoiding unnecessary crossings of the centerline. 
D.  Not in Public Streets. Where a sewer cannot be installed in a public street it shall be located in an easement conveyed to the City and shown as such on the tract map. Sewer plans shall show easement descriptions wherever practicable. 
E.  Easements. Sewer easements shall be 12 feet wide where access is provided at both ends, and 15 feet wide where access is provided at one end only. 
F.  Deeds for Easements. Deeds for easements shall provide for restrictions of permanent construction so that access to the sewer for maintenance operations will not be impaired. 
G.  Easements in Relation to Lot Lines. Where easements follow common lot lines, the full easement width shall be on one lot, in such a manner that access to manholes will not be obstructed by walls, trees, or permanent improvements. Where this requirement cannot be met without interfering with existing buildings, easements may straddle lot lines. 
(Ord. 416 §704, 1970) 
13.08.540 - Depth of sewer. 
    Sewers shall be installed at a depth which will provide suitable service to the properties connected and will allow subsequent installation of waterlines in accordance with the regulations of the county governing separation of sewers and water supplies, with a minimum of special construction of the waterlines other than joint spacing. 
(Ord. 416 §705, 1970) 
13.08.550 - Slopes. 
    Minimum slope requirements are necessary to assure self-cleansing and self-oxidizing velocities in order to avoid significant generation of hazardous, odorous, and corrosive sulfur compounds. The standard minimum slope shall be 0.006 (0.6%) except where the sewer will serve more than 400 connections. Slopes below the standard minimum slopes may be used only if justified in an engineering report, approved by the City Manager, showing that it is not reasonably feasible to attain the standard slopes. 
(Ord. 416 §706, 1970) 
13.08.560 - Manholes. 
A.  Spacing. Manholes shall be located at all abrupt changes in alignment and at junctions, and elsewhere as required so that the spacing shall nowhere exceed 400 feet. 
B.  Design. Manholes shall be provided with steps made of bent Type 304 stainless steel rod five-eighths inches in diameter. The steps shall be formed so that a foot cannot slip off laterally, and shall have a clear width not less than 12 inches. The vertical spacing shall not exceed 14 inches. The channel shall be of well-formed U shape, with a depth equal to the diameter of the pipe and with the lower half continuous with the lower half of the pipe. The bench shall slope one-half inch per foot toward the channel. The drop of invert elevation through the manhole, even on curves, shall be only the drop due to a continuation of the slope of the pipe. At a junction of two sewers of the same size, however, the invert of the branch shall be 0.1 foot above the invert of the main stream, or more if necessary to avoid retardation of flow in the branch. Drop manholes should be avoided insofar as possible. 
(Ord. 416 §707, 1970) 
13.08.570 - Terminal cleanouts. 
A.  Use Allowed. The upper end of a sewer may end in a terminal cleanout if the distance to a manhole is not more than 200 feet, or if the slope is no less than 0.01 (0.1%) and the distance to a manhole is not more than 300 feet. Otherwise, it shall end in a manhole. 
B.  Design. A terminal cleanout shall be constructed generally as illustrated on drawings furnished by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 416 §708, 1970) 
13.08.580 - Service laterals. 
A.  Requirements. Wherever it is known or can be reasonably assumed that a building sewer connection is required, a service lateral shall be shown on the plans and installed to the property line as a part of the street sewer construction prior to paving; provided, however, that a subdivider will not be required to pay for service laterals from off-site sewers. 
B.  Size. A service lateral serving a single dwelling shall be at least four inches inside diameter. All others shall be at least six inches inside diameter. 
C.  Wyes or Tees. Where a service lateral will not be needed because the public sewer will be on private property, or where for some reason it may not be feasible, during main sewer construction, to construct a lateral for future use, yet there is a strong possibility that a connection will be needed, the City Manager may require that a wye or a tee be installed. 
D.  Unused Openings. Unused wyes and service laterals shall be tightly sealed and supported in a manner to facilitate their future location and use. Locations shall be indicated on the plans and marked on the curb, or as otherwise approved by the City Manager. 
E.  Making Connections. The making of connections to wyes, tees, and service laterals, the tapping of the main sewer where there is no wye or service lateral, the maintenance of service laterals are subject to the requirements of Sections 13.08.060 through 13.08.110. 
(Ord. 416 §709, 1970) 
13.08.590 - Construction. 
    The construction specifications shall contain adequate provisions, satisfactory to the City Manager, describing the conditions of excavation so as to minimize hazard or nuisance to the public and to safeguard the integrity of the sewer being installed. Methods of backfilling also shall be specified that will avoid trouble from damaging of the pipe or from subsequent sinking of the surface. 
(Ord. 416 §710, 1970) 
13.08.600 - Testing. 
A.  General Requirements. The specifications shall require that the sewer line pass a test for tightness before its acceptance by the City, said test to be not less strict than set forth in this section. 
B.  Test Method Alternatives. The finished sewer shall be tested either by air or water. 
C.  Air Test. After plugging all openings and providing thrust blocking as necessary, air shall be admitted to the section under test at an inlet pressure not exceeding 5 psi from a source regulated by an adjustable pressure control valve and measured by a sensitive pressure gauge calibrated from zero to 10 psi. When the internal gauge pressure has reached 3.5 psi under stabilized temperature conditions, the air supply to the test section shall be cut off. The inspector shall then observe the time interval during which the internal pressure drops 1 psi from 3.0 to 2.0 psi. The length of time for the 1 psi loss shall not be less than that shown in the following table for the sewer size being tested: 
Sewer Diameter 
(in inches) Minimum Time For 1 psi Loss 
(in minutes) 6 through 14 1 15 through 20 2 21 through 30 3 33 through 36 4  
D.  Water Exfiltration Test. Water shall be applied until the head over the lower end of the reach is ten feet, or the head over the upper end is five feet, whichever requires the higher water level, except that a lower head may be applied where necessary to avoid overflowing a manhole or exceeding the safe working pressure of the pipe. The leakage shall be determined from the loss of water from a standpipe or manhole. The water level shall not drop more than two feet during the measurement. The rate of loss of water shall not exceed 0.05 gallon per day per inch of pipe diameter per foot of length tested, including the length of service laterals. 
(Ord. 416 §711, 1970) 
13.08.610 - Exceptions. 
    It is recognized that unusual conditions not anticipated in the composing of these criteria may arise, of such nature that strict conformance would lead to designs not indicative of the application of proper engineering skill. The criteria shall not be interpreted to excuse the designing engineer from the need to develop an all-around good design. On the other hand, rigid conformance to the criteria may not be required in situations where no useful purpose would be served. Therefore, the City Manager may reject a design that he considers unsatisfactory even though it may not specifically violate any criterion listed in this Article, and he may grant exceptions to the criteria of this Article where the exercise of sound engineering judgment requires such exceptions. 
(Ord. 416 §712, 1970) 
VIII. - ENFORCEMENT, DAMAGES AND PENALTIES 

13.08.620 - Disconnection for illegal use. 
    If a connection to a sewerage system of the City is used to discharge materials prohibited by this Chapter, the City Manager may order the property disconnected from the sewer or the water supply to the property disconnected, or both. He may excavate and sever the service lateral to disconnect the property. Upon the property owner taking steps to prevent a recurrence of the illegal discharge, the property may be reconnected. Before such reconnection is made, the owner shall reimburse the City for the expenses of disconnection and any damages for the illegal discharge, plus twenty percent for administration. 
(Ord. 416 §801, 1970) 
13.08.630 - Assessment of damages. 
A.  If the City Manager finds that any person has discharged any liquid or solid wastes into the sewerage system of the City in violation of this Chapter and that the discharge caused harm to the sewerage system of the City or caused abnormal operating costs or diminished the efficiency of the treatment process, the City Manager shall estimate the value of the harm done and include that sum on that person's next regular sewer service billing. The items that the City Manager shall consider include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Cost of repairs to the sewerage system; 
2.  Depreciation of the system due to damage not repaired; 
3.  Extra operating cost; 
4.  Value of loss of sewage treatment plant operating efficiency, based upon the City's normal operating costs and the extent to which the performance of the plant was reduced below normal as a result of the improper discharge to the sewer; and 
5.  Any costs to the City due to its liability for discharging the improper effluent. 
B.  To the sum of these and any other proper items, 20 percent shall be added as administrative costs. The amount so charged is intended to compensate the City for improper use of the sewer and shall be in addition to, and not in limitation of, any fines or other penalties for violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 416 §802, 1970) 
13.08.640 - Illegal opening of sewer. 
    No person may, without written permission of the City Manager, cut or open or break a sewer or manhole or other part of a sewerage system of the City or make an illegal connection thereto. 
(Ord. 416 §803, 1970) 
13.08.650 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
IX. - AMENDMENT OF CHAPTER 

13.08.660 - Setting fees by resolution and amendment of Chapter by ordinance. 
A.  The City Council shall at least annually review the fees to be charged by the City as required in this Chapter and shall by resolution set the fees and/or fee rates to be charged as required by this Chapter for the period until a new fee resolution is adopted. 
B.  The City Council may amend this Chapter by ordinance of the City Council in the manner governing the adoption or ordinances. 
(Ord. 648 §3, 1987) 
Chapter 13.09 - REGULATING FATS, OILS AND GREASE (F.O.G.) MANAGEMENT IN FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

13.09.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to comply with the Order No. DWQ 2006-0003 adopted by the State Water Resources Control Board in May, 2006, mandating implementation of various tasks associated with the City's sanitary sewer systems. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.020 - Administration. 
    This Chapter shall be administered by the Director of the Department of Public Works of the City. This Chapter shall be construed and administered to assure consistency with the Order No. DWQ 2006-0003 and amendments, revisions and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.030 - General prohibition. 
    The discharge of fats, oils, greases and other solids ("F.O.G.") in concentrations from food services establishments and other commercial and other industrial facilities to the City sewer systems that may adversely affect the normal function of these systems or result in blockages and/or public nuisance is prohibited. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.040 - Specific prohibitions. 
    The following prohibitions apply to all food service establishments: 
A.  Installation of food grinders in the plumbing system of all new construction. All food grinders installed in food service establishments as of November 1, 2009 shall be removed within 180 days thereafter; 
B.  Introduction of any additive into food service establishments for the purpose of emulsifying F.O.G.; 
C.  Any disposal of cooking oil into the sewer system. All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recyclable containers and removed off-site for proper recycling and /or disposal; 
D.  Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any grease traps or grease interceptors; 
E.  Discharge of wastewater in excess of 150° F, which is considered hot, to any grease control device, including grease traps and grease interceptors; 
F.  Discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, wash basins, and other fixtures containing fecal materials to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service, or vice versa; 
G.  Discharge of any waste, including F.O.G. and other solid materials removed from the grease control device to the sewer system. F.O.G. and other solid material removed from grease interceptors shall be hauled off-site periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.050 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations). Other terms not herein defined are defined as being the same as set forth in the latest adopted applicable editions of the California codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to the California Building Standards Law. Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following definitions shall apply in this Chapter: 
    "Best Management Practices." Schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of F.O.G. to the sewer facilities. 
    "Change in operations." Any change in the ownership food types or operational procedures that have potential to increase the amount of F.O.G. generated and/or discharged by food service establishments in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for a sewer system overflow ("SSOs") to occur. 
    "City." The City of Beaumont. 
    "City Manager." The City Manager of the City of Beaumont or his or her designee. 
    "City sewer facility" or "system." Any property belonging to the City used in the treatment, reclamation, reuse, transportation, or disposal of wastewater, or sludge. 
    "Composite sample." A collection of individual samples obtained at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. The resulting mixture (composite sample) forms a representative sample of the waste stream discharged during the sample period. Samples may be collected when a wastewater discharge occurs. 
    "Discharger." Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. Discharger shall mean the same as user. 
    "Effluent." Any liquid outflow from the food service establishment that is discharged to the sewer. 
    "Fats, oils, and grease" ("F.O.G."). Any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
    "Food grinder." Any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by products for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system. 
    "Food service establishment." Facilities defined in California Uniform Retail Food Services Establishments Law ("CURFFL") Section 113785, and any commercial entity within the boundaries of the City, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its member or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces F.O.G., or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood, as defined in CURFFL Section 113785. A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food services establishment when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of F.O.G. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
    "Formal notice or notification." The date on which the City mails notice by regular mail to food service establishments. 
    "Grease control device." Any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or treat F.O.G. prior to it being discharged into the sewer system 
    "Grease interceptor." A multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the California Plumbing Code, underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate F.O.G. from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the F.O.G. removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
    "Grease trap." A grease control device that is used to serve individual fixtures and have limited effect and should only be used in those cases where the use of a grease interceptor or other grease control device is determined to be impossible or impracticable. 
    "Grab sample." A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    "Hot spots." Areas and sewer lines that have experience sanitary sewer overflows or that must be cleaned or maintain frequently to avoid blockages of sewer system. 
    "Inflow." Water entering a sewer system through a direct storm water runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an almost immediate increase in waste water flows 
    "Infiltration." Water entering into sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. 
    "Inspector." A person authorized by the City to inspect any existing or propose wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and disposal facilities. 
    "Interceptor." A grease interceptor. 
    "Interference." Any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the City's NPDES or Waste Discharge Requirements or prevents lawful sludge use or disposal. 
    "Local Sewering Agency." Any public agency or private entity responsible for the collection and disposal of wastewater to the City's sewer facilities duly authorized under the laws of the State of California to construct and/or maintain public sewers. 
    "Manifest." That receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required by the City. 
    "NPDES." The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and the permit issued to control the discharge of liquids or other substances or solids to surface waters of the United States as detailed in Public Law 92-500, Section 402. 
    "New construction." Any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection permit has not been issued. 
    "Permittee." A person or owner of a food establishment who has received a permit to discharge wastewater into the City's sewer facilities subject to the requirement and conditions established by the City. 
    "Person." Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or public agency, including the State of California and the United States of America. 
    "Program." The Program required by RWQCB Order No. R8-2002-0014, Section (c)(12)(viii) or the SWRCB Order No. DWQ 2006-003 and its amendment or renewals. 
    "Program Manager." The City Manager or his or her designee. 
    "Public agency." The State of California and/or any city, county, special district, other local governmental authority or public body of or within this State. 
    "Public sewer." A sewer owned and operated by the City. 
    "Regulatory agencies." Regulatory agencies shall mean those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the City, including but not limited to: 
(a)  United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX, San Francisco and Washington, DC (EPA). 
(b)  California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) 
(c)  California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region (RWQCB) 
(d)  South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) 
(e)  California Department of Health Services (DOHS). 
    "Remodeling." A physical change or operational change causing generation of the amount of F.O.G. that exceed the current amount of F.O.G. discharge to the sewer system by the food service establishment in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for SSOs to occur or an Establishment that requires a building permit, and involves any one or combination of the following: (1) underslab plumbing, (2) a 30 percent increase in the net public seating area, (3) a 30 percent increase in the size of the kitchen area, or (4) any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment. 
    "Sample point." A location approved by the City, from which wastewater can be collected that is representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of wastewater being sampled. 
    "Sampling facilities." Structure(s) provided at the user's expense for the City or user to measure and record wastewater constituent mass, concentrations, collect a representative sample, or provide access to plug or terminate the discharge. 
    "Sewer." Wastewater. 
    "Sewer facilities or system." Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and sludge. 
    "Sewer lateral." A building sewer as defined in the latest edition of the California Plumbing Code. It is the wastewater connection between the building's wastewater facilities and a public sewer system. 
    "Sludge." Any solid, semi-solid or liquid decant, subnate or supermate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
    "User." Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer system. User shall mean the same as discharger. 
    "Waste." Sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within the containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal. 
    "Wastewater discharge permit." A permit issued by the City subject to the requirements and conditions established by the City authorizing a food service establishment to discharge wastewater into the City's sewer facilities or into sewer facilities which ultimately discharge into a City sewer facility. 
    "Waste minimization practices." Plans or programs intended to reduce or eliminate discharges to the sewer system or to conserve water, including, but not limited to, product substitutions, housekeeping practices inventory control, employee education, and other steps as necessary to minimize wastewater produced. 
    "Waste hauler." Any person carrying on or engaging in vehicular transport of waste as part of, or incidental to, any business for that purpose. 
    "Wastewater." The liquid- and water-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharge into or permitted to enter a public sewer. 
    Words used in this Chapter in the singular may include the plural and the plural the singular. Use of masculine shall mean feminine and use of feminine shall mean masculine. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.060 - Wastewater discharge permit required. 
    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharge, any wastewater from food service establishments directly or indirectly into the sewer system without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.070 - Design and construction of sewage facilities. 
    Any and all sewerage facilities for any food service establishment shall be designed, and constructed as a minimum in accordance with the most current edition of the California Plumbing and Building Codes, and in accordance with the City's current sewerage design and construction standards. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.080 - Sampling and inspection. 
    Sampling and inspection of food service establishments may be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency as determined by City Manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.090 - Revocation or suspension of wastewater discharge permit. 
    The City Manager or it designee may revoke or suspend a wastewater discharge permit for any of the following reasons: 
A.  Violation of a permit condition; 
B.  Creating a nuisance; 
C.  Violation of this Chapter; 
D.  Violation of State or Federal law related to F.O.G. discharges. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.100 - Notice of violation. 
    The City Manager or his or her designee shall issue to the food service establishment a notice of violation prior to revocation of the establishment's wastewater discharge permit, except in emergency situations. The City Manager or his or her designee shall issue the notice in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.110 - Appeal. 
    If the food service establishment objects to the intended revocation, or it shall follow the procedures for appeal set forth in Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.120 - Best Management Practices. 
    All food service establishments shall, at a minimum, implement the following Best Management Practices, when applicable: 
A.  Installation of Drain Screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas. 
B.  Segregation and Collection of Waste Cooking Oil. All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure that they do not leak. Licensed waste haulers or an approved recycling facility must be used to dispose of waste cooking oil. 
C.  Disposal of Food Waste. All food waste shall be disposed of directly into the trash or garbage, and not in sinks. 
D.  Employee Training. Employees of the food service establishment shall be trained by the food service establishment within 180 days of November 1, 2009 and twice each calendar year thereafter, on the following subjects: 
1.  How to "dry wipe" pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove grease. 
2.  How to properly dispose of food waste and solids in enclosed plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors. 
3.  The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped. 
4.  How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling. 
Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the Program Manager or an inspector. 
E.  Maintenance of Kitchen Exhaust Filters. Filters shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be disposed properly. 
F.  Kitchen Signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.130 - Grease interceptor maintenance requirements. 
A.  Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor which includes wastewater, accumulated F.O.G., floating materials, sludge and solids. 
B.  All existing and newly installed grease interceptors shall be regularly maintained. 
C.  No F.O.G. that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right-of-way during maintenance activities. 
D.  Food service establishments with grease interceptors may be required to submit data and information necessary to establish the maintenance frequency grease interceptors. 
E.  The maintenance frequency for all food service establishments with a grease interceptor shall be determined in one of the following methods: 
1.  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined F.O.G. and solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the total liquid depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain F.O.G. discharge to the sewer system. 
2.  All food service establishments with a grease interceptor shall regularly maintain their grease interceptor and maintain a record of such maintenance. 
3.  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned quarterly when the frequency described in (1) has not been established. The maintenance frequency may be adjusted when sufficient data have been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the requirements described in (1). Based on the actual generation of F.O.G. from the food service establishment, the maintenance frequency may increase or decrease. 
4.  If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains F.O.G. and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements described in (1), the food service establishment shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the Program Manager may also increase the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor from the current frequency. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
13.09.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  In addition to the specific provisions set forth in this Chapter, the City may enforce this Ordinance through any of the Civil, Criminal or Administrative Procedures established by the City of Beaumont Municipal Code. 
B.  In addition to the specific provisions set forth elsewhere in this Code, the City may enforce this Chapter, through any Civil, Criminal or Administrative Procedures established by State or Federal Laws. 
(Ord. 959, 10/09; §1) 
Chapter 13.12 - GAS CONNECTIONS 

13.12.010 - Prohibited acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, excepting an authorized agent or employee of a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of furnishing or supplying gas and whose service pipes supply or connect with the particular premises, to turn on or reconnect to gas service in or on any premises where and when gas service is not at the time being rendered. 
(Ord. 215, 1943) 
13.12.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an Administrative Citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. 997, 5-3-11) 
Chapter 13.14 - UTILITY USER TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior history: Ord. 585. 

13.14.010 - Established-Purpose. 
    There is hereby established a three percent utility user tax for the purpose of providing general fund operating funds for use by the City. 
(Ord. 629 § 1, 1986; Ord. 702 § 2, 1991) 
13.14.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Ordinance shall be construed as defined in this Section: 
A.  "City" shall mean the City of Beaumont. 
B.  "Month" shall mean a calendar month. 
C.  "Person" shall mean any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society or individuals. 
D.  "Tax Administrator" shall mean the Finance Director of the City of Beaumont. 
E.  "Telephone corporation", "Electrical corporation", "Gas corporation" and "Cable Television corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Section 234, 218, 222 and 215-5, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California as said sections existed on January 1, 1986. "Electrical corporation" shall be construed to include any municipality or franchised agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user. 
F.  "Service supplier" shall mean a utility company which receives taxes paid and remits same as imposed by this Ordinance. 
G.  "Service user" shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed by this Ordinance. 
H.  "Non-utility service supplier" shall mean a service supplier, other than an electrical corporation franchised to serve the City, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least 50 kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others. 
(Ord. 629 § 2, 1986; Ord. 702 § 2, 1991) 
13.14.030 - Exemptions. 
    Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the State of California. 
A.  A household with a combined annual gross income of $7,500.00 or less is eligible for exemption or refund when application is made pursuant to Sections 13.14.110 and 13.14.140(F). 
B.  The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this Chapter by virtue of this Section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
(Ord. 629 § 3, 1986; Ord. 702 § 2, 1991) 
13.14.040 - Telephone users tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate telephone services by every person in the City using such services. The tax imposed by this Section shall be at the rate of three percent of the charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
B.  As used in this Section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "charges" include charges for any type of service or equipment during any period in which the same lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to Public Utility regulations, nor shall the words "telephone communication service" include land mobile services or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as said Section existed on January 1, 1970. The term "telephone communication services" refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the City, irrespective of whether a particular communication services originates and/or terminates within the City. 
C.  The tax imposed by this Section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the intrastate telephone communications services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or the amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of each month. 
D.  The following shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section, if any: 
1.  Service paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones with respect to local telephone service, or with respect to toll telephone service if the charge for such toll telephone service is less than $0.25; except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be subject to the tax. 
2.  Payment received from any person for services used in the collection of news for the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or radio broadcasting, or in the dissemination of news through the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or by means of radio broadcasting, if the charge for such service is billed in writing to such person. 
3.  Payment received for services furnished to an international organization, or to the American National Red Cross. 
4.  Payment received for any toll telephone service which originates within a combat zone from a member of the Armed Forces of the United States performing service in such combat zone, as determined under such section, provided a certificate, setting forth such facts as applicable regulations may prescribe, is furnished to the person receiving such payment. 
(Ord. 629 § 4, 1986; Ord. 702 § 2, 1991; Ord. 903, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-06) 
13.14.050 - Electricity users tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City using electrical energy in the City. The tax imposed by this Section shall be at the rate of three percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation franchised to serve the City and shall be paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a non-utility service supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation available from the City. Non-utility suppliers shall install and maintain an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this Section. "Charges", as used in this Section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy, and (2) minimum charges for service including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, stand-by charges and annual and monthly charges, fuel cost adjustments, etc. 
B.  As used in this Section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business as an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the City of Beaumont for resale; or the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency. 
C.  The tax imposed in this Section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying such energy. The tax shall be self-imposed by non-utility suppliers as to their own use. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax, measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of each month. Remittance of tax may be predicated on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's customers. 
(Ord. 629 §5, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.060 - Gas users tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City, other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using in the City gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this Section shall be at the rate of three percent of the charges made for such gas and shall be paid by the person paying for such gas. "Charges" as used in this Section shall include: (1) gas which is delivered through mains or pipes; (2) minimum charges for such services, including customer charges, service charges and annual and monthly charges. 
B.  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this Section is computed: 
1.  Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; 
2.  Charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency; 
3.  Charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities; 
4.  Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, utilizing natural gas, and 
5.  Charges related to late payments and returned checks. 
C.  The tax imposed in this Section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling the gas. The person selling the gas shall, on or before the 20th of the calendar month, commencing on the 20th day of calendar month after the effective date of this part, make a return to the Tax Administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling the gas shall remit tax payments to the Tax Administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the Tax Administrator. 
(Ord. 629 §6, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.070 - Cable television users tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City using cable television service. The tax imposed by this Section shall be at the rate of three percent of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for such service. 
B.  The tax imposed in this Section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the cable television service. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 629 §7, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.080 - Penalty for delinquency. 
A.  Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this Ordinance are delinquent. 
B.  The interest penalty shall be the same as specified in Section 13.14.120, Paragraph D Administrative Remedy Penalty. 
(Ord. 629 §8, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.090 - Actions to collect. 
    Any such tax received from a service user which has willfully been withheld from the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit. Any person holding such money contrary to provisions of this Ordinance shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 629 §9, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.100 - Duty to collect-Procedures. 
    The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this Ordinance shall be performed as follows: 
A.  The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the energy charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charges has been. Any remaining balancing shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user shall be applied to the utility charges first until such charge has been satisfied. Any remaining balances shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on said energy charge, Section 13.14.120(c) will apply. 
B.  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period appliance to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of the Chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than other, the duty to collect hall arise separately for each billing. 
(Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.110 - Powers of Tax Administrator. 
A.  The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of the ordinance. 
B.  The Tax Administrator shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this ordinance for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator Office. 
C.  The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this Ordinance so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Ordinance. A copy of this agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's Office. 
D.  The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this Ordinance. The Tax Administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the Tax Administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with "the address and account numbers to which services are supplied to any such exempt person. The Tax Administrator shall notify the service supplier of the termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
(Ord. 629 §11, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.120 - Assessment-Collection by Tax Administrator. 
A.  The Tax Administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit. 
B.  Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax to such person, or whenever the Tax Administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, he may relieve such person of the obligation to collect taxes due under this Ordinance from certain named service users for specified billing periods. 
C.  The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused along with the names and addresses of the service users refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this Ordinance. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect back taxes due. 
D.  The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or should the service user have changed his address, to his last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within 15 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than $5.00. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 629 §12, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.130 - Records. 
    It hall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the City any tax imposed by this Ordinance to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.140 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this Ordinance, it may be refunded as provided in this Section. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this Section, a service supplier may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this ordinance, and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than three years from the date of overpayment. 
C.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
D.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this Section whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility service, the taxes paid pursuant to this ordinance on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this Ordinance is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the City. 
E.  If the amount of any tax paid is in excess of the Maximum amount payable as provided in any section hereof, the Tax Administrator shall refund the amount overpaid to the service user within 60 days after the service user has established his entitlement to such refund, provided that no refunds under this Subsection need be made more frequently than quarterly-annually. 
F.  A refund of all taxes due and paid under the provisions of this Ordinance for utility services rendered on and after July 1, 1990 and through June 30, 1991, or for any succeeding 12-month period, shall be made whenever all of the following occur: 
1.  The annual gross income of the household in which claimant lives is less than $7,500.00 for the claimant's preceding, federal or state personal income tax reporting period; 
2.  An amount greater than the maximum amount specified in Section 13.14.050(D) is paid; 
3.  Claimant makes application and files a verified claim in writing at the Department of Finance at City Hall for such refund upon a claim form provided by the Tax Administrator; 
4.  The claim is approved by the Tax Administrator as being in conformance with this Subsection. 
G.  Only one member of each household may file a claim, and only one claim may be filed for each individual household. 
H.  The claimant shall be the person in whose name the bills for utility services were rendered. "Income of the household" means all income of the claimant's household while members of such household are related to the claimant as a spouse or as defined in Sections 17056 and 17057 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of California. 
I.  "Gross income" shall mean the sum of adjusted gross income as used for purposes of the California Personal Income Tax Law, together with the net income from all sources of all kinds, including but not limited to alimony, support money, cash public assistance and relief, pensions, annuities, social security, interest on securities (including tax free interest on governmental securities), realized capital gains, workers' compensation (not including medical benefits), unemployment insurance income, insurance benefits of all kinds (other than medical), and gifts, except that income shall not include Medicare benefits, Medicaid benefits, gifts of food and gifts between members of the household, the receipt of surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a governmental agency. 
J.  The claim for such refund for the preceding 12-month period ending on June 30 shall be made only during the month of September or October of each year, and must be accompanied by a copy of the utility bills, together with proof that the utility taxes have been paid by the claimant or some member of the household. No such refund shall be made on any claim filed or postmarked later than the 31st day of October. 
K.  No refund shall be made to any person for taxes levied on a utility account for which any utility tax is due and outstanding for the period for which refund is claimed or for any prior period. No refund shall be made of any tax which was paid with public assistance or relief funds which included an allowance to pay the tax. 
L.  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require that any utility company has any obligation to make or furnish, for the purpose of the refund provisions hereof, proof of utility taxes due or utility taxes paid. 
(Ord. §14, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
13.14.150 - Civil debt. 
    The taxes imposed by this Ordinance shall be civil debts owing to the City from the service user. A service supplier is not liable to the City until the tax is collected from a service user. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 629 §15, 1986; Ord. 702 §2, 1991) 
Chapter 13.20 - PRETREATMENT AND REGULATION OF WASTES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1094, adopted Nov. 7, 2017 , amended Ch. 13.20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 13.20, §§ 13.20.005-13.20.320, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 627, § 4(Ext. A) (part), 1986. 

I. - PREAMBLE 

13.20.100 - Purpose and policy. 
    This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for all users of the Beaumont Wastewater Collection and Treatment System, which serves the City and certain unincorporated areas of Riverside County. Capitalized terms as used in this chapter are defined in Section 13.25.105. 
    The City discharges treated effluent from the Beaumont Wastewater Treatment Plant (hereinafter "plant") into permeable soil structures and surface waters of the State. The chemical nature of this effluent affects the quality of water flowing in the receiving stream as well as the quality of underground waters in the vicinity. 
    The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, (hereinafter the "Regional Board") has established discharge limitations for the chemical content of sewage effluent discharged by the City. These limitations are set forth from time to time in duly enacted Resolutions and Orders of the Regional Board. In order to conform to such sewage effluent discharge limitations and requirements, the City must regulate the discharge of waste to the Publically Owner Treatment Plant or "POTW" and the flow of waste into its storm drain system. 
    This Ordinance shall allow the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws required by the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). 
    The objectives of this Ordinance are: 
A.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which may interfere with the operation of the system, including but not limited to blockages caused by solids or Fats, Oils, and Grease "FOG" or pollutants that contaminate the resulting sludge; 
B.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which may pass through the system, inadequately treated, into surface waters, groundwaters, the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
C.  To ensure the quality of sludge to allow its disposal in compliance with statutes and regulations; 
D.  To protect the general public and POTW personnel; 
E.  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge; 
F.  To provide equitable distribution of costs of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and 
G.  To enable the POTW to comply with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other Federal or State laws. 
    This Ordinance shall apply to all users of the POTW. The Ordinance provides for regulation through issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and enforcement of general requirements for the other users. The Ordinance also authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, establishes administrative review procedures, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs for sewer service. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.105 - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
1.  Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. Pursuant to California Water Code § 13370 et seq., the State is authorized to implement the provisions of the Act. 
2.  Approved analytical methods. The sampling referred to in 40 CFR Part 403, Appendix E, and analysis of samples so collected, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the City and the EPA. 
3.  Approval authority. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region. 
4.  Approved pretreatment program. Shall mean a program administered by a POTW that meets the criteria established in 40 CFR 403.8 and 403.9 and which has been approved by a Regional Administrator or State Director in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11. 
5.  Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user means: 
a.  A responsible corporate officer, if the user submitting required reports is a corporation; 
b.  A general partner or proprietor if the user submitting the required reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; 
c.  The person in responsible charge, if the user is a governmental agency; or 
d.  An individual responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates. 
If authorization under this definition is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matter for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of these definitions shall be submitted to the City prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the new authorized representative. 
6.  Best Management Practices. The schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage of raw materials storage. 
7.  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen (expressed in mg/L), required to biochemically oxidize the organic material in a wastewater sample over a five-day period at 20 degrees centigrade. 
8.  BMR. Baseline monitoring report. This is the first report required by an industrial user that determined to be subject to a Categorical Pretreatment Standard. The purpose of the BMR is to provide information to the Control Authority to document the industrial user's current compliance with a Categorical Pretreatment Standard. 
9.  BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand (five-day). See definition under "Biochemical oxygen demand." 
10.  Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's pretreatment facilities. 
11.  Categorical industrial user. An industrial user who is subject to any promulgated Categorical Standard. 
12.  Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing Pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, as it exists and as it may be amended. 
13.  CFR. Code of Federal Regulations. 
14.  Chemical oxygen demand (COD). The quantity of oxygen (expressed in mg/L) required to chemically oxidize the contents of a wastewater sample under specific conditions of oxidizing agent, temperature, and time. 
15.  City. The City of Beaumont or the City Council of the City of Beaumont. 
16.  Class I user. A categorical industrial user. 
17.  Class II user. A non-categorical significant industrial user. 
18.  Class III user. A non-significant industrial user, including a non-significant categorical industrial users (NSCIU). 
19.  Class IV user. A temporary industrial user. 
20.  Class V user. A wastehauler. 
21.  COD. Chemical oxygen demand. See definition under "Chemical oxygen demand." 
22.  Compliance time schedule (CTS). A formal timetable issued by the Director for users to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or a wastewater discharge permit. Each compliance time schedule shall contain milestone dates as well as a final compliance date. 
23.  Composite sample. A sample which is collected from a wastewater discharge at selected intervals over a time period of 24 hours. A composite sample may be collected using automatic continuous or discrete sampling equipment, or by manually collecting a minimum of four grab samples. When specified by the Director, composite samples shall be collected in a manner which is proportional to the flow rate of the discharge. 
24.  Constituent. Any physical, chemical, or microbiological component or parameter of water or wastewater which can be quantified using Approved Analytical Methods. 
25.  Control authority. The term control authority refers to: 
a.  The POTW if the POTW's Pretreatment Program Submission has been approved in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.11; or 
b.  The approval authority if the submission has not been approved. 
26.  County. The County of Riverside or the Board of Supervisors of the County of Riverside. 
27.  Daily maximum limit. The term means the maximum allowable discharge limit that may be discharged during a calendar day and may be expressed as a concentration and/or lbs/day limit. 
28.  Director. The Public Works Director/City Engineer for the City of Beaumont or his authorized representative, agent or deputy. 
29.  Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
30.  Discharger. Any person who, directly or indirectly, causes or contributes to a discharge into the POTW. 
31.  Discharge to the ground. The discharge of wastewater to or into the soil which is not contained in an impermeable facility approved by the Director. 
32.  Domestic wastewater. Water bearing wastes from residences and other premises resulting from personal use of water for ordinary living processes of humans and of such a character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the POTW. The typical strength shall be considered from 250-300 mg/L each for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and for total suspended solids (TSS). 
33.  Effluent. The treated wastewater flowing from the wastewater treatment facilities, or the non-domestic wastewater discharged by an industrial user, to the POTW. 
34.  Enforcement response plan (ERP). A plan that details the progressive responses to escalating noncompliance issues related to violation(s) of a wastewater discharge permit or any section of this Ordinance. 
35.  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
36.  Exchange-type water conditioning equipment. Water conditioning equipment that is removed for regeneration from the premises at which it is normally operated to a commercial regeneration facility. 
37.  Fats, oils, and grease (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended. 
38.  Federal regulations. Any applicable provision of the Act as amended and any regulation promulgated by the EPA under Title 40 CFR implementing the Act. 
39.  Food processing facilities. Those wholesale or retail facilities which handle, process or prepare food intended for human and/or animal consumption. 
40.  Grab sample. A sample which is collected from a wastewater discharge, without regard to the flow in the wastestream, over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes. 
41.  Gravity separation interceptor (or grease interceptor ). A detention chamber designed to remove oil and grease, and solids from wastewater before discharge to the POTW and which detention chamber is acceptable to the Director. 
42.  Grease. See definition under "Oil and Grease." 
43.  Hazardous substance. Any substance which is toxic, explosive, corrosive, flammable or an irritant, or which generates pressure through heat or decomposition including but not limited to, any substances determined to be a toxic or hazardous substance pursuant to Section 307 and 311(b)(2) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C., Section 1251, et seq., or its implementing regulations at 40 CFR Parts 116 and 129; any substance classified as a hazardous substance pursuant to California Water Code Section 13050(p) and; any imminently hazardous chemical substance subject to regulation under the Toxic Mixtures or Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C., Section 2601, et seq. 
44.  Hazardous waste. Any hazardous substance which is either the resultant and/or intermediate or final by-product of any process. 
45.  Indirect discharge. See "Discharge." 
46.  Industrial user (IU). Any non-residential user who discharges non-domestic wastewater to the POTW. 
47.  Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected independent of the industrial flow rate and duration of the sample event. 
48.  Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
a.  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
b.  Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any applicable State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
49.  L. Liter. 
50.  LEL. Lower explosive limit. See definition under "Lower explosive limit." 
51.  Local limits. Discharge limits developed and enforced by the City upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
52.  Lower explosive limit (LEL). The minimum concentration of a combustible gas or vapor in the air which will ignite if an ignition source is present. 
53.  Mass emission rate. The mass of material discharged to the POTW during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall be expressed in pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
54.  May is permissive. 
55.  MBAS. Methylene Blue Activated Substances. 
56.  Medical waste. Isolated wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, formites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, dialysis wastes, hypodermic needles, syringes, instruments, utensils or any other paper or plastic items of disposable nature used for medically related purposes. The term "Medical waste" shall exclude de minimus amounts of wastes, human blood and paper items of a disposable nature associated with domestic wastewater discharges. 
57.  Mg. Milligrams. 
58.  Milligrams per liter (mg/L). Shall mean unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 1 gram of the constituent in 1,000 liters of water. 
59.  Monthly average limit. Shall mean the highest allowable average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month 
60.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. The permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342) for the City's POTW treatment plant. 
61.  New source. Is defined in 40 CFR 403.3 and shall mean any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
62.  Non-categorical significant industrial user. A significant industrial user who is not subject to promulgated Categorical Standards. 
63.  Non-contact cooling or heating water. Water discharge from any use which has no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate or final product, and to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
64.  Non-domestic wastewater. All wastewater except domestic wastewater and unpolluted water as defined herein. Non-domestic wastewater shall include, but not be limited to, wastewater resulting from Industrial, commercial, producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, governmental, and agricultural operations, and brine wastewater resulting from the regeneration of water conditioning devices. All liquid wastewater hauled by truck, rail, or any other means shall also be considered as non-domestic wastewater, regardless of the original source of the wastes. 
65.  Non-significant categorical industrial user (NSCIU). A categorical industrial user that meets all of the following requirements: (a) never discharges more than 100 gallons per day of a total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the applicable Pretreatment Standard); (b) if an existing facility has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; (c) annually submits the certification statement required in § 403.12(q) together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; (d) never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater; and (e) is found by the Director to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or requirement. 
66.  Non-significant industrial user (NSIU). Any industrial user who is not a significant industrial user, including without limitation any NSCIU. 
67.  NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
68.  NPDES permit. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit. See definition under "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit." 
69.  Oil and grease. Any of the following in part of in combination: 
a.  Petroleum derived products, e.g., oils, fuels, lubricants, solvents; 
b.  Vegetable derived products, e.g., oils, shortenings, soluble cutting oils; 
c.  Animal derived products, e.g., fats, greases, oils, lard. 
70.  Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
71.  Permittee. Any user or group of users which are issued a permit to discharge to the POTW pursuant to Sections 13.08.300 et seq. of the Beaumont Municipal Code. The permit may be an individual (for a specific industrial user) or group (general) permit as deemed appropriate by the Director to control wastewater discharges to the POTW. 
72.  Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their representatives, agents, or assigns. 
73.  pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, as analyzed in accordance with Approved Analytical Methods. pH represents both acidity and alkalinity on a scale ranging from 0 to 14 where 7 represents neutrality, numbers less than 7 increasing acidity and more than 7 increasing alkalinity. 
74.  Plumbing Official. Plumbing Official shall mean the Director of Community Development of the City or his authorized representative or deputy. 
75.  Pollutant. Any constituent or characteristic (including but not limited to pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor) of wastewater on which a discharge limit may be imposed either by the City or regulatory bodies empowered to regulate the POTW; and any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemicals wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agriculture wastes. 
76.  Pollution. The man-made or man-induced adverse alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
77.  POTW. Publicly owned treatment works. See definition under "Publicly owned treatment works." 
78.  POTW treatment plant. The portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
79.  Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of Pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or process changes of other means, except, as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d), with the use of dilution. 
80.  Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural pretreatment requirement, other than a Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
81.  Pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits or prohibitions promulgated by EPA or the City, applicable to industrial users, including promulgated Categorical Standards; National Prohibitive Discharge Standards developed pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5, general discharge prohibitions contained in Section 13.20.210 herein; and any specific local discharge limits established by the City. 
82.  Pretreatment wastes. All wastes liquid or solids, removed from a waste stream or discharge by physical, chemical or biological means. 
83.  Process wastewater. means any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. 
84.  Public sewer. Any sewer located in or maintained by the City of Beaumont. The term as used herein does not include storm drains or channels for conveyance of natural surface waters. 
85.  Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). The Beaumont Wastewater Treatment Plant and any other devices or systems used by the City in the storage, conveyance (including all sewers, pipes, lift stations, and other conveyances which convey wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant), treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage. 
86.  RCRA. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) as amended or revised. 
87.  Regional Board. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region. 
88.  Responsible Corporate Officer. 
a.  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation. 
b.  The Manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the Manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
89.  Restaurants. Restaurants shall include, but not be limited to, retail establishments selling prepared foods and drinks for consumption or off the premises. 
90.  Sample point. A location approved by the Director from which wastewater that is representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of wastewater being sampled can be collected. 
91.  Septic waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump trucks. 
92.  Service area. The area in which discharges to the sewerage system flow to, or are intended by the City to flow to, the POTW. 
93.  Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
94.  Sewer collection system. All facilities, owned and maintained by the City, that are used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater, excluding sewer service laterals. 
95.  Sewer service lateral. The wastewater collection pipe extending from the structure where the wastewater is generated up to and including the connection to the City's sewer collection system. 
96.  Shall is mandatory. 
97.  SIC. Standard industrial classification. 
98.  Significant industrial user (SIU). An industrial user of the POTW who (1) is subject to categorical standards, or (2) has an average daily discharge of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary waste, unpolluted water, and boiler/cooling tower blowdown discharges), or (3) has a discharge which makes up five percent or more of the average dry-weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater treatment facilities receiving the wastewater, or (4) has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act, or (5) is designated by the Director to have a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any applicable pretreatment standard, requirement or discharge limit set forth in this chapter. 
99.  Significant noncompliance (SNC). Violations of pretreatment standards or requirements, which include violations of effluent limits, sampling violations, analysis violations, reporting violations, compliance schedule and regulatory deadline violations, which satisfy one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Violations of wastewater discharge limits: 
i.  Chronic Violations. Sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l); 
ii.  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations. Thirty-three percent or more of all the measurements for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
iii.  Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum or long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of the POTW personnel or the public). 
iv.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
v  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, achieving final compliance; 
vi.  Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
vii.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
viii.  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the Pretreatment Program. 
100.  Single pass non-contact cooling or heating water. Water used solely for the purpose of cooling or heating, which has no direct contact with any raw material, or any intermediate, final or waste product, and which is used only once and then discarded. 
101.  SIU. See definition under "Significant industrial user." 
102.  Slug discharge control plan. A plan submitted to the City by a user pursuant to Section 13.08.330D of this chapter, which specifies to the Director's satisfaction the potential pollutants used and/or stored at the user's facility; potential pathways of entry of the potential pollutants into the POTW; and facilities and procedures for preventing or controlling the occurrence of slug loading. 
103.  Slug loading (slug discharge). The discharge of any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), which is released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which may cause pass through of or interference with the POTW. 
104.  SNC. Significant noncompliance. See definition under "Significant noncompliance." 
105.  Solvent management plan (toxic organic management plan). A plan submitted to the City by an industrial user pursuant to Section 13.20.330C of this section, which specifies to the Director's satisfaction the solvents and other toxic organic compounds used and stored; the methods of delivery, storage, and disposal used; and procedures for assuring that solvents and other toxic organics do not routinely spill or leak into the POTW or ground. 
106.  Specific compliance plan. A plan submitted to the City by an industrial user pursuant to Section 13.08.330E of this section, which specifies to the Director's satisfaction the cause of noncompliance, the corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence of the noncompliance, and, if required by the Director, a proposed compliance time schedule. 
107.  Spent solutions. Any concentrated non-domestic wastewater (i.e., plating solutions and static rinses), which contains concentrations of pollutants, the discharge of which may cause interference, pass through or a violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
108.  Spill containment. A protection system to prevent the discharge of noncompliant pollutants to the sewerage system. 
109.  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987 or latest edition thereof. 
110.  Standard methods. "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," latest edition, prepared and published by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and Water Environment Federation, which specifies accepted procedures used to assess the quality of water and wastewater. 
111.  State. State of California. 
112.  State Water Board. The State of California Water Resources Control Board. 
113.  Stormwater. Any flow of water resulting from natural precipitation. 
114.  Stormwater system. All stormwater conveyance and treatment facilities located within the City including, but not limited to storm drains, catch basins, storm drain manholes, and storm water pumping facilities. 
115.  SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq. 
116.  TDS. Total dissolved solids. See definition under "Total dissolved solids." 
117.  Temporary industrial user. Any industrial user who is granted temporary permission by the Director to discharge unpolluted water or wastewater to the POTW. Such temporary permission shall not be granted to industrial users subject to promulgated categorical standards. 
118.  TFR. Total filterable residue. See definition under "Total suspended solids." 
119.  Total dissolved solids (TDS). The quantity of nonvolatile substances remaining after filtration through a standard filter and drying to constant weight at 180 degrees C, expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l) and analyzed in accordance with approved analytical methods. TDS is synonymous with total filterable residue (TFR). 
120.  Total suspended solids. The concentration of nonfilterable residue determined in conformance with standard methods procedures 
121.  Total toxic organics (TTO). The sum of the concentrations for each of the toxic organic compounds regulated by applicable categorical standards which are found in the user's discharge at a concentration greater than 0.010 mg/L, and analyzed in accordance with approved analytical methods. The local limit TTO constituents shall be defined in the local limit resolution. 
122.  Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401.15 or 40 CFR 403, Appendix B. 
123.  TRC. Technical review criteria. 
124.  TSS. Total suspended solids. 
125.  Unpolluted water. Non-contact cooling or heating water, air conditioning condensate, ice melt, condensate, rain water, or uncontaminated groundwater, surface water, stormwater or other water to which no pollutant has been added either intentionally or unintentionally. 
126.  U.S.C. United States Code. 
127.  User. Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW. 
128.  Wastehauler. Any person engaging in vehicular transport of waste, as part of or incidental to any business, for the purpose of discharging the transported waste to the POTW. 
129.  Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried domestic wastes or non-domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, Industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
130.  Wastewater discharge permit or permit. The regulatory procedure established and enforced by the Director to control the flow and quality of wastes discharged into the POTW. 
131.  Wastewater treatment facilities. The structures, equipment, and processes maintained by the City which accept untreated sewage from the public sewer and which treat and dispose of domestic and non-domestic wastewater. 
132.  Water conditioning equipment. Any device or apparatus used to soften or otherwise condition water, including zeolite or resinous anion or cation exchange softeners, demineralizers or any other like device. 
133.  Waters of the States. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, well, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. Words used in this chapter in the singular may include the plural and the plural the singular. Use of masculine shall include feminine and the use of feminine shall include masculine. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

13.20.200 - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided, the Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the Director to other persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.201 - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any pipe on private property with any pipe that is connected with the public sewer, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.202 - Design and construction of sewer lateral connections. 
    All connections (sewer laterals) shall be designed and constructed in accordance with established City standards. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.203 - Responsibility for installation, maintenance and replacement. 
    The costs for installation, maintenance, and replacement of the sewer service lateral as defined in Section 13.20.105, shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.204 - Responsibility for removal of obstructions in sewer service laterals. 
    The City is not responsible for maintaining the sewer service lateral as defined in Section 13.20.105. When necessary, to mitigate a sanitary sewer overflow caused by a sewer service lateral blockage, the property owner shall pay to the City all costs associated with the remediation of such obstruction including cleanup. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.205 - Authorization for new or increased pollutant discharges or changes in the nature of pollutant discharges. 
    It is unlawful to commence, increase, or substantially change any discharge of wastewater to the POTW except as authorized by the Director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The City may deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.207 - Record keeping. 
    Each permittee shall retain records of all monitoring activities, including documentation associated with best management practices. Such records shall include for all samples: 
a.  the date, exact place, method, time of sampling and the name of person or persons taking the samples; 
b.  the dates analyses were performed; 
c.  who performed the analyses; 
d.  the analytical techniques or methods used; and 
e.  the results of the analyses. 
    All calibration and maintenance records and all original chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by the permit, and records of all data used to complete the application for the permit, for a period of at least three years from the date of the sample, measurement, report or application. This period may be extended by request of the Director at any time. 
    All records that pertain to matters that are the subject of special orders or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the City shall be retained and preserved by the permittee until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.210 - General discharge prohibitions. 
    No person shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference with the operation or performance of the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.211 - Specific discharge prohibitions. 
    No person shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
A.  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire, explosion, or in any other way be injurious to the POTW or to operation of the POTW including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade; 
B.  Any solids or viscous substance of such size or character, or in such quantity that they may cause obstruction to flow in the collection system or be detrimental to proper wastewater treatment plant operations; 
C.  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 11.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW; 
D.  Any wastewater containing hazardous substances or toxic pollutants, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process including sludge disposal, constitute a hazard to human or animals, or create a hazardous effect or acute or chronic toxicity in the receiving waters of the POTW; 
E.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; 
F.  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent, or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to violate applicable sludge use or disposal regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Clean Air Act, Toxic Substances Control Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, or state regulations; 
G.  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
H.  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 60 degrees Centigrade (140 degrees Fahrenheit), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant to exceed 40 degrees Centigrade (104 degrees Fahrenheit); 
I.  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference, pass through, or otherwise cause violation of the NPDES permit or receiving water quality standards; 
J.  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
K.  Any discharge which may, alone or in combination with other waste substances, result in the presence of toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, gases, vapors, or fumes in the POTW in such quantities that would create a hazard, public nuisance, or acute worker health and safety problems; 
L.  Any stormwater, groundwater, well water, street drainage, sub-surface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds, lawn sprinklers, or any type of surface water or unpolluted water. The Director may approve, on a temporary basis, the discharge of such waters to the POTW when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available, subject to the payment of all applicable user charges and fees by the discharger. Water from swimming pools, wading pools, and therapy pools may be discharged to the sewerage system between 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless specifically prohibited by the Director; 
M.  Any wastewater, sludge or septic waste removed from a cesspool, septic tank, chemical toilet or similar waste holding device, except such wastes which are discharged to the POTW in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the City. No wastehauler discharging septic waste to the POTW shall discharge constituents in excess of the limits for wastehaulers set forth by resolution of the City and amended from time to time; 
N.  Any trucked or hauled pollutants or wastewater, except at such place and in such manner as authorized by a wastewater discharge permit issued by the City; 
O.  Any pesticides or fertilizers in amounts which may cause interference or pass through; 
P.  Any non-biodegradable cutting oil, petroleum oil, refined petroleum products, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts which could cause interference or pass through; 
Q.  Any substances containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). PCBs include, but are not limited to, the following: Aroclors 1016, 1221, 1228, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, 1260 and 1262; 
R.  Any excessive quantities of dispersed biodegradable oils or fats such as lard, tallow, or vegetable oil or any other substances that may precipitate, solidify, or become viscous at temperatures between 140 degrees Fahrenheit; 
S.  Any pretreatment wastes. All pretreatment wastes shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, state, county, and other local laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.215 - Prohibition against discharging solid or fluid material to watercourse. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any storm drain, stormwater channel, or natural watercourse, whether currently carrying water or not, or into any pipe, parking lot, street, gutter, or waterway leading to such drain, channel, or watercourse, any solid or fluid material which will impair the useful functioning of such drain, channel, or watercourse, or which will cause expense to the City, or other public agency, in maintaining the proper functioning of same, or which will cause or threaten to cause a public nuisance, public hazard, or pollution of waters of the state. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.220 - Prohibition against discharging pollutants to the ground. 
    No person shall deposit or discharge, or cause to be deposited or discharged, into any sump which is not impermeable, or into any pit or well, or onto the ground, or into any storm drain or watercourse, any material which, by seeping underground or by being leached or by reacting with the soil, can pollute usable groundwaters. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.222 - Point of discharge limits. 
    No person, excluding authorized City personnel involved in maintenance of POTW facilities, shall discharge any wastewater directly into the POTW other than through an approved building sewer, unless written permission for the discharge has been granted by the Director. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.223 - Prohibition against dilution. 
    No person shall increase the use of process water or, in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with categorical standards, the discharge limits contained in this chapter or in any wastewater discharge permit, or any other pollutant limit developed by the City. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.225 - Special restrictions, vehicle servicing facilities. 
A.  Any facility maintained for the servicing, repair, washing, or cleaning of any vehicles or roadway machinery, including car and truck washes, which discharges non-domestic wastewater, shall install and maintain a gravity separation interceptor in accordance with Section 13.20.253. Wastewater from toilets shall not be allowed to pass through the interceptor, but all wastewaters arising from the servicing, repair, washing or cleaning of vehicles shall pass through the interceptor before discharge to the POTW. 
1.  If the vehicle servicing facility is only capable of serving one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have a fluid detention capacity of at least 100 gallons. 
2.  If the vehicle servicing facility has facilities for servicing, repair, washing, or cleaning more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall be as large as necessary so that seven-day accumulation of sand and oil will not together fill more than 25 percent of the fluid capacity, and shall have a fluid detention capacity of at least 750 gallons. The interceptor shall be designed so as to retain any oil and grease which will float and any sand which will settle. 
B.  Any interceptor legally and properly installed at a vehicle servicing facility before June 2, 1990 shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified in Subsection A of this section provided such interceptor is properly maintained, effective in removing sand and oil, and designed and installed so that it can be inspected. 
C.  The plumbing official shall not approve the plumbing of a vehicle servicing facility which is designed to accommodate the discharge of non-domestic wastewater if it does not have a gravity separation interceptor meeting the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.230 - Restrictions on water-softening wastes. 
A.  It is unlawful to install, replace, or enlarge apparatus for softening all or any part of the water supply to any residential premises when such apparatus is an ion exchange softener or demineralizer of the type that is regenerated on the site of use, except as otherwise authorized by the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Sections 116775 through 116795, inclusive, and any amendment thereto. 
B.  This section shall not apply to existing units nor to apparatus of the type which is regenerated off-site by a water conditioning company. 
C.  This section shall not apply to any type of commercial or Industrial softening apparatus which will be considered individually in connection with non-domestic wastewater controls. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.235 - Special restrictions-Food processing facilities. 
    All food processing facilities, including restaurants, which discharge food processing wastes to the POTW, shall direct all wastewater from floor drains and sinks in the food processing area, waste container wash racks, and dishwashers through a minimum of 100-gallon gravity separation interceptor in accordance with Section 13.20.253. All domestic wastewaters from restrooms, showers, mop sinks, and drinking fountains shall be kept separate until the previously specified wastes have passed through the interceptor. Sizing of interceptor shall be determined as described in the latest version of Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City except that the capacity of the interceptor shall not be less than 100 gallons, unless a conditional waiver is granted pursuant to Section 13.20.237. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.237 - Conditional waivers. 
    Conditional waivers modifying or waiving the gravity separation interceptor requirements may be granted by the Director for those restaurants and other food processing facilities determined not to have the potential to adversely affect the POTW. Conditional waivers may be revoked for the following reasons: 
A.  Changes in types of food prepared or served; 
B.  Falsification of information submitted to the City; 
C.  Changes in operating hours; 
D.  Changes in equipment used. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.240 - Specific local discharge limits. 
A.  Except as specifically allowed by the Director on a temporary basis or as provided herein, no Class I or Class II user shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the POTW any wastewater unless it conforms to all the applicable local discharge limits as set forth by resolution of the City and amended from time to time as needed to protect the POTW and comply with current and future state and federal regulatory requirements. 
    The local discharge limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The Director may impose average daily, monthly and/or mass limits in addition to the instantaneous concentration based limits set forth by resolution of the City. Further, the City may establish Best Management Practices (BMPs) for certain industries as needed to control discharges to the wastewater system. 
B.  Specific Local Pollutant Mass Emission Rate Limits. The Director may authorize the discharge of non-domestic wastewater to the POTW which contains pollutants in concentrations exceeding the specific local pollutant concentration limits contained herein, when said concentrations, in combination with the measured discharge flow rate, do not exceed specific local mass emission rate limits which are computed for the individual discharger on the basis of the specific local pollutant concentration limits and the discharger's permitted discharge flow rate limit, and which are issued to the discharger as part of the discharger's permit. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.242 - Prohibition on disposal of spent solutions and sludges. 
    No user shall discharge to the POTW spent solutions, sludges, or any other materials of a quantity or quality in violation of or prohibited by this chapter or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. All waste manifests for such materials shall be retained for a minimum of three years, and made available to the City upon request. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.243 - Prohibition on discharge of medical waste. 
A.  No person shall discharge to the POTW medical wastes from hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors, convalescent homes, medical laboratories, other medical facilities or any other locations except where prior written authorization for such discharges is given by the Director following the Director's determination that the discharge will not, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, adversely affect the operation and maintenance of the POTW. If written authorization for such a discharge is given, the Director shall have the authority to require that any discharge of an infectious waste to the sewer be rendered noninfectious prior to discharge if the infectious waste is deemed to pose a threat to the public health and safety, or will result in any violation of applicable waste discharge requirements. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.245 - Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
    Promulgated National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, located in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, are incorporated into this chapter. Upon the promulgation of new or revised categorical pretreatment standards for a particular Industrial subcategory, the new or revised categorical pretreatment standards shall immediately be deemed incorporated herein. The Director shall notify affected users of applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 401, et seq. 
    No user subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the POTW any wastewater which is not in conformance with the discharge limits set forth in the categorical pretreatment standards, including any revisions thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.13 and by establishing to the satisfaction of the Director, that the discharge will not adversely affect POTW operation and maintenance. 
    If a categorical pretreatment standard establishes a discharge limit which conflicts with a local discharge limit, the more stringent discharge limit shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.247 - Mass emission rates. 
A.  Mass emission rates for pollutants that are present or anticipated in a user's wastewater discharge may be set for each user and made an applicable part of each user's permit. These rates shall be based on specific local wastewater discharge limits as adopted by resolution of the City and amended from time to time or categorical pretreatment standards, and the user's average daily wastewater discharge for the past three years, the most recent representative data, or other data acceptable to the Director. 
B.  To verify the user's operating data, the Director may require a user to submit an inventory of all wastewater streams and/or records indicating production rates. 
C.  The Director may revise limits or mass emission rates previously established in the user's permit at any time, based on: (1) current or anticipated operating data of the discharger or the City; (2) the City's ability to meet NPDES limits; or (3) changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies. 
D.  The excess use of water to establish an artificially high flow rate for mass emission rate determination is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.250 - Pretreatment. 
    Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable, promulgated categorical standards within the time limitations specified therein. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to meet applicable discharge limits shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in proper operating condition at the user's expense. 
    Upon request by the Director, users shall provide to the City detailed construction drawings and plumbing plans showing existing process equipment, pretreatment facilities, spill containment facilities, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and a description of existing operating procedures. Prior to construction of new or modified facilities, users shall submit to the Director for review and acceptance, detailed construction plans and a description of proposed operating procedures for any new equipment or facilities. Users shall submit any subsequent changes in operating procedures of the equipment or facilities to the Director for review and acceptance prior to initiation of the changes. The review and acceptance of such drawings and operating procedures by the Director shall not relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the equipment or facilities as necessary to produce an effluent in compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.252 - Prohibited discharge of recovered pretreatment wastes. 
    No person shall discharge wastes recovered from pretreatment devices into any sewer or storm drain opening, any drains or other openings leading to any sewer or storm drain, parking lot, street, curb and gutter, or the ground. All recovered pretreatment wastes shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, state, county and local laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.253 - Gravity separation interceptor. 
    Any person so required by the Director, shall install and maintain a gravity separation interceptor. Domestic wastewater shall not be allowed to pass through this interceptor. This interceptor shall have an operational fluid capacity of not less than 100 gallons and shall be designed to retain any material which will float and any material which will settle. The interceptor shall be watertight, structurally sound, and durable. Interceptors of less than 750 gallons capacity and interceptors for restaurants and food processing facilities shall have no less than two compartments. Interceptors of 750 gallons or larger shall conform to the City's most current approved standard drawings for gravity separation interceptors. 
A.  Interceptor Requirements. 
1.  All interceptor chambers shall be immediately accessible at all times for the purpose of inspection and cleaning. At no time shall any material, debris, obstacles or obstructions be placed in such a manner so as to prevent immediate access to the interceptor. 
2.  All interceptors of 300 gallons capacity or larger shall be equipped with a sample chamber located at the downstream end of the interceptor. The sample chamber shall have a 24-inch square, or 24-inch diameter, clear opening for the temporary installation of the City's portable automatic sampling equipment. Any sample chamber legally and properly installed before the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter shall be acceptable as an alternative to the sample chamber specified herein, provided such sample chamber is so designed and installed that the City's portable automatic sampling equipment may be readily installed therein, or the owner provides a secure and protected location for installation of such sampling equipment within an eight-foot radius of the sample chamber. 
3.  Any interceptor legally and properly installed before the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this chapter shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified herein, provided such interceptor is effective in removing floatable and settleable material and is so designed and installed that it can be inspected and properly maintained. 
4.  If the Director finds that an interceptor is incapable of adequately retaining the floatable and settleable material in the wastewater flow or is structurally incomplete, he shall notify the owner that it does not meet the requirements of this section and shall require the user to install, at the user's expense, an acceptable interceptor. 
B.  Interceptor Approval. If a gravity separation interceptor is required, the plumbing official shall only approve plumbing plans which include an interceptor which meets the requirements of this section. 
C.  Interceptor Maintenance. Any person who owns, operates, or maintains a gravity separation interceptor shall maintain it properly. It shall be cleaned as often as is necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the interceptor. The use of chemicals to dissolve grease is specifically prohibited. When an interceptor is cleaned, the accumulated sediment and floating material shall be removed and legally disposed of otherwise than to the sewer. An interceptor is not considered to be properly maintained if for any reason it is not in good working condition or if the operational fluid capacity has been reduced by more than 25 percent by the accumulation of floating and settling solids, oils and grease. The owner of any facility required to install an interceptor, the lessee and sublessee, if there be such, and any proprietor, operator or superintendent of such facility are individually and severally liable for any failure of proper maintenance of such interceptor. If the interceptor is not properly maintained under the conditions of use, the Director may require that the interceptor be resized and replaced. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.255 - Monitoring facilities. 
    The City may require, at the user's expense, installation and operation of monitoring facilities to allow inspection of discharges to the POTW, monitoring of wastewater quality, and collection of wastewater samples. The monitoring facilities, including sampling and monitoring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. The City may require that the monitoring facilities include a security enclosure that can be locked with a City provided hasp lock, or similar device, during monitoring or upon termination of service. 
    Monitoring facilities shall normally be situated on private property, but the City may, when such a location would be impractical, allow the facilities to be constructed in public right-of-way. 
    There shall be ample room in or near any monitoring facility to allow installation of portable sampling and monitoring equipment by the Director. 
    Construction drawings for proposed monitoring facilities shall be submitted to the Director for review prior to construction. The sampling and monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written acceptance by the Director. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.257 - Flow metering facilities. 
    The Director may require any Class I or Class II user to install a flow meter capable of measuring, recording, and totalizing the discharge to the POTW on a continuous basis. The flow measuring equipment shall conform to the requirements of the Director. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.260 - Inspection and sampling. 
    The Director shall have the right to enter the premises of any user where non-domestic wastewater is created or discharged during all times that the user's facility is open, operating or at any other reasonable time to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or administrative order issued hereunder. The users or the occupants of such premises shall allow the Director ready access to all parts of the premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records, and any other activities related to determining compliance with this chapter. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Director access to the user's premises shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
    The Director shall inspect the facilities of each Class I and Class II user a minimum of once each year, and shall sample the discharge of each Class I and Class II user a minimum of once each year. 
    The Director shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force, which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director will be permitted to enter, without delay, for purposes of performing the functions described in this section. 
    All sampling and reporting of monitoring results shall comply with 40 CFR 136 and 40 CFR 403.12(g). In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.262 - Sampling and analysis-Fee-Billing. 
A.  Sampling and analysis shall be at the expense of the user. The actual cost for laboratory analyses and reports and an administrative fee, shall be the obligation of the occupants of the premises where the wastewater is created or discharged. 
B.  The administrative fee shall be fixed by the City Manager based on the City's current overhead cost allocation percentage. 
C.  The expense to be paid by the user shall be billed and be payable the same as for other sewer-use charges. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.265 - Confidential information. 
    Information and data regarding a user, obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections, shall be available without restriction to the EPA, the State Water Board, and the regional board. Such information shall also be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request shall be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data and marked "Confidential Business Information" by the user on each page containing information asserted to be trade secrets. The demonstration of the need for confidentiality made by the user must meet the burden necessary for withholding such information from the general public under applicable state and federal law. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined in 40 CFR 2.302 shall not constitute confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction. 
    Information which a user demonstrates to constitute a trade secret shall not be made available for inspection by the public without prior notification to the user, but shall be made available to the EPA, the State Water Board, and the Regional Board, and upon written request, to other governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES permit, or other state regulations. Such information shall also be available for use in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user furnishing the information. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.267 - Industrial user survey. 
    The Director shall prepare and maintain a current list of industrial users subject to the requirements of this chapter. Each industrial user listed shall be identified by class. Class I industrial users shall be further identified by a citation of the applicable, promulgated categorical standards. At least once every two years, the Director shall conduct a survey of facilities located within the POTW service area to identify any facilities which should be added to the list of industrial users. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.270 - Reporting changes in discharge, slug loading, and potential problems. 
    All industrial users shall promptly notify the City in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge. If any routine or special sampling or monitoring by an industrial user indicates that, for any reason, pollutants are discharged at a rate or concentration which may cause pass through or interference with the POTW, a violation of categorical standards or permit limits, violation of Sections 13.20.211 or 13.20.240, or a hazard to City, POTW personnel and/or the public, the user shall verbally notify the Director and POTW staff immediately. If the discharge to the sewerage system has the potential to cause a fire or explosion hazard, the industrial user shall also immediately notify the fire department. The verbal report to the City shall be followed by a written report submitted to the Director within 24 hours describing the cause of the incident and corrective action taken by the user. The user shall also collect a representative repeat sample of the discharge and submit the analysis to the City within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation to determine whether compliance has been achieved. 
    The notification provided pursuant to this section shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred pursuant to this chapter or other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.272 - Notification of bypass. 
A.  Bypass of non-domestic wastewater to the sewerage system is prohibited. The City may take enforcement action against the user unless: 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable because it was done to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, elective slow-down or shut-down of production units or maintenance during periods of production downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment could have been feasibly installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
3.  The permittee submitted notices as required under subsection B of this section. 
4.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the user shall be liable to the City for any expenses or costs incurred by the City as a result of a bypass. 
B.  If a permittee knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit a written request to allow the bypass to the Director, if possible, at least ten days before the date of the bypass. 
C.  The Director may approve an anticipated bypass at his sole discretion after considering its adverse effects, and the Director determines that the conditions listed in subsection (A)(1) to (3) are met. 
D.  A permittee shall provide telephone notification to the City of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds its permitted discharge limits within four hours from the time the permittee becomes aware of the bypass. A written report shall also be provided within five days of the time the permittee becomes aware or could reasonably have been aware of the bypass. The report shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. Failure to submit oral notice or written report may be grounds for permit revocation. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.275 - Annual public notice of significant noncompliance. 
    Each year, the Director shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the service area, a list of all industrial users determined to have been in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or requirements during the previous 12 months. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.280 - Damage to City's equipment or facilities. 
    Any unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing, or tampering with any temporary or permanent structure, equipment, or appurtenance which is part of the POTW shall be a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.282 - Compensation for unauthorized discharges. 
    Any user who discharges wastewater which impairs, interferes with or damages the POTW, its operations or monitoring equipment, detrimentally affects the wastewater treatment process, significantly increases POTW operation costs, requires non-routine inspection and/or sampling, or results in any other damages, costs or expenses, including the imposition of fines or penalties on the City, shall be liable to the City for all damages, costs and expenses occasioned thereby. An administrative fee, which shall be fixed by the City Manager based on the City's current overhead cost allocation percentage, shall be added to these charges. The City's total expenses shall be payable within 30 days of invoicing by the City. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.284 - Charges. 
    Charges for sewer use shall be established and revised periodically by ordinance or resolution, as appropriate, of the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.286 - City's right of revision. 
    The City reserves the right to amend this chapter to impose more stringent discharge limits or requirements if deemed appropriate to advance the objectives presented in Section 13.20.100 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.295 - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter are to be reasonably interpreted. It is the intent herein to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard to surface and underground waters and to apply the principal that the degree of protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.296 - Severability. 
    If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and articles shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
III. - PERMITS 

13.20.300 - Wastewater discharge permits. 
    All Class I, Class II, Class IV and Class V users and those Class III users so notified by the Director, which propose to connect or to discharge to the POTW, shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging to the POTW. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit shall not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with any other applicable requirements of federal, state and/or local law. Class I, Class II, Class IV and Class V users are issued individual or site-specific permits. Class III user permits may be either individual or group (general) permits as deemed appropriate by the Director. In general, when it has been established that a group of similar type businesses (i.e. restaurants, photo processing, car washes, and automotive repair, etc.) are better regulated using Best Management Practices (BMPs), a general permit will be issued with conditions and BMP requirements that have been established for a specified business group. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.305 - Permit applications. 
    Users required to obtain a permit shall complete and file with the Director an application in a form prescribed by him and submit any required application, filing, or permit fee. Applicable permit fees shall be established by separate ordinance or resolution of the City. Users for whom permits are mandatory must make application for and obtain a permit which shall govern each wastewater connection to the City's wastewater system. Said users include existing connections, new connections, and extra-jurisdictional users. 
    New Class I and Class II users shall apply for a permit at least 90 days prior to connecting to or discharging to the POTW. Class III users shall apply for a permit within 30 days after receiving notification to apply from the Director. Class IV users shall apply for a permit at least ten days prior to the proposed discharge. Class V users shall apply for a permit at least five days prior to the proposed discharge. 
    The following information may be required with the permit application: 
A.  Name, address, and location of the facility (if different from the address); 
B.  Names and addresses of the operator and owner, if different than above; 
C.  Name and address of all principals, owners, major shareholders of company, articles of incorporation; business license (if applicable); 
D.  Name and address of property owners, landlord and/or property manager of the facility site; 
E.  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1987, as amended; 
F.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics of the proposed discharge, as determined by a state certified analytical laboratory using approved analytical methods and sampling procedures in accordance with 40 CFR 136 and 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3), and other EPA approved analytical methods; 
G.  Time, volume and duration of proposed discharge(s); 
H.  Average daily, peak daily, and 15-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any; 
I.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, including details showing all sewers, sewer connections, treatment facilities, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. If required by the Director, such plans shall be certified by a civil engineer registered in the State of California; 
J.  A process flow schematic diagram. If required by the Director, the diagram shall be certified by a civil engineer registered in the State of California; 
K.  Descriptions of activities, facilities, operations and planned processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
L.  Number and type of employees, and hours of plant operation, and proposed or actual hours of pretreatment system operation; 
M.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
N.  A time schedule for compliance with any categorical standards or provisions of this chapter for which immediate compliance is not possible; 
O.  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the user's facility, and a copy of the Riverside County "Business Plan" which addresses the location, type, and quantity of hazardous materials handled by the user; 
P.  Water supplier and water account numbers; 
Q.  Volume of cooling tower capacity, if applicable; 
R.  Waste minimization and water conservation practices; 
S.  Production records, if applicable; 
T.  Waste manifests, if applicable; 
U.  EPA hazardous waste generator number, if applicable; 
V.  Additional information may be required of wastehaulers, including the following: 
1.  A description of the industries and clients using the applicant's services; 
2.  Name and address of leaseholder of the vehicle or trailer, if applicable; 
3.  Number of trucks and trailers used and the license numbers and tank hauling capacity of each; 
4.  A copy of the applicant's Riverside County Health Department permit. 
5.  Any other information as may be deemed by the Director to be appropriate to evaluate the discharge to the POTW. 
After evaluation and acceptance of the data, the Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.310 - Permit modifications. 
    Within three months of the promulgation of a categorical standard, permits for users subject to the categorical standards shall be revised to require compliance within the time frame prescribed by the new standard. Where an affected user has not previously submitted an application for a permit as required by Section 13.20.305, the user shall apply within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable categorical standard. In addition, users with existing permits shall submit to the Director, within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, a time schedule for compliance with the categorical standard. 
    The terms and conditions of any permit may be subject to modification by the Director during the term of the permit if discharge limits or requirements, as referenced in Sections 13.20.210 and 13.20.240, are modified or other good cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in a permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. Good cause for permit modification includes, but is not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.  To incorporate new or revised categorical standards or to incorporate other new or revised federal, state or local standards or requirements; 
B.  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance; 
C.  A change in the POTW operations that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
D.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, City employees, the public or the receiving waters; 
E.  The user's actual discharge is significantly different than the proposed discharge identified in the user's permit application; 
F.  Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the City; or 
G.  A determination by the Director that modification is appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter. 
The Director may at any time rescind the requirement that any NSIU obtain and maintain a Class III permit, at the Director's discretion. With respect to any user that was designated as an SIU solely because of the Director's designation under Section 13.20.105(90), the Director may terminate said user's designation as an SIU and Class II permittee on the Director's later determination that the user no longer has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any applicable pretreatment standard, requirement, or discharge limit set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.315 - Permit contents. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, and such charges and fees established, as appropriate, by City resolution or ordinance. 
A.  Class I and Class II permits shall contain at least the following: 
1.  Statement of permit duration; 
2.  Statement of permit nontransferability; 
3.  Discharge limits based on applicable pretreatment standards and/or local limits, including but not limited to discharge limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics and Best Management Practices; 
4.  Specifications for self-monitoring programs which may include: pollutants to be monitored; sampling location(s); frequency of sampling; sample type(s); number, types and standards for tests; and a reporting schedule for submitting to the City reports, data and records relating to production levels and wastewater discharges to the POTW; 
5.  Recordkeeping requirements for operational activities including but not limited to hauled waste, spill events, equipment maintenance, and training. 
6.  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
7.  Compliance time schedule(s) where required; 
8.  Statement that all SIUs must comply with slug load control programs and reporting requirements in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8. SIUs will be evaluated at least once every two years for the need to develop and implement an approved slug load control plan 
(a)  The evaluation and results of said evaluation must be available for review by the Approval Authority upon request; and 
9.  Statement of Permit Revocation/Termination 
B.  Permits may also contain the following: 
1.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
2.  Schedule of penalty fees for noncompliance; 
3.  Limits on the average and/or maximum discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
4.  Instantaneous concentration discharge limits and/or mass emission discharge limits. 
5.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
6.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pH control equipment, flow monitoring facilities, sampling facilities, development of pollution control plans and/or other special conditions including management practices appropriate to prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-routine discharges; 
7.  Requirements for development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. 
8.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of spill containment systems; 
9.  Requirements for submission of technical or discharge reports including but not limited to a demonstration of compliance with discharge limits including Best Management Practices or pollution prevention alternatives when the alternatives are part of the categorical standard; 
10.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to the wastewater discharge as specified by the Director; 
11.  Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharges, and/or discharges of hazardous waste; 
12.  Requirements for submittal of slug discharge control plans and/or solvent management plans; 
13.  Requirements to submit tax and water bills; 
14.  Requirements for maintaining and submitting waste manifests and/or waste hauling records; 
15.  Requirements to develop and implement Best Management Practices; 
16.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure protection of the POTW and compliance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.320 - Permit duration and duty to reapply. 
    Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed two years for Class I and Class II permits, and shall identify the permit expiration date. The user shall apply for a permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
    Permits shall be issued for a time period not to exceed five years and shall be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall have the duty to reapply a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the said user's existing permit 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.325 - Permit transfer. 
    Permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A permit shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner or user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.330 - Reporting requirements. 
    In addition to reporting potential problems (see Sections 13.20.270 and 13.20.272), industrial users, at their sole expense, may be required to submit one or more of the following types of reports to the City: 
A.  Self-Monitoring Reports: The Director may require a permittee to submit periodic self-monitoring reports containing a description of the (1) nature, concentration, and flow of pollutants; (2) the time, date, and place of sampling; (3) methods of analysis; and (4) other information reasonably related to ensuring compliance with this chapter. Sampling for self-monitoring reports shall be performed by the user as the Director specifies. All required analyses shall be performed by a state-certified laboratory using approved analytical methods. Class I and Class II users shall submit self-monitoring reports at least once every six months. Each sample report shall be accompanied by an approved chain of custody that ensures proper handling and integrity of the sample from collection, preservation, holding times, approved analytical methods, and storage. All monitoring data collected from the approved sample location(s) must be submitted. 
B.  Compliance Reports: Class I users shall submit initial baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) and periodic compliance reports, and, if applicable, compliance schedule reports and final compliance reports. 
1.  Initial baseline monitoring reports shall be submitted to the City within 180 days after the effective date of the categorical standard, which will facilitate evaluation of initial compliance status and any modifications or conditions necessary to achieve full compliance with categorical standards. Baseline monitoring reports shall include: 
(a)  All information listed in Section 13.20.305; 
(b)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, where required by the applicable categorical standard or the Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported; and 
(c)  A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified as to accuracy by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. New sources shall submit a baseline monitoring report at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. 
If immediate compliance with the categorical standard is not possible and additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance is necessary, the report must specify the shortest time necessary to achieve compliance. The completion date must not be later than that specified in the applicable categorical standards. New sources shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards within 90 days of commencing discharge. 
2.  Compliance schedule reports shall be submitted to the City, if necessary, to demonstrate compliance with conditions of a time schedule requiring full compliance with categorical standards and/or other applicable discharge limits set forth in this chapter by a specific date. 
Compliance schedule reports shall contain dates for commencement and completion of major events leading to construction and operation of additional pretreatment equipment, including but not limited to dates for pretreatment equipment design completion, building permit submittal, construction commencement, construction milestones, progress reports, construction completion, employee training completion, and final compliance. Samples shall be collected and analyzed to demonstrate compliance. The samples shall be taken in accordance with 40 CFR 136 and 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3). Compliance schedule reports shall be submitted at the completion of all major events necessary to achieve full compliance with categorical standards or discharge requirements, but not less frequency than 30 days. Compliance schedule reports shall be submitted within 14 days of a milestone date. Absent unusual circumstances, the duration of a compliance schedule shall not exceed nine months. 
3.  Final compliance reports shall be submitted to the City by any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable, categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, within 90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, to demonstrate that full compliance with categorical standards has been achieved. Final compliance reports shall include all information contained in a baseline monitoring report. 
4.  Periodic compliance reports shall be submitted to the City to demonstrate continued compliance with categorical standards. Periodic compliance reports shall include all monitoring data specified in the applicable categorical standard, and any additional monitoring data obtained by the user during the period covered by the report. 
Sampling for periodic compliance reports shall be performed during the period covered by the report. Analyses shall be performed by a state-certified laboratory using approved analytical methods. The Control Authority shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Control Authority. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Control Authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil & grease the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Control Authority, as appropriate. 
Periodic compliance reports shall be submitted every six months in June and December of each year, unless required to be submitted more frequently by the Director. Periodic compliance reports may be combined with self-monitoring reports pursuant to subsection A of this section. 
C.  Solvent Management Plans. All industrial users subject to promulgated categorical standards which include a total toxic organic (TTO) limitation shall be required to file a solvent management plan. The Director may also require other users to submit solvent management plans where, in his judgment, a plan is necessary to assure proper containment and disposal of solvents. 
D.  Slug Discharge Control Plans. All industrial users so required by the Director shall develop and file with the Director and implement a slug discharge control plan. The plan shall contain at least the following elements: 
1.  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
2.  Description of stored chemicals; 
3.  Procedures for prompt verbal notification to the City of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a specific prohibition under Sections 13.20.210 or 13.20.240 of this chapter or 40 CFR 403.5(b), and procedures for follow-up written notification to the Director within 24 hours; 
4.  If required by the Director, the plan shall include procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response; and 
5.  If required by the Director, the plan shall include follow-up practices to limit the damage suffered by the POTW or the environment. 
E.  Specific Compliance Plans. All industrial users so required by the Director shall file a specific compliance plan. The plan shall indicate the cause of noncompliance, the corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence of the noncompliance, and, if required by the Director, a proposed compliance time schedule indicating the dates those corrective actions will be completed. 
F.  Notification of Hazardous Waste Discharge. Any user shall notify the City, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division, State, and/or local hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge by the user into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be classified a hazardous waste pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261, as revised. Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
Users shall provide notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the hazardous waste. 
Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(j). 
The hazardous waste discharge notification requirements specified herein do not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections A and B of this section. Users are also exempt from the above requirements during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
Discharges of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), require a one-time notification. Additional notification is not required for subsequent months during which the user discharges additional quantities of the same non-acute hazardous waste. 
In the case of new federal regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user shall notify the City, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
In the case of any notification made under these requirements, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume or toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
G.  Any other reports required by California State Law; including such reports as are required by Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Users shall be responsible for compliance with all milestone dates established pursuant to the reports required pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.335 - Spill containment facilities. 
    All industrial users shall provide spill containment for protection against the unauthorized discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Such protection shall be designed to prevent such materials and wastes from entering into the sewerage system in accordance with reasonable engineering standards. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's expense. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.340 - Signatory and certification requirements. 
    All permit applications, reports and plans submitted to the City by industrial users pursuant to Sections 13.20.270, 13.20.272, 13.20.305, 13.20.310, and 13.20.330 shall be signed and dated by an authorized representative of the user. The signature shall accompany the following certification statement: 
    "I certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
    Analytical reports submitted directly to the City by a certified analytical laboratory at the request of the user for samples of wastewater collected at user facilities may be signed, dated, and certified by the laboratory manager in lieu of an authorized representative of the user; however, such reports shall be accompanied by a statement, signed, dated, and certified by an authorized representative of the user, as above, which verifies that the sample identified in the analytical report was collected on the date and time indicated at the location indicated, and using the method indicated on the analytical report. This signed, dated, and certified statement may be included as part of the chain-of-custody form for the sample. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
IV. - ENFORCEMENT 

13.20.400 - General enforcement. 
    Whenever any person violates any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or administrative order issued hereunder, the violation constitutes a violation of this chapter and is immediately actionable. Enforcement responses shall consider the intent, nature of the violation, history of noncompliance, the magnitude and duration of the violation when considering the enforcement action. The Director may take any, all or any combination of these actions in accordance with progressive enforcement response procedures as contained in the City's Enforcement Response Plan (ERP) against a noncompliant user. The Director may immediately proceed with any one or more of the enforcement remedies set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.401 - Notification of violation (NOV). 
    Whenever the Director finds that any user has violated any discharge limit, reporting requirement or other requirement contained in this chapter or a wastewater discharge permit, the Director may serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature of the violation and the penalties for continued noncompliance. Within a prescribed period specified in the notice, the user shall submit to the Director a specific compliance plan pursuant to Section 13.20.330E. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.402 - Compliance time schedules (CTS). 
    The Director may issue a compliance time schedule submitted by a user, or may issue a revised compliance time schedule if, in the judgment of the Director, the user's proposed compliance time schedule is insufficient to achieve timely compliance with this chapter. The Director will notify the user of the compliance time schedule established by the Director in a timely manner. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.403 - Administrative orders (AO). 
    The Director may direct compliance with any prohibition, discharge limit, or requirement of this chapter or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit by issuing one or more of the following administrative orders: 
A.  Consent order 
B.  Compliance order; 
C.  Cease and desist order; 
D.  Termination of service order; 
E.  Immediate termination of service order. 
    Any user served with an administrative order shall be subject to noncompliance fees which may be established by City Ordinance or resolution, as appropriate. The City may also bring a court action to enforce any administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.404 - Compliance orders. 
    When the Director finds that a user has violated or threatens to violate any prohibition, discharge limit or requirement of this chapter or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the Director may issue a compliance order and direct the user to: 
A.  Comply immediately; or 
B.  Comply in accordance with a specific compliance time schedule. 
    A compliance order may establish a noncompliance monitoring program, or modify an existing noncompliance monitoring program. A compliance order may also include, but is not limited to, modifications in the frequency and extent of monitoring, sampling and analysis, submission of self-monitoring reports and directives to institute management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewerage system. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.405 - Cease and desist orders. 
    When the Director finds that a user has violated or threatens to violate any prohibition, discharge limit, provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or administrative order, the Director may issue a cease and desist order and direct the user to: 
A.  Comply immediately; or 
B.  Take appropriate remedial or preventative action, including, if necessary, halting operations or terminating the discharge, to prevent the recurrence of a violation or a threatened violation. 
    A cease and desist order may establish a noncompliance monitoring program or modify an existing noncompliance monitoring program. A cease and desist order may also include, but is not limited to, modifications in the frequency and extent of monitoring, sampling and analysis, and submission of self-monitoring reports. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.406 - Determination of noncompliance with discharge limits. 
A.  Sampling Procedures. 
1.  Sampling of all users shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the City. 
2.  Noncompliance with mass emission rate limits, concentration limits, permit discharge conditions, or any discharge provision of this chapter may be determined by an analysis of a grab or composite sample of the effluent of a user. Noncompliance with mass emission rate limits shall be determined by an analysis of a composite sample of the user's effluent, except that a grab sample may be used to determine compliance with mass emission rate limits when the discharge is from a closed (batch) treatment system in which there is no wastewater flow into the sewerage system when the discharge is occurring, the volume of wastewater contained in the batch system is known, the time interval of discharge is known, and the grab sample is homogeneous and representative of the discharge. 
3.  Any sample taken from a sample point shall be deemed to be representative of the discharge to the POTW. 
B.  Waste Hauler Noncompliance with Discharge Limits. A waste hauler's noncompliance with discharge limits shall be determined by an analysis of a sample of the discharge for any constituent or conditions specified in the waste hauler's wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. If the discharge of a waste hauler is found by the analysis to be in excess of the concentration limits specified in the waste hauler's wastewater discharge permit or in this chapter, the waste hauler shall, upon receiving a demand from the City, identify in writing all sources of the discharge. 
    Even if it is established to the satisfaction of the Director that the origin of the discharge is septic waste or sanitary waste, the City may still elect not to accept waste from that particular source. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.407 - Noncompliance monitoring program. 
A.  Repeat Sampling. If any sample analysis indicates that the user is discharging wastewater with pollutant concentrations or levels exceeding discharge limits contained in this chapter or contained in user's permit, then the user shall notify the City of the violation within 24 hours of becoming aware of the incident. The user shall also collect and analyze a follow-up sample or samples (as directed by the Director using approved analytical methods). The user shall submit the completed follow-up sample analysis to the City within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation. 
B.  Initiation of Noncompliance Monitoring Program. If the follow-up sample indicates continued noncompliance, the user may be ordered by the Director to immediately initiate a noncompliance monitoring program requiring additional sampling and reporting by the user in accordance with a schedule issued by the Director. During the program, the user may be subject to noncompliance fees established by City ordinance or resolution, as appropriate. 
C.  Termination of Noncompliance Monitoring Program. The noncompliance monitoring program may be terminated by the City upon the user's demonstration of a return to consistent compliance. To demonstrate consistent compliance, the user must either: 
1.  Terminate the discharge; or 
2.  Provide analyses (which have been analyzed using approved analytical methods), which show discharge levels in consistent compliance over a period of not less than 30 days or as specified in the program. 
D.  Noncompliance Fees. The payment of noncompliance fees by users shall not bar the City from undertaking any other enforcement, civil, or criminal proceedings. The purpose of noncompliance fees is to compensate the City for costs of additional sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal and administrative processing incurred because of noncompliance. Noncompliance fees are established by City resolution and are amended from time to time to reflect the cost of providing additional oversight to remedy noncompliance with the provisions of this Ordinance or wastewater discharge permit. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.408 - Permit suspension or revocation. 
A.  Grounds. The Director may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that a permittee: 
1.  Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the City; 
2.  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the City to determine permit terms, conditions, or limits, discharge compliance, or compliance with this chapter; 
3.  Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
4.  Fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
5.  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of an administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter; 
6.  Discharges effluent to the POTW while its permit is suspended; 
7.  Refuses reasonable access to the permittee's premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring; 
8.  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the City for fees imposed pursuant to this chapter; 
9.  Causes interference with the City's collection, treatment or disposal system; 
10.  Fails to submit oral notice or written report of bypass occurrence; 
11.  Violates any condition or limit of its discharge permit or any provision of this chapter. 
B.  Notice/Hearing. When the Director has reason to believe that grounds exist for the suspension or revocation of a permit, he shall give written notice by personal service or certified mail thereof to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the Director's designee. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 calendar days nor more than 45 calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
1.  At the hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The suspension or revocation hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established by the Director and approved by counsel for the City. 
2.  After the conclusion of the hearing, the Director's designee shall submit a written report to the Director setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation. Upon receipt of the written report, the Director shall make his determination and should he find that grounds exist for suspension or permanent revocation of the permit, he shall issue his decision and order in writing within 30 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing by his designee. The written decision and order of the Director shall be served personally or by certified mail on the permittee or its legal counsel/representative. 
    In the event the Director determines to not revoke the permit, he may order other enforcement actions, including, but not limited to, a temporary suspension of the permit, under terms and conditions that he deems appropriate to further the purposes of this Chapter. 
C.  Effect. 
1.  Upon an order of suspension or revocation by the Director becoming final, the permittee shall lose all rights to discharge any non-domestic wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW in accordance with the order. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the permittee. 
2.  Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of suspension or revocation. 
3.  Any future application for a permit at any location within the POTW's service area by any person subject to an order of revocation will be considered by the City after fully reviewing the records of the revoked permit, which records may be the basis for denial of a new permit. 
4.  An order of permit suspension or revocation issued by Director shall be final in all respects on the 31st day after it is served personally or by certified mail on the permittee unless a notice of appeal is filed with the City pursuant to Section 13.20.427 no later than 5:00 p.m. on the 30th day following such mailing. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.410 - Termination of service. 
    When the Director finds that any user has done any of the following acts, the Director may terminate sewer service to that user upon serving appropriate notice to the user: 
A.  Violate a cease and desist order; 
B.  Fail to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
C.  Fail to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
D.  Refuse to allow reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; 
E.  Violate any pretreatment standard. 
    The procedures set forth in Section 13.08.408.B shall apply to termination of service proceedings. The user shall be liable for all costs for termination of sewer service incurred by the user and the City. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules, or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment, or for any other reason. 
    Sewer service may be re-instituted if the Director is satisfied that the user has remedied all aspects of noncompliance with this chapter and that the user has the capability to and will remain in compliance in the future. The user shall be liable for all costs for re-institution of sewer service. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.415 - Emergency suspension of service. 
A.  The Director may suspend sewerage service or wastehauler discharge service, after informal notice to the user, when the Director determines that such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, may cause pass through of or interference with the POTW, or may cause the City to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any user notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease the discharge of all non-domestic wastewater to the sewerage system. If a user fails to immediately comply with an emergency suspension order, the Director shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent the continued discharge of non-domestic wastewater to the POTW. The user shall be liable for all costs incurred by the City in terminating sewer service. 
B.  As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order and informal notice to the user of the time and location for a hearing, but in no event more than five days following the issuance of such order, the Director shall hold a hearing to provide the user the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Director and approved by counsel for the City. The Director shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision shall be served personally or by certified mail on the user or the user's legal counsel. The decision of the Director following the hearing shall be final and not appealable. 
C.  Upon a demonstration by the user to the satisfaction of the Director that the period of endangerment has passed and will not recur, the Director may allow the user to recommence its discharge to the POTW, unless the Director proceeds with permit revocation or termination of service pursuant to Sections 13.20.408 or 13.20.410. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.416 - Public nuisance. 
    Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter, is declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Director. Any person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.417 - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine of at least $1,000.00 for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter has been committed or continued. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.419 - Search or inspection warrants. 
    If the Director has been refused access to a building or property, or any part thereof, or determines that a search or inspection warrant is appropriate to investigate in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, the Director may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a search or inspection warrant. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.420 - Legal action. 
    If any person, firm or corporation violates or has the reasonable potential to violate any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this chapter, federal or state pretreatment standards or requirements, or any administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter, the City Attorney may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate legal, equitable or injunctive relief including, but not limited to, issuance of a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction, permanent injunction, and/or any other relief that may be appropriate to restrain the continued violation or prevent threatened violations by the user. 
    In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Director may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.425 - Civil penalties. 
A.  Authority. All users of the POTW are subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the City, EPA, Regional Board, and/or the County of Riverside District Attorney. The actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including but not limited to: (1) Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.); (2) California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.); (3) California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code Section 25100 et seq.); (4) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.); and (5) California Government Code, Sections 54739 et seq. 
B.  Recovery of Fines or Penalties. In the event the City is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits, and the violation can be established by City as caused by the discharge of any user of the POTW which is in violation of any provision of this chapter, the user's permit, or an administrative order issued pursuant to this chapter, City shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which it has been subjected. 
C.  Ordinance. Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739-54740, any person who violates any provision of this chapter; any permit condition, prohibition or effluent limit; or any suspension or revocation order shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed $37,500.00 per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed $25,000.00 per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Counsel for the City, upon order of the Director, shall petition a court of competent jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such penalties, or such other penalties as the City may impose, assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or state legislative authorization. 
D.  Administrative Civil Penalties. 
1.  Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54740.5 and 54740.6, the City may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates: 
(a)  any provision of this chapter; 
(b)  any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit; or 
(c)  any suspension or revocation order. 
2.  The administrative complaint shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail on the person and shall inform the person that a hearing will be conducted, and shall specify a hearing date within 60 days following service. The administrative complaint shall allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation of the City's requirements, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed, and the proposed civil penalty. The matter shall be heard by the Director or his designee. The person to whom an administrative complaint has been issued may waive the right to a hearing, in which case a hearing will not be conducted. 
3.  At the hearing, the person shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the administrative complaint by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established by the Director and approved by the Counsel for the City. 
4.  After the conclusion of the hearing, the Director's designee shall submit a written report to the Director setting forth a statement of the facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation. 
5.  Upon receipt of the written report, the Director shall make his determination and should he find that grounds exist for assessment of a civil penalty against the person, he shall issue his decision and order in writing within 30 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing by his designee. 
6.  If, after the hearing or appeal, if any, it is found that the person has violated reporting or discharge requirements the Director or City Council may assess a civil penalty against that person. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the Director or City Council may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs, and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the person involved. 
7.  Civil penalties may be assessed as follows: 
(a)  In an amount which shall not exceed $2,000.00 for each day for failing or refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports; 
(b)  In an amount which shall not exceed $3,000.00 for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedules established by the City; 
(c)  In an amount which shall not exceed $5,000.00 per violation for each day of discharge in violation of any waste discharge limit, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the City; 
(d)  In any amount which does not exceed $10.00 per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, revocation, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the City. 
8.  An order assessing administrative civil penalties issued by the City shall be final in all respects on the 31st day after it is served on the person unless a notice of appeal is filed with the City Council pursuant to Section 13.20.427 no later than the thirtieth day following such mailing. An order assessing administrative civil penalties issued by the City Council shall be final upon issuance. 
9.  Copies of the administrative order shall be served on the party served with the administrative complaint, either by personal service or by registered mail to the person at his business or residence address, and upon other persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy of the order. 
10.  Any person aggrieved by a final order issued by the City council, after granting review of the order of the Director, may obtain review of the order of the City Council in the superior court, pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, by filing in the court a petition for writ of mandate within 30 days following the service of a copy of the decision or order issued by the City Council. 
11.  Payment of any order setting administrative civil penalties shall be made within 30 days of the date the order becomes final. The amount of any administrative civil penalties imposed which have remained delinquent for a period of 60 days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty originated. The lien shall have no effect until recorded with the county recorder. The City may record the lien for any unpaid administrative civil penalties on the 91st day following the date the order becomes final. 
12.  No administrative civil penalties shall be recoverable under subsection D of this section for any violation for which the City has recovered civil penalties through a judicial proceeding filed pursuant to Government Code Section 54740. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.427 - Appeals to the City Council. 
A.  General. Any user, permit applicant, or permittee adversely affected by a decision, action, or determination made by the Director may file a written notice of appeal requesting a hearing before the City Council, which notice shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount established by a separate resolution of the City Council. The notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the service on the appellant of notice of the decision, action or determination of the Director. The notice of appeal shall set forth in detail all the issues in dispute for which the appellant seeks determination and all facts supporting appellant's request. 
    No later than 60 days after receipt of the request for hearing, the City council shall either set the matter for a hearing, or deny the request for a hearing in accordance with subsection B of this section. 
    Upon receipt of a timely notice of appeal, a hearing shall be held by the City Council within 65 days, unless a later date is agreed to by the appellant and the City Council. 
    If the matter is not heard within the required time, due to actions or inactions of the appellant, the Director's order shall be deemed final. 
    As the ordinance codified in this chapter constitutes a legislative enactment, except as expressly authorized under this chapter, there are no provisions for waiver or variance from the terms of said ordinance. 
B.  Granting Request for Hearing. The City Council shall grant all requests for a hearing on appeals concerning an award of civil penalties, or orders of permit suspension, revocation, or denial. Whether to grant or deny the request for a hearing on appeals of other decisions of the Director shall be within the sole discretion of the City Council. 
C.  Appeal Fee Refund. The appeal fee shall be refunded if the City Council denies a hearing or reverses or modifies, in favor of the appellant, the order of the Director. The fee shall not be refunded if the City Council denies the appeal. 
D.  Written Determination. After the hearing, the City Council shall make a determination whether to uphold, modify, or reverse the decision, action, or determination made by the Director. 
    The decision of the City Council shall be set forth in writing within 65 days after the close of the hearing and shall contain findings of the facts found to be true, the determination of issues presented, and the conclusions. The written decision and order of the City Council shall be served personally or by certified mail on the appellant or its legal counsel/ representative. 
    The order of the City Council shall be final upon its adoption. In the event the City Council fails to reverse or modify the Director's order, it shall be deemed affirmed. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.428 - Financial security/amendments to permit. 
A.  Compliance Deposit. Permittees that have been subject to enforcement and/or collection proceedings may be required to deposit with the City an amount determined by the Director as necessary to guarantee payment to City of all charges, fees, penalties, costs and expenses that may be incurred in the future, before permission is granted for further discharge to the sewer. 
B.  Delinquent Accounts. The City may require an amendment to the permit of any permittee who fails to make payment in full of all fees and charges assessed by the City or otherwise incurred by permittee. 
C.  Bankruptcy. Every permittee filing any legal action in any court of competent jurisdiction, including the United States Bankruptcy Court, for purposes of discharging its financial debts or obligations or seeking court-ordered protection from its creditors, shall, within ten days of filing such action, apply for and obtain the issuance of an amendment to its permit. 
D.  Permit Amendments. The City shall review and examine permittee's account to determine whether previously incurred fees and charges have been paid in accordance with time requirements prescribed by this chapter. The City may thereafter issue an amendment to the user's permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Security. An amendment to a waste discharge permit issued pursuant to subsections B, C and/or D of this section, may be conditioned upon the permittee depositing financial security in an amount equal to the average total fees and charges for two calendar quarters during the preceding year. The deposit shall be used to guarantee payment of all fees and charges incurred for future services and facilities furnished by City and shall not be used by the City to recover outstanding fees and charges incurred prior to the permittee filing and receiving protection from creditors in the United States Bankruptcy Court. 
F.  Return of Security. In the event the permittee makes payment in full within the time prescribed by this chapter of all fees and charges incurred over a period of two years following the issuance of an amendment to the permit pursuant to subsections B, C and/or D of this section, the City shall either return the security deposit posted by the permittee or credit his account. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.430 - Enforcement response plan (ERP). 
    The Director shall prepare, implement, and, if necessary, periodically update an enforcement response plan (ERP) in conformance with EPA guidance contained in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5). 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.440 - Notice of discharge prohibition. 
    The Director may serve a written notice of discharge prohibition on any person(s) engaged in any activity or activities which, while not resulting in a discharge of non-domestic wastewater to the POTW at the time, may, in the Director's judgment, result in a discharge of non-domestic wastewater at some time in the future. A notice of discharge prohibition shall include at least the following: 
A.  A list of general discharge restrictions and prohibitions; 
B.  A list or citation of any categorical standards that would be applicable upon commencement of non-domestic wastewater discharge; 
C.  A requirement to apply for and obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to commencing discharge of non-domestic wastewater to the POTW; 
D.  A requirement for notification of slug or accidental discharges; and 
E.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements. A notice of discharge prohibition may also contain one or more of the following: 
1.  A requirement to prepare and submit a slug discharge control plan; 
2.  A requirement to install and maintain one or more spill containment systems; 
3.  A requirement for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastes removed from the facility; 
4.  A requirement to submit an annual written statement to the Director certifying that no non-domestic wastewater has been discharged to the POTW during the previous year other than discharges of which the Director was properly notified, and that no non-domestic wastewater will be discharged during the forthcoming year without proper notification and/or obtaining a wastewater discharge permit. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.445 - Industrial waste pass through or interference. 
    Any person whose discharge results in a pass through or interference event affecting the POTW shall be liable for all costs associated with the event, including treatment costs, regulatory fines, penalties, assessments, and other indirect costs. The user shall submit to the City plans to prevent future recurrences to the satisfaction of the Director. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.450 - Publication of violation. 
    Upon a determination in a permit suspension, permit revocation, or civil penalty proceedings that a user has discharged in violation of its permit or any provision under this chapter, the City may require that the user notify the public and/or other users of the POTW of such violation, of actions taken to correct such violation, and of any administrative or judicial orders or penalties imposed because of such violation. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.460 - Recovery of costs incurred by the City. 
    In the event a permittee fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter, an administrative order, compliance schedule or a permit issued hereunder, the City shall be entitled to reasonable attorney fees and costs which may be incurred to enforce any of the terms and conditions, with or without filing proceedings in court. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.470 - Judicial review. 
A.  Purpose and Effect. Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, the City enacts this section to limit to 90 days following final decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Decision shall mean and include adjudicatory administrative decisions that are made after hearing, and after an award of civil penalties pursuant to Section 13.20.425, after revoking, suspending, or denying an application for a permit or a license, or after other administrative hearings taken to enforce this chapter. 
2.  Complete record shall mean and include the transcript, if any exists, of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by the Director, and the final decision, all admitted exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the City or its officers or agents, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case. 
C.  Time Limit for Judicial Review. Except as set forth in subsection G of this section, judicial review of any decision of the City or its officer or agent may be made pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provision for reconsideration in the procedures governing the proceedings or if the date is not otherwise specified, the decision is final on the date it is made. If there is a provision for reconsideration, the decision is final upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to such provision, the decision is final for the purposes of this section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. 
D.  Preparation of the Record. The complete record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the City officer or agent who made the decision and shall be delivered to the petitioner within 90 days after a written request is filed by said petitioner and received by the City. The City may recover from the petitioner its actual costs for transcribing and otherwise preparing the record. 
E.  Extension. If the petitioner files a request for the record within ten days after the date the decision becomes final, the time within which a petition, pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, may be filed shall be extended to not later than the 30th day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or the petitioner's attorney of record, if appropriate. 
F.  Notice. In making a final decision, the City shall provide notice to the person(s) subject to the administrative decision that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
G.  Administrative Civil Penalties. Notwithstanding the foregoing in Section 13208.470, and pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, judicial review of an order of the City Council imposing administrative civil penalties pursuant to Section 13.20.425.D may be made only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the thirtieth day following the day on which the order of the City Council becomes final. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
V. - ADOPTION 

13.20.500 - Effective date-Annexations. 
    Wherever in this chapter time limits are established or periods of compliance or extensions thereof are specified, the commencement date for computing such periods of time limits for areas annexed to the City subsequent to enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be the official annexation date. This section shall have no application to firms or industries established in annexed areas subsequent to the annexation date. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.505 - Effective date. 
    The mayor will sign the ordinance codified in this chapter and the City Clerk shall attest thereto, and said ordinance shall become effective in the City of Beaumont. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
13.20.510 - Conflicts. 
    All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict herewith, and specifically Ordinance No. 627 are hereby repealed. 
( Ord. No. 1094, 11-7-2017 ) 
Chapter 13.21 - MOBILE HOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION 

13.21.010 - Title. 
    This Ordinance may be cited as the Mobile Home Park Rent Stabilization Ordinance of the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.020 - Statement of purpose and findings. 
A.  Mobile home owners have a substantial investment in their residences and appurtenances for which space is rented or leased. Alternate sites for relocation of mobile homes are difficult to find due to restrictions of age, size, or style of mobile homes permitted in many parks, and related to the installation of mobile homes, including permits, landscaping and site preparation. Additionally, the cost of moving a mobile home may be substantial, and the risk of damage in moving is significant. 
B.  A significant percentage (nearly 11%) of the residential population of the City of Beaumont resides in mobile homes. 
C.  Mobile homes are often occupied by senior citizens, persons on fixed income and persons of low or moderate income, where extreme rent adjustments fall upon these individuals with particular harshness. Many mobile home owners have a substantial portion of their net asset worth invested in their mobile homes. The continuing possibility of unreasonable space rental adjustments in mobile home parks threatens to diminish the value of the investment of the mobile home owners in their homes. Further, existing state law permits mobile home park owners to require mobile home owners to make modifications to their homes for reasons of aesthetics or conformity to park standards that amount to capital improvements which would accrue to the benefit of the park owner by potentially increasing the market value of the park itself. 
D.  The result of these conditions is the creation of a captive market of mobile home owners and tenants. This, in turn, contributes to the creation of an imbalance in the bargaining relationship between park owners and mobile home park tenants in favor of the park owners. 
E.  The City Council of the City of Beaumont finds and declares it necessary to facilitate and encourage fair bargaining between mobile home owners and park owners in order to achieve mutually satisfactory agreements regarding space rental rates in mobile home parks (a) to preserve to the residents the value of their mobile homes and (b) to preserve to the park owners the value of their parks. Absent such agreements, the City Council further finds and declares it necessary to protect the owners and residents of mobile homes from unreasonable space rental adjustments while simultaneously recognizing and providing for the need of park owners to receive a just and reasonable return on their property. 
F.  The City Council of the City of Beaumont finds that it is the goal of the City's Housing Element to "conserve and improve existing affordable housing" in the City, and to prohibit conversion of mobile home rental units or mobile home parks to ownership or other uses unless conditions are adopted to maintain existing affordable conditions. 
G.  The City Council of the City of Beaumont finds and declares that Ordinance No. 602, enacted in 1984, and amendments, adding Chapter 13.16 to the Beaumont Municipal Code, entitled Mobile Home Rent Revenue Commission, has been reviewed and evaluated and is found to be inadequate for the needs and purposes of the City as reflected in the above findings and should, therefore, be repealed with the adoption of this Ordinance. 
H.  Administration of this Ordinance shall be under the general direction of the Planning Director hereinafter referred to as "Director," with general oversight responsibility vested in the City Manager. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.030 - Application. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all mobile home residential rental spaces located within the City of Beaumont unless otherwise exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, as such exemptions are provided for hereinafter in this Ordinance and by law. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to supersede any provision of California Civil Code Section 798 et seq., and as it may be amended. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.040 - Definitions. 
    In construing the provisions of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Base year" is the calendar year 1995; or the year established by the most recent (prior) hearing before the Arbitrator or Board; or, if necessary, the year established by the Arbitrator or Board in parks that have been sold since 1995. 
B.  "Consumer Price Index" or "C. P. I." means the Index known as the "Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area, (1982-1984) and thereafter or the index which may replace this index if it is discontinued. 
C.  "Landlord" means any owner, lessor, operator or manager of a mobile home park. 
D.  "Mobile home" means a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Section 35790 of the Vehicle Code. Except as provided in Civil Code Section 798.3, mobile home does not include "recreational vehicle" as defined in Section 799.29 of the Civil Code or a "commercial coach" as defined in Section 18001.8 of the Health and Safety Code. 
E.  "Mobile home owner" or "resident" means any person entitled to occupy a mobile home dwelling space pursuant to ownership thereof or a rental or lease agreement with the owner thereof. 
F.  "Mobile home park owner" or "park owner" means the owner, lessor, operator, manager or designated agent thereof of a mobile home park; sometimes referred to as "owner." 
G.  "Mobile home space" or "space" means the site within a mobile home park intended, designed, or used for the location or accommodation of a mobile home and any accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto or used in conjunction therewith. 
H.  "Rent adjustments" means any rent increase or decrease demanded of or paid by a tenant, including any reduction in housing services without a corresponding reduction in the monies demanded or paid for rent. 
I.  "Rental agreement" means an agreement between a mobile home park owner and tenant establishing the terms and conditions of a tenancy in a mobile home park. A lease is a rental agreement. 
J.  "Residential rental space" means any mobile home space occupied by any person other than the owner of the park for payment of rent pursuant to an oral or written lease, or other form of rental agreement. 
K.  "Space rent" means the consideration, including any bonuses, benefits, or gratuities demanded or received for and in connection with the use or occupancy of a mobile home space within a mobile home park, or for housing services provided and security deposits, but exclusive of any amounts paid for the use of the mobile home as a dwelling unit. The use or occupancy of a mobile home space shall include the exercise of all rights and privileges and the use of facilities, services and amenities accruing to the residents thereof. "Space rent" shall not include any separately billed utility fees and charges for natural gas or liquid propane gas, electricity, water, cable television, garbage or refuse service and sewer service. 
L.  "Tenancy" means the right of a tenant to the use of a mobile home site within a mobile home park on which to locate, maintain, and occupy a mobile home, site improvements and accessory structures; for human habitation, including the use of the services and facilities of the mobile home park. 
M.  "Tenant" means any person entitled to occupy such mobile home space pursuant to an oral or written lease with the owner thereof, or pursuant to some other rental agreement with the owner, lessor, operator or manager thereof. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.050 - Exemptions from coverage. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Newly Constructed Space. Space rent or space rent adjustments for new mobile home spaces whether in parks constructed after January 1, 1990 or spaces rented out for the first time after January 1, 1990 shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance. Civil Code Section 798.45. 
B.  Vacancies. 
1.  Subject to the exceptions in paragraphs 2 and 3 below, if the mobile home space or mobile home is (a) voluntarily vacated, abandoned or repossessed, or (b) vacated pursuant to California Civil Code Sections 798.56 or 798.75 the landlord may adjust the rental rate to an amount as he or she in his or her discretion may determine. 
2.  Subject to the provisions of Civil Code Section 798.17, if the mobile home is sold in place and is to remain on site, the landlord may only increase the rental rate of the space to the new owner to an amount that is no greater than the average of the three highest rentals then currently being charged by the park owner for resident owner occupied spaces of comparable size, location and amenities in the park. 
3.  In the event a resident owner must move from his or her mobile home because of a need for long term medical or custodial care, the space shall remain subject to this Ordinance during the time that the owner is absent and remains incapacitated. In those parks that allow subletting, the absent and incapacitated owner may sublet the mobile home for a charge not to exceed the space rent and utilities and all legally allowable pass thorough costs for a period of time not to exceed 24 months without removing the space from the protection of this Ordinance. 
C.  Space Rent Agreement Exemption. Any rental agreement in excess of 12-months duration which also meets all criteria specified by Section 798.15 and Section 798.17 of the California Civil Code, including, but not limited to, the tenant notification requirement within the first paragraph of such rental agreements, shall be exempt from the space rent ceiling provisions of this Ordinance, but only during the term of such rental agreement or any uninterrupted, continuous extensions thereof. If such rental agreement is not extended and no new rental agreement in excess of 12-months duration is entered into, then the last month's rent under the expired rental agreement shall be the base rent for purposes of this Ordinance. Any rental agreement exempt from this Ordinance by virtue of this subsection shall remain so exempt despite voluntary amendments made thereto, as long as any amendments extending the term contain the disclosures required by Section 798.17 of the California Civil Code. 
D.  Lease Agreement Exemption. Section 7 of this Ordinance does not apply to any residential rental space for the rental of which the mobile home park owner and the tenants have mutually agreed to enter into a lease which conforms to the provisions of California Civil Code Section 798.15 et seq. 
E.  Tenant Approval. This Ordinance does not apply if two-thirds of all mobile homes affected by the rent increase or other action give their approval in writing as evidenced by the signature of one tenant for each space or in an election called to consider the matter with each space casting one vote. The park owner shall supply proof of such approval to the Director for verification. 
F.  Violation. No person shall perform any act of duress, menace, or undue influence with the intent of thereby obtaining the consent of any other person to enter into any lease for the occupancy of a residential rental space in a mobile home park. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.060 - Registration and fees. 
A.  Within 90 calendar days after the effective date of this Ordinance, mobile home park owners are required to register all mobile home parks and mobile home rental spaces within such parks with the Director. The initial registration shall include: the name(s), business address(es), business telephone number(s) of each person or legal entity possessing an ownership interest in the park and the nature of such interest; the number of mobile home rental spaces within the park; the space rent charged for each space during the base year; and the number of spaces currently exempt under Civil Code Sections 798.17 and 798.45. The Director is hereby empowered to establish procedures for requiring such re-registration as he or she deems necessary. 
B.  After initial registration and on an annual basis, if needed thereafter, each space in the park then subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and not otherwise exempt under provisions in the Mobile Home Residency Law, i.e., Civil Code Sections 798.17 [or such other amount as the City Council may establish] and 798.45, may be assessed a fee of up to $12 per space per year to cover the anticipated costs of administering this Ordinance. The fee shall be collected by the park owner who shall promptly remit all of the per space fee collected except $1.00 per space to the Director who shall use the monies so received to cover the costs of administering this Ordinance. The park owner shall be entitled to retain $1.00 of the fee amount collected to cover the park owner's expenses in complying with this Ordinance. 
C.  No park owner shall be eligible to receive any rent ceiling adjustment as provided for under the provisions of this Ordinance unless such current registration information as may then be required for the mobile home park is on file with the Director at the time the petition for the rent ceiling adjustment is filed. The registration and re-registration requirements provided for in this section, or which may be hereafter established by the City Council, shall apply to all mobile home parks including those exempt from the space rent ceiling limitation by reason of the existence of a valid space rent agreement. Registration shall not apply to parks that were constructed in 1990 or later. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.070 - Space rent ceiling or maximum allowable space rent. 
    Beginning the first month which commences following the day after the effective date of this Ordinance, no mobile home park owner shall charge space rent for any mobile home space in an amount greater than (a) the space rent in effect on December 31, 1995 increased by the increase in the CPI since that date or (b) the rent for the space that is in effect on the effective date of this Ordinance. The space rent in effect on that date shall be known as the "space rent ceiling." 
    If there was no space rent in effect on December 31, 1995, the space rent ceiling shall be the space rent that was charged on the first date that space rent was charged after December 31, 1995 (with the exception above noted) adjusted by the CPI to the current date as indicated above or the rent for the space that is in effect on the effective date of this Ordinance. If a mobile home park space is exempted from the application of this Ordinance by reason of the existence of a space rent agreement and the agreement expires, the space rent ceiling for that space shall be the space rent in effect on the date the agreement expires. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.080 - Space rent ceiling adjustment-Initial adjustment. 
A.  No adjustment in space rent ceilings shall be permitted except as provided for herein. 
B.  Permissive Adjustment. A park owner shall be entitled to an initial permissive adjustment gross space rental income equal to 100 percent increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) from the end of the base year (1991) to the date of application for the adjustment. The percentage adjustment in the CPI shall be calculated by subtracting the CPI reported for December, 1995, from the most recently reported monthly CPI preceding the application and then dividing this remainder by the December, 1995, CPI. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.090 - Space rent ceiling adjustment-Annual adjustments. 
    Commencing in calendar year 1996, park owners shall be entitled to the following annual adjustments. 
A.  Permissive Annual Adjustment. 
1.  A park owner shall be entitled to one annual permissive adjustment of gross space rental income equal to 100 percent of the percentage adjustment in the CPI from the date of the most recent initial or annual adjustment to the date of application for the proposed adjustment. No application or permission is required for the annual adjustment under this section. 
B.  Net Operating Income (NOI) Adjustment. 
1.  In the event a park owner believes he or she does not receive a just and reasonable return on park property after receiving the maximum permissive adjustment provided for above, the park owner may, upon payment of a filing fee as hereinafter provided, file a petition with the Director for an adjustment of the space rent ceiling, providing adequate justification for the proposed increase. 
(a)  Upon the filing by a park owner of a petition for hardship rent increase, the Director shall request a deposit from the petitioner who shall pay 50 percent of the anticipated cost of the proceedings. Any final decision of the Arbitrator or Mobile Home Board (or final decision of a Hearing Officer if not appealed to the City Council) shall contain an estimate of the total expenses of the Hearing process. The petitioner shall be obligated to pay, as a fee, one-half of the total cost of said hearing process (less the deposit). Any hardship rent increase may be conditioned upon the payment of said fee. In the event that the deposit exceeds one-half of the expense of the hearing process, the petitioner will be entitled to a refund of that difference. 
2.  If the City shall establish forms for such a petition, the petition shall be prepared and submitted using such a form. In the absence of such designated form, such petition shall be in writing verified by the applicant, and shall contain the names, address and telephone number of the applicant, the name and address of the tenant of each rental space which would be affected if the petition were granted, a statement of the facts giving rise to the petition for an NOI adjustment in sufficient detail that, if established, such facts would demonstrate the existence of a decrease in the NOI warranting such NOI adjustment. Within 30 working days after the petition has been submitted to the Director for filing, petitioner shall be given notice of the time and place of the hearing, which notice together with a copy of the petition shall be served upon or mailed to each tenant of a rental space which would be affected by the NOI adjustment if granted. When a declaration of service has been submitted to the Director, the petition for an NOI adjustment shall be deemed filed. 
3.  A park owner shall be entitled to an adjustment of the space rent ceiling so as to enable the park owner's net operating income (NOI) for the subsequent year to be increased by a rate which, when added to the maximum permissible adjustment provided for above will give the park owner a just and reasonable return on park property. In determining whether the current NOI is adequate in comparison with the base year NOI, the NOI for the park earned in the base year shall be increased by the amount of the CPI increase from the base year to the date of the proposed rental increase. 
C.  No annual adjustment shall become effective if a previous annual adjustment became effective within the previous 12 months unless approved by Arbitrator. 
D.  Rent Increase Based upon Capital Improvements. 
1.  An application for a rent increase based on the cost of a proposed or completed capital improvement may be filed by the park owner with the Director pursuant to this subsection. For the purposes of this subsection "Capital Improvement" is defined as the installation of new improvements and facilities, and/or the replacement or reconstruction of existing improvements and facilities which consist of more than ordinary maintenance or repairs, with a useful life of at least five years. A capital improvement shall be approved by the Arbitrator where the improvement has been agreed upon between the park owner, and by more than 50 percent of the owners of all mobile homes affected by the improvement in an election called to consider the matter with each space casting one vote. 
2.  A capital improvement shall be approved if the improvement is required (a) to maintain the common facilities and other areas of the park in a safe and sanitary condition (b) to maintain the existing level of park amenities and services, or (c) to comply with the law or an administrative regulation. No vote of mobile home owners shall be required for approval under this provision. 
3.  Capital improvement costs for items which are not necessary or approved as described above, in paragraphs 1 and 2, shall be allowable rent increases only if the park owner has (a) consulted with the park residents to be affected prior to initiating construction of such improvements, regarding the nature and purpose of such improvements and the estimated cost of such improvements, and (b) demonstrated the need for the improvements and the reasonableness of the anticipated costs. 
4.  Capital improvement rent increases shall be amortized over the useful life of the improvement as set forth in Internal Revenue "class life" tables then in effect, unless the Arbitrator at its discretion determines that the use of such tables is unreasonable under the circumstances. 
5.  In addition to the reasonable cost of the improvement(s) and the reasonable costs of financing, the rent increase shall include a return of two percent over the prime rate at Bank of America in effect at the time the rent increase is approved calculated annually on the unamortized cost improvement. 
6.  In the event the need for the capital improvement is a result of an accident, disaster, or other event for which the park owner receives insurance benefits, only those capital improvement costs which exceed such insurance benefits may be amortized as operating expenses unless the uncovered loss or portion thereof is a result of an underinsured or uninsured loss in which event the underinsured or uninsured portion is disallowed unless prudent business practices would not require it to be ensued. 
7.  Capital improvement rent increases shall be apportioned equally among all spaces in the mobile home park affected thereby and shall be payable monthly, and shall be set forth by the park owner as a separate item from the space rent. The increase shall remain in effect until the cost of the improvement, plus reasonable costs of financing as set forth above, have been fully recovered. 
8.  The application for the cost of a completed capital improvement or the estimated cost of a proposed capital improvement shall contain: 
(a)  A description of the capital improvement; 
(b)  A copy of all estimates, contracts, bills, invoices, canceled checks and other documentation reasonably necessary to establish the cost of the capital improvement and the reasonable cost of financing the capital improvement. If, instead of borrowing the money to make the capital improvement, the park owner uses his or her own funds, the reasonable cost of financing which will be allowed shall be the average prime rate charged by the Bank of America for the three months preceding the start of construction of the capital improvement; and 
(c)  If the capital improvement has been agreed upon between the park owner and by more than 50 percent of the owners of all mobile homes affected by the improvement, proof of that fact will be submitted with the application. 
9.  A petition by tenants, as allowed by Section 13.21.120, will be limited to challenging the special increase for a capital improvement only on the basis that it does not meet the criteria established by Section 13.21.090.D of this Ordinance. 
10.  The Hearing Officer or Arbitrator may, in its discretion, approve the capital improvement without the necessity of a hearing, as provided for in this Ordinance. 
11.  No rent increase for a proposed capital improvement may be collected until the park owner provides proof to the Director that the improvement has been completed. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.100 - Required certification on rental adjustment notice. 
    The Arbitrator shall have the right to deny any rent adjustment under this Ordinance if the owner: 
A.  Has failed to comply with any provisions of this Ordinance and/or regulations issued there under by the Director or the City Council. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.110 - Petition by tenant. 
A.  Any tenant of a mobile home rental space affected by this Ordinance, upon payment of a filing fee of $1.00 and joined by at least 30 percent of the other tenants similarly affected (each of whom pays $1.00 per space), may petition for a determination whether a proposed or actual action by the landlord affecting such tenant(s) is within the terms of this Ordinance. If the City shall establish forms for such petitions, the petition shall be prepared and submitted upon such form. In the absence of such designated form, the petition shall contain the name, address and telephone number, if known, of the landlord, owner, manager, or other person authorized to represent the owner of the mobile home park, a brief statement of the facts giving rise to the petition and a statement that a copy of the petition has been personally served or mailed to the owner, manager or other person authorized to accept and receive notices to the landlord. 
B.  The petition shall also include the name, address, and telephone number of the designated representative of the petitioner(s) to whom notices and other communications respecting the petition are to be transmitted. 
C.  In the event a petition by a tenant(s) results in a downward adjustment in the space rent, the park owner shall not be obligated to adjust any rent except the rent of those tenant(s) who signed the petition and paid the established filing fee. 
D.  A petition must be filed within 60 days of notice being given by the park owner or within 90 days of the action actually taken by the park owner when no written notice preceded the action. 
E.  In the event the petitioner or petitioners are claiming that a net operating income rental increase otherwise allowed by Section 13.21.090B above should be disallowed in whole or in part because of conditions of deteriorating maintenance the petitioner(s) shall specify the conditions of deteriorating maintenance in their petition with the specificity required by Civil Code Section 798.84(b). 
F.  Upon receipt of the petition, the Director shall determine whether or not the petition contains the minimum number of signatures required. Thereafter, the Director shall notify, in writing, the park owner and the residents of the results of his/her determination. 
G.  The Director shall in a timely manner assign a Hearing Officer who shall conduct an informal hearing in an attempt to resolve the matter. In making his/her recommendation(s), the Hearing Officer may consider all relevant factors including those listed in this Ordinance. 
H.  The Hearing Officer shall, if he/she finds it practical to do so, hold the informal hearing at the mobile home park. In any event, the Hearing Officer shall use all reasonable efforts to hold the hearing at a location which is convenient for the residents of the park. 
I.  The hearing may be attended by no more than two representatives from the affected tenants and two representatives from the park owner. Attorneys shall not be present at the informal hearing(s) unless agreed to in writing, by both sides except in a case where the park owner or petitioning tenant(s) is an attorney in which case the other party may be accompanied by its own attorney. 
J.  Either side may submit written, photographic or other type of documentary evidence to support their contentions, but is not required to do so. 
K.  The Director shall set time lines by which the informal hearing process must be concluded and shall take all appropriate steps to see that the informal hearing process is conducted in a manner that respects the rights of both sides. 
L.  The Hearing Officer shall serve, by his/her final recommendations in written form to both sides and to the Director. 
M.  Any agreements reached by the parties shall be reduced to writing and be signed by them and the Hearing Officer. 
N.  No statement(s) made by a party in the informal hearing process may be introduced into evidence or presented before the Arbitrator unless agreed to by the party making the statement. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.120 - Petition by landlord. 
    Any landlord of a mobile home park affected by this Ordinance may, upon payment of a filing fee of $1.00 per space affected under this Ordinance, petition for a determination whether a particular course of action by said landlord is allowable, valid and in conformity with this Ordinance. The Director may designate forms for the filing of such petitions. In the event that no such form has been designated, the petition shall be in writing, and shall contain the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the person requesting the interpretation or opinion, the name and address of each tenant of a rental space owned or managed by the person requesting the interpretation or opinion, if it is intended that such interpretation or opinion affects such rental space, a brief statement of the facts giving rise to the request for interpretation or opinion, and a statement that a copy of such petition has been personally served upon or mailed to each such tenant who might be affected thereby. 
    The Hearing Officer procedures specified in Section 13.21.110G-N inclusive of this Ordinance shall be used for the initial consideration of the landlord's petition. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.130 - Appeal to Arbitrator. 
    Any party to a hearing conducted by a Hearing Officer shall be entitled to appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer to the Arbitrator. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.140 - Arbitration. 
A.  If a majority of the petitioning parties or the park owner wish to proceed to arbitration they shall, within 20 days of the date of service of the written notification of the Hearing Officer's final recommendation, notify the Director in writing of their decision to proceed to arbitration. 
B.  Within 30 days of notice of the filing of the request for arbitration the mobile home owner(s) and park owner shall contribute and deposit a sum of money with the Director for the estimated costs of, and as determined by, the Director. In no event shall the mobile home owner(s) contribution exceed $300.00 or such other amount (greater or lesser) as the Director may establish. Failure on the part of the petitioner(s) to deposit its share, shall terminate the proceedings and will be deemed a denial of the request. In the event the park owner fails to deposit his share, the Arbitrator shall enter an order as to such park owner denying any increase in rent or any other new "pass through" charge for a 12-month period, beginning the date of the notice of increase that is the subject of dispute. This order shall become effective 30 days from the date it is mailed by the Director unless a court-ordered stay of execution is granted. Unless such a stay is granted, any rent increase collected by park owner while this procedure was pending shall be refunded to residents within 60 days of the date of mailing of the notice denying the increase pursuant to this Section, by the Director. If no contrary court order is entered, and the amounts owed are not repaid in 60 days, affected residents may reduce their rental payments next due by the amount overpaid. If the amount exceeds one month's payment, the balance shall be deducted the next month until resident has received the overpayment plus ten percent of the total as a penalty for park owner not having complied with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
C.  In the event a petition by a tenant(s) results in a downward adjustment in the space rent, the park owner shall not be obligated to adjust any rent except the rent of those tenant(s) who signed the petition and paid the established filing fee. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.150 - Selection of Arbitrator. 
A.  The City Manager shall, if the parties cannot otherwise agree, select the person who is to be the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator shall be selected from a list of recommendations provided by the Board of Directors of the Riverside County Bar Association or such other organization(s) as the City Manager deems appropriate. The Arbitrator shall be a resident of Riverside County and be qualified by education, training and experience. 
B.  The City shall pay the Arbitrator his or her fees as agreed between the Arbitrator and the City Manager. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.160 - Conduct of Arbitration. 
A.  The following is applicable to all hearings before the Arbitrator. 
B.  Each party to a hearing may have assistance in presenting evidence or in setting forth by argument his or her position, from an accountant, attorney or such other person of his own choosing as may be designated by said party. 
C.  Formal rules of evidence shall not apply in such proceedings; however, all testimony (oral or written) offered as evidence shall be submitted under oath. 
D.  In the event any party shall fail to appear at the time and place set for hearing of a petition without good cause as determined by the Arbitrator, the Arbitrator may hear and review such evidence as may be presented by those present, and may make such findings and decisions as shall be supported by the evidence placed into the record. 
E.  The Arbitrator, shall make findings based on the evidence as presented as to each fact relevant to its decision on the petition. The decision shall be based upon the findings, and shall: 
1.  Determine whether the action or proposed action of a landlord is valid, authorized, and in conformity with this Ordinance; 
F.  The decision shall be made no later than 30 days after the matter has been submitted for determination. No rent adjustment shall be authorized unless supported by a preponderance of the evidence. A written notice of the decision shall be sent to each party to a proceeding. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.170 - Appeal to court. 
    The findings and decision of the Arbitrator shall be a final administrative action. There shall be no right of appeal to the City Council, but appeal may be made to Court pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. Such findings and decision shall be public records, arid may be certified by the Director, or by the City Clerk. Each decision shall set forth a Notice as required by California Government Code Section 1094.6. The decision shall become effective and final upon mailing to the parties. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.180 - Priorities. 
    All petitions for hearings shall be heard in order of date filed. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.190 - Rent adjustment regulations. 
    For purposes of determining allowable rent adjustments, except those specified in Section 13.21.090 A for permissive annual adjustment and in Section 13.21.090 D for capital improvements, the principles set forth in this section shall be used. The Arbitrator may consider all relevant factors including, but not limited to: increases or decreases in operating and maintenance expenses, the extent and cost of utilities paid by the park owner, necessary and reasonable capital improvements of the park as distinguished from normal repair, replacement and maintenance, increases or decreases in amenities, equipment, insurance, services, substantial deterioration of the park other than as a result of ordinary wear and tear, failure on the part of the park owner to provide timely and/or adequate maintenance and repair, federal and state income tax benefits, the speculative nature of the investment, whether or not the property was acquired or is held as a long term or short term investment, the owner's rate of return on investment, the owner's method of financing and prudent use and need thereof, the owner's current and base year net operating income (NOI) as inflated to date by current CPI and any other factors deemed relevant by the Arbitrator, in providing the owner a fair return. 
    The fact that a park is old shall not, of itself, be indicative that maintenance has deteriorated. The Arbitrator shall distinguish between normal deterioration and obsolescence of the park due to age and failure to adequately maintain. 
    In the event any such claim or claims of failure to adequately maintain are proven, the Arbitrator may take one or more of the following actions: 
A.  Deny any rental increase; 
B.  Offset any allowable rental increase by an amount that is adequate to reflect the degree of failure to adequately maintain. 
C.  Condition any allowable rental increase upon a remediation of the failure to maintain by the park owner. In this regard, the Arbitrator may freeze rents at the pre-increase level until such time as the park owner has come into compliance with the Arbitrator's decision. 
D.  The Arbitrator may recess the hearing for a period not exceed 90 days to allow the park owner to correct the condition or conditions of inadequate maintenance. 
E.  The Arbitrator may combine any two or more of the above listed actions and/or may take any other action or actions that it deems necessary to correct the problem of inadequate maintenance. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.200 - Net operating income. 
    Net operating income (NOI) shall be gross income less allowable operating expenses. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.210 - Gross income. 
    Gross income equals: 
A.  Gross rents, computed as gross rental income at 100 percent paid occupancy, plus 
B.  Interest from rental deposits, unless directly paid by the landlord to the tenants. 
C.  Income from miscellaneous sources, including, but not limited to, laundry facilities, vending machines, amusement devices, cleaning fees or services, garage and parking fees, plus 
D.  All other income or consideration received or receivable for or in connection with the use or occupancy of rental units, 
E.  Minus uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent that the same are beyond the landlord's control. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.220 - Allowable operating expenses. 
    Operating expenses shall include but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Real property taxes, 
B.  Utility costs. Utility costs are for natural gas or liquid propane gas, electricity, water, cable television, garbage or refuse service, and sewer service, unless billed separately to and paid by the park residents in which case the park owner may not deduct such costs. It is assumed that charges for utility services billed to the tenant separately include an adequate reserve amount to repair and upgrade meters, lines and equipment and the park owner shall have the burden of showing by clear and convincing evidence that any additional expense is necessary to cover such repairs or upgrade. 
C.  Management fees actually paid if management services are contracted for. If all or a portion of management services are performed by the landlord, management fees shall include the reasonable value for such landlord performed services. Management fees greater than five percent of gross income are presumed to be unreasonable. Such presumption may be rebutted. 
D.  Other reasonable management expenses, including, but not limited to, necessary and reasonable advertising, accounting and insurance. 
E.  Normal repair and maintenance expenses, including, but not limited to, painting, normal cleaning, fumigation, landscaping, and repair of all standard services, including electrical, plumbing, carpentry, furnished appliances, drapes, carpets, and furniture. 
F.  Owner-performed labor, which shall be compensated at the following hourly rates upon documentation of the date, time, and nature of the work performed: 
1.  At the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for the Riverside area, for the specific type of work performed, as determined and published by the Director of the Department of Industrial Relations of the State of California pursuant to Section 1770 et seq. of the Labor Code of the State of California. 
2.  If no such general prevailing rate has been determined and published, then a cost per hour for general maintenance and a cost per hour for skilled labor as established by Riverside County Department of Economic Development. 
3.  Notwithstanding the above, a landlord may receive greater or lesser compensation for self-labor if the landlord proves by clear and convincing evidence that the amounts set forth above are substantially unfair in a given case. 
4.  Owner performed labor in excess of five percent of gross income shall not be allowed unless the landlord proves by clear and convincing evidence that such excess labor expenses resulted in proportionately greater services for the benefit of tenants. 
G.  License and registration fees required by law to the extent same are not otherwise paid by tenants. 
H.  The reasonable cost of the capital improvement including reasonable financing costs, plus two percent over the prime rate at Bank of America in effect at the time of the assessment computed in accordance with any useful life table utilized by the Internal Revenue Service. 
I.  Reasonable attorneys fees and costs incurred as normal reasonable costs of doing business, including, but not limited to, good faith attempts to recover rents owing and good faith unlawful detainer actions not in derogation of applicable law, to the extent same are not recovered from tenants. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.230 - Operating expenses not allowable. 
    Operating expenses shall not include the following: 
A.  Avoidable, unreasonable or unnecessary expenses; 
1.  All expenses allowed must be reasonable. To the extent that the Arbitrator finds any expense(s) to be unreasonable, the Arbitrator shall adjust such expense(s). 
B.  Mortgage principal and interest payments; 
1.  In refinancing, increased interest shall be permitted to be considered as an operating expense only where the park owner can show that the refinancing was reasonable and consistent with prudent business practices under the circumstances. 
C.  Lease purchase payments; and rent or lease payments to park owner's lesser; except that increases in such payments in any year may be allowed if found by the Arbitrator to be reasonable and consistent with prudent business practice under the circumstances. 
D.  Excessive costs of maintenance caused by delaying normal maintenance; 
E.  A cost that results because the loss is uninsured where prudent business practice would expect insurance coverage or the cost for that portion of a loss above a normal deductible, if underinsured, shall not be included as an operating expense. 
F.  Depreciation of the real property; 
G.  Any expenses for which the landlord has been reimbursed by any security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for damages, settlement, or any other method. 
H.  Attorneys fees and other costs incurred for preparation and presentation of proceedings before the Arbitrator or Board, or in connection with civil actions or proceedings against the Arbitrator or Board. 
I.  Penalties, fees or interest assessed or awarded for violation of this or any other statute; 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.240 - Presumption of fair base year net operating income. 
    Except as provided in below, it shall be presume that the Net Operating Income produced by a park owner during the base year, provided a fair return on property. Owners shall be entitled to maintain and increase their Net Operating Income from year to year in accordance with Sections 13.21.080B and 13.21.090B. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.250 - Rebutting the presumption. 
    It may be determined that the base year net operating income yielded other than a fair return on property, in which case, the base year Net Operating Income may be adjusted. In order to make such a determination, the Arbitrator or its designee must make at least one of the following findings: 
A.  The owner's operating and maintenance expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating such expenses so the base year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the property over a reasonable period of time. The Arbitrator shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The owners made substantial capital improvements during the base year which were not reflected in the rent levels on the base date. 
2.  Substantial repairs were made due to damage caused by natural disaster, vandalism or other cause which management has taken appropriate action to reduce. 
3.  Maintenance and repair were below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration in the quality of housing services. 
4.  Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding the following of prudent business practices by management. 
B.  The rental rates in the base year were disproportionate due to enumerated factors below. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating gross rents consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance. 
1.  The rental rates in the base year were substantially higher or lower than in preceding months by reason of premiums being charged or rebates being given for reasons unique to particular units or limited to the period determining the base rent. 
2.  The rent in the base year was substantially higher or lower than at other times of the year by reason of seasonal demand or seasonal variations in rent. 
3.  The rental rates in the base year were exceptionally high or low due to other factors which would cause the application of the base year net operating income to result in gross inequity to either the owner or tenant. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.260 - Determination of base year net operating income. 
A.  To determine the net operating income during the base year, there shall be deducted from the annualized gross income being realized in 1991, a sum equal to the actual operating expenses for calendar year 1991, unless the owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Arbitrator that the use of some other consecutive 12-month period is justified by reasons consistent with the purposes of this section. 
B.  In the event the owner did not own the subject property during the base year, the operating expenses for 1991 shall be determined by one of the following methods, whichever the Arbitrator or Board determines to be more reliable in the particular case: 
1.  The previous owner's actual operating expenses as defined in Section 13.21.230 if such figures were available, or 
2.  Actual operating expenses for the first calendar year of new ownership, adjusted to 1991. 
C.  Park owners shall be entitled to maintain and increase their net operating income from year to year in accordance with the guidelines set forth in this Ordinance. It shall further be rebuttably presumed that where the net operating income is less than 50 percent of gross income in the base year, the park owner was receiving less than a just and reasonable return on the mobile home park. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.270 - Determination of current year net operating income. 
    To determine the current year net operating income there shall be deducted from the annualized gross income, determined by analyzing the monthly rents in effect at the time of filing of a petition, a sum equal to the actual operating expenses for the last calendar year (unless the owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Arbitrator that the use of some other consecutive 12-month period is justified by reasons consistent with the purposes of this section). 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.280 - Schedule of increases in operating expenses. 
    Where scheduling of rental increases, or other calculations, require projections of income and expenses, it shall be assumed that operating expenses, exclusive of property taxes, and management expenses, increase at five percent per year, that property taxes increase at two percent per year, and that management expenses constitute five percent of gross income, provided, however, that if actual increases are greater or less than those listed in this section, the actual increases shown according to proof shall be the increases applicable. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.290 - Discretionary considerations. 
    While the net operating income formula should operate to provide a park owner a fair return on the park, the Hearing Officer or Arbitrator considering a request for rent increases shall consider all relevant factors presented in making a determination, as set forth in this Ordinance. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.300 - Increases pending hearing. 
    Rent increases may be collected in full by the park owner until such time as ordered otherwise by a final decision of the Arbitrator or unless agreed upon by the residents and the park owner. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.310 - Rent adjustments for reduction in utility services. 
A.  If a mobile home park provides in the rent, without separate charge, utilities or similar services (including, but not limited to, natural gas, electricity, water, sewer, trash, and/or cable television) and converts to separate charge for such service by separate metering, separate charge or other lawful means of transferring to the tenant the obligation for payment for such services, the cost savings shall be passed through to tenants by a rent adjustment equal to the actual cost to the park of such transferred utility or similar service (less common area usage) based on costs for the 12 months period prior to notice to the tenants of the change. It is the intent of this Section for those rental agreements entered into on or after January 1, 1991, to be consistent with the provisions of Civil Code Section 798.41 as adopted by Chapter 1013, Section 2 of the Statutes of 1990. 
B.  For purposes of this section, in determining cost savings to be passed on to tenants in the form of decreased rent, the cost of installation of separate utility meters, or similar costs incurred by the owner to shift the obligation for payment of utility costs to the tenants shall not be considered. However, this shall not be construed to prohibit or prevent the consideration of inclusion of such costs as an increased operating expense at arbitration. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.320 - Quantum of proof and burden of proof. 
    The decision of the Arbitrator, the Director, or the Hearing Officer must be supported by the evidence submitted. In Arbitration, the petitioning party shall have the burden of going forward with the evidence and the burden of persuasion by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.330 - Remedies for violation. 
A.  Civil Remedies. Any person who demands, accepts, or retains any payment in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be liable in a civil action to the person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted, or retained for damages in the sum of three times the amount by which the payment or payments demanded, accepted or retained exceed the maximum rent which could lawfully be demanded, accepted, or retained, together with reasonable attorney's fees and costs as determined by the Court. 
B.  Criminal Remedies. It shall be unlawful for any owner to willfully and knowingly adjust any rent in an amount in excess of that allowed under this Ordinance or by order of the Arbitrator. Any owner who willfully and knowingly violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the orders of the Arbitrator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or six months in jailor both. 
C.  Injunctive and Other Civil Relief. The Arbitrator, the Director, the City, and/or the Tenants and Owners may seek relief from the appropriate Court within the jurisdiction in which the rental unit is located to enforce any provision of this Ordinance or its implementing regulations or to restrain or enjoin any violation of this Ordinance and of the rules, regulations, orders and decisions of the Arbitrator or City Council. 
D.  Non-waiver of Rights. Any waiver or purported waiver by a tenant or prospective tenant of rights granted under this Ordinance prior to the time when such rights may be exercised, whether oral or written, shall be void as contrary to public policy. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.340 - Periodic review of Ordinance. 
    The City Council shall review the provisions of this Ordinance following a report by the Director one year following the date of adoption thereof, and at any other time deemed appropriate, in order to consider the following: 
1.  Whether this Ordinance continues to be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
2.  Whether the implementation of the provisions of this Ordinance have been adequate; and 
3.  Whether the provisions of this Ordinance should be amended to provide more effective regulations or to avoid unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.350 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid, this invalidity shall not affect other applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.360 - Ordinance to be liberally construed. 
    This Ordinance shall be liberally construed to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance and to preserve its validity. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.370 - Prospective effect. 
    This Ordinance is intended to operate prospectively from its effective date, and anything which occurred prior to the effective date of this Ordinance which was otherwise lawful shall not be affected. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.080 - Introduction. 
    This Ordinance was duly and regularly introduced as a meeting of the City on the 12th day of March, 1996. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.390 - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance is effective 31 days after adoption. 
(Ord. 758) 
13.21.400 - Repeal of Ordinance No. 602, and amendments thereto. 
    Ordinance 602, and amendments thereto, enacted in 1984 adding Chapter 13.16 entitled Mobile Home Rent Review Commission to the Beaumont Municipal Code, is hereby repealed and superseded by the adoption of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. 758) 
Chapter 13.22 - REGULATION OF CITY-OWNED RAILROAD TRACK 

13.22.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless otherwise noted: 
    "City track" means and includes the following portions of City-owned railroad track located at or near Milepost 562.6, Yuma Subdivision of the Union Pacific Railroad Company ("UPRC"), as more particularly described in that certain "Industry Track Contract" dated June 25, 2001, between the City and the UPRC, as it presently exists and may hereafter be amended. 
    "City track use permit" means and includes a permit issued by the City to a person or business authorizing such person or business to use the City track for the loading and unloading of goods. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 10-5-04) 
13.22.020 - City track permit required. 
    Any business, business owner or other person desiring to use the City track shall first apply for and obtain a City track use permit. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 10-5-04) 
13.22.030 - City track use permit: Application. 
    Any business, business owner or other person desiring to use the City track shall make application therefor and pay the prescribed application fee to the Planning Director. The application shall set forth the following: 
1.  The name, business address and telephone number(s) of the applicant; 
2.  A description of the activities which the applicant proposes to conduct on and about the City track, including a description of the vehicle(s) which the applicant proposes to use to load and unload railroad cars; 
3.  The number of times per day, week, month or year, whichever is appropriate or applicable, that the applicant intends to use the City track; 
4.  Proof of insurance, including general liability insurance, automobile insurance and workers compensation insurance; and 
5.  Such additional information as the Planning Director may require. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 10-5-04) 
13.22.040 - Annual fees. 
    Each and every City track permittee shall pay the following fees annually: 
A.  Annual Regulatory Fee: This fee shall be levied and collected for the purpose of defraying the cost of the administration of City track permits, and the inspection and monitoring of City track usage. 
B.  Annual Use Fee: This fee shall be levied and collected at least annually and shall be based upon the number of railroad cars utilizing the City track. Proceeds from the fee shall be used for the operation, maintenance and replacement of the City track. 
C.  Fee Schedule: The City Council shall adopt, from time-to-time, a resolution establishing a fee schedule for the application fee, the annual regulatory fee, and the annual use fee. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 10-5-04) 
13.22.050 - Prohibitions. 
A.  No person shall utilize the City track for loading or unloading purposes without first obtaining from the Planning Director a permit therefor. 
B.  No person shall allow any materials, commodities, bulk materials or other substance, whether liquid or solid, to be deposited on the ground in or around the City track. In the event of a spill or other deposit, the permittee shall take all steps necessary to immediately clean up such spill or deposit, and shall call the City Building Department for an inspection. 
C.  No person shall utilize the City track in a manner that will damage the City track or any appurtenant or adjacent facilities including, without limitation, docks, ramps and adjacent surfaces. 
D.  No permittee shall use the City track in violation of this Chapter or the provisions, terms and conditions of any City track permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 10-5-04) 
13.22.060 - Penalty. 
    Any individual violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. Such individual shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued, or permitted. Any individual convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be: (1) guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; (2) guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same Chapter provision and perpetrated by the same individual. The third and any additional violations on the same Chapter and perpetrated by the same individual shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or six months in jail, or both. Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Payment of any penalty herein shall not relieve an individual from the responsibility for correcting the violation. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 10-5-04) 
Chapter 13.24 - STORMWATER/URBAN RUNOFF MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 3, 2017 , amended Ch. 13.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 13.24, §§ 13.24.010-13.24.090, pertained to storm water and urban runoff management, and derived from Ord. No. 1010, adopted Feb. 7, 2012. 

13.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by: 
1.  Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable; 
2.  Regulating illicit connections and discharges to the storm drain system; and 
3.  Regulating non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system. 
B.  The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses, water bodies, groundwater and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act, the State Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and the conditions of any NPDES permit applicable to the City. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.020 - Definitions. 
    The terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Best management practices (BMPs)" mean any activities, prohibitions, practices, procedures, programs or other measures designed to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into waters of the United States. BMPs mean and include, but are not limited to, those measures specified in the California Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbooks for municipal, industrial/commercial, new development and redevelopment and construction activity and other measures approved by the City Engineer. 
    "City" means the City of Beaumont. 
    "City Engineer" means the City Engineer of the City. 
    "Discharge" means, when used as a verb, to allow pollutants to directly or indirectly enter stormwater, or to allow stormwater or non-stormwater to directly or indirectly enter the MS4 or receiving waters from an activity or operation. When used as a noun, "discharge" means the pollutants, stormwater and non-stormwater that are discharged. 
    "Discharger" shall mean any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities, which may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the MS4 or receiving waters. Dischargers include, but are not limited to, real property owners, occupants, tenants, lessees, contractors, developers, managers and employees. 
    "Green infrastructure" shall mean an array of products, technologies, and practices that use natural or engineered systems that mimic natural processes to enhance overall environmental quality. As a general principal, green infrastructure techniques use soils and vegetation to infiltrate, evapotranspirate, and/or recycle stormwater runoff. 
    "Illicit discharge" shall mean any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges made pursuant to a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or as otherwise authorized by the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
    "Illicit connection" shall mean any physical connection to a MS4 which has not been permitted by the City, the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District or other appropriate public agency. 
    "Low impact development (LID)" shall mean any ecosystem-based approach to designing a hydrologically functional site that mimics predevelopment conditions. 
    "Low volume road" shall mean roads with traffic indexes less than or equal to six. 
    "Municipal NPDES permit" shall mean an area-wide NPDES permit issued to a government agency or agencies for the discharge of stormwater from a MS4. 
    "Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" shall mean any facility within the City limits by which stormwater may be conveyed to waters of the United States. MS4 includes, but is not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, streets, curbs, gutters, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, ditches, aqueducts, storm drains, inlets, conduit or other drainage structure. 
    "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit" shall mean a stormwater discharge permit issued by the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board or the State Water Resources Control Board in compliance with the Clean Water Act. 
    "Non-stormwater discharge" shall mean any discharge to the MS4 that is not entirely composed of stormwater. 
    "Person" shall mean any natural person, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, business trust, company or other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
    "Pollutant" shall mean anything which causes the deterioration of water quality such that it impairs subsequent and/or competing uses of the water. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, oil and other automotive fluids, soil, rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, refuse, waste, fecal matter, heavy metals, hazardous waste, chemicals, fresh concrete, yard waste from commercial landscaping operations, animal waste, materials that result from the process of constructing a building or structure, nauseous or offensive matter of any kind. 
    "Premises" shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved. 
    "Stormwater runoff" shall mean surface runoff and drainage associated with rainstorm events and snow melt. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.030 - Responsibility for administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered for the City by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may appoint and authorize one or more members of the City staff to act as his/her designee(s) to administer or enforce this chapter. In the context of this chapter, the phrase "City Engineer" includes each and all persons designated by the City Engineer to assist in the administration and enforcement of this chapter, as limited by the terms of the delegation. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.040 - Regulatory consistency. 
    This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and acts amending or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations and any existing or future municipal NPDES permits and any amendments or revisions thereto or reissuance thereof. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.050 - Reduction of pollutants in stormwater runoff. 
A.  In General. It is a violation of this chapter to throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any pollutant in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place or upon any public or private plot of land in the City. The only exception is where such pollutant is temporarily placed in an appropriate container with a spill containment system for later collection and removal. It is a violation of this chapter to cause or permit any dumpster, solid waste bin or similar container to leak such that any pollutant is discharged into any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place or upon any public or private plot of land in the City. 
B.  Construction Sites. Any person performing construction work in the City shall comply with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter and other City ordinances for erosion and sediment control. 
C.  New Development and Redevelopment. New development or redevelopment projects shall control stormwater runoff so as to prevent any deterioration of water quality that would impair subsequent or competing uses of the water. The City Engineer shall identify the BMPs that shall be implemented to prevent such deterioration and shall identify the manner of implementation. The BMPs may include, but are not limited to, the following and may, among other things, require new developments or redevelopments to do any of the following: 
1.  Increase permeable areas by leaving highly porous soil and low lying areas undisturbed; by incorporating landscaping, green roofs and open space into the project design; by using porous materials for or near driveways, drive aisles, parking stalls and low volume roads and walkways; and by incorporating detention ponds and infiltration pits into the project design. 
2.  Direct runoff to permeable areas by orienting it away from impermeable areas to swales, berms, green strip filters, gravel beds, rain gardens, pervious pavement or other approved green infrastructure and french drains; by installing rain-gutters oriented towards permeable areas; by modifying the grade of the property to divert flow to permeable areas and minimize the amount of stormwater runoff leaving the property; and by designing curbs, berms or other structures such that they do not isolate permeable or landscaped areas. 
3.  Maximize stormwater storage for reuse by using retention structures, subsurface areas, cisterns, or other structures to store stormwater runoff for reuse or slow release. 
4.  Rain gardens may be proposed in-lieu of a water quality basin when applicable and approved by the City Engineer. 
D.  Existing Development. Existing development shall control stormwater runoff so as to prevent any deterioration of water quality that would impair subsequent or competing uses of the water. The City Engineer shall identify the BMPs that may be implemented to prevent such deterioration and shall identify the manner of implementation. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.060 - Illicit connections or discharges. 
    It is a violation of this chapter to establish, use, maintain or continue illicit connections to the storm drain system, or to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the storm drain system. This prohibition against illicit connections and discharges is expressly retroactive and applies to connections and discharges made in the past, regardless of whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection or discharge. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.070 - Non-stormwater discharges. 
    The discharge of non-stormwater into the storm drain system is a violation of this chapter except as specified below. 
A.  The discharge prohibition shall not apply to any discharge regulated under an NPDES permit or waiver issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under the authority of the EPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit or waiver and other applicable laws or regulations. 
B.  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a violation of this chapter when properly managed: water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, infiltration to separate storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensate, springs, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, swimming pool discharges or flows from fire fighting. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.080 - Discharges in violation of permit. 
A.  Municipal NPDES Permit. Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of an existing or future municipal NPDES permit(s) or any amendment or revision thereto or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is a violation of this chapter and is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. 
B.  NPDES Permit for Industrial/Commercial and Construction Activity. Any industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity or other discharger subject to any NPDES permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board, shall comply with all requirements of such permit. Such discharges shall specifically comply with the following permits: the industrial stormwater general permit, and the dewatering general permit. Proof of compliance with said NPDES general permits may be required in a form acceptable to the City Engineer prior to issuance of any City grading, building, or occupancy permits. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.090 - Permits and approvals. 
    Compliance with this chapter shall be a condition of every permit, license or approval granted or issued by the City. Failure to comply with the chapter shall be grounds for revocation of any such permit, license or approval. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.100 - City authority to sample, inspect and monitor. 
A.  Regulatory Inspections. The City Engineer may inspect the premises of any discharger at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to carry out the purposes of this chapter. If a discharger refuses to allow entry for inspection, an inspection warrant shall be obtained prior to inspection. 
B.  Scope of Inspections. Inspections may include all actions necessary to determine whether any illicit discharge/connection exist, whether the BMPs installed and implemented are adequate to comply with the chapter, whether those BMPs are being properly maintained and whether the discharger complies with other requirements of this chapter. This may include sampling, metering, monitoring, visual inspections and records review. Records, reports, analyses or other required information may be inspected and copied, and photographs may be taken for purposes of enforcement of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.110 - Establishment of a fee. 
    The City Council may establish a fee by resolution to recover the cost of inspection, sampling, metering and monitoring by the City Engineer. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.120 - Orders by the City Engineer. 
    The City Engineer is authorized to issue cease and desist orders or stop-work orders to any person who is in violation of this chapter. Failure to comply with a written order of the City Engineer shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be grounds for the imposition of civil penalties described in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.130 - Notice of violation. 
A.  Whenever the City Engineer finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the City Engineer may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
1.  The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting; 
2.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
3.  That violating discharges, practices or operations cease and desist; 
4.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
5.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
6.  The implementation or maintenance of source control and treatment control BMPs. 
B.  If an abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. The notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the City or a contractor designated by the City Engineer and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to Chapter 8.32 of this Code. A notice issued under this chapter shall identify the provisions of this chapter which have been violated and shall state the recipient has a right to appeal as set forth in Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
C.  The notice shall be served upon the recipient as set forth in Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.140 - Violations-Misdemeanors or infractions. 
    A violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, shall constitute an infraction. Repeated violations may be prosecuted as misdemeanors at the discretion of the City Attorney. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.150 - Penalty for violation. 
    Upon conviction of a misdemeanor for violating any provision of this chapter, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the limits set forth by law. Upon conviction of an infraction for violating any provision of this chapter, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, not to exceed the limits set forth by law. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.160 - Separate offenses. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.170 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    The City Council hereby declares that any violation of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is therefore a public nuisance which may be summarily abated. The cost of such abatement shall be borne by the owner of the premises and the cost thereof may be imposed as a lien upon the premises, and such lien shall continue in existence until it is paid. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.180 - Administrative enforcement powers. 
    In addition to any other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, an authorized enforcement officer has the authority to issue administrative citations and fines for violations of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.190 - Civil actions. 
    In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the City. In any such action, the City may seek, and the court may grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
A.  A temporary and/or permanent injunction; 
B.  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection including, but not limited to, atttorneys' fees; 
C.  Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation; or 
D.  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
13.24.200 - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of the ordinance codified in this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of that ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
( Ord. No. 1093, § 3(Exh. A), 10-3-2017 ) 
TITLE 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapter 15.03 - ADMINISTRATION 

15.03.010 - Adoption of 2016 Chapter 1, Division II, Scope and Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Building Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 2, Volume 1, Chapter 1, Division II, "Scope and Administration," including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the Administrative Code of the City. This administrative chapter shall apply to all codes listed in this title. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
15.03.015 - Department of Building and Safety. 
    The Department of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official. The Building Official shall be appointed by the City Manager. With the concurrence of the City Manager, the Building Official shall have the authority to appoint a Deputy Building Official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers delegated by the Building Official. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
15.03.020 - Duties and powers of Building Official. 
    The Building Official is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code. The Building Official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
15.03.025 - Amendments to Chapter 1, Division II, Scope and Administration. 
    The Administrative Code is amended in part as follows: 
105.3.2 Time limit of application. 
Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 90 days upon request by the applicant. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant which has prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
105.5.1 Expiration of Permit regarding Nuisance Abatement 
Building permits issued to repair under Nuisances Chapter 8.32 of this code shall expire in sixty (60) days from the date such permit is issued unless authorized by the Chief Building Official that a longer period of time is needed to complete the work in which event such permit will expire at the end of such longer period of time. 
Section 109, Fees is amended to read as follows: 
109.1.1 Plan Review Fees 
When submittal documents are required by Section 109.3.2, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. 
The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. 
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107.3.4.2, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate established by the Building Official. 
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance 
Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
109.4.1 Investigation fee 
An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
109.6 Fee Refunds 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit or which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. 
The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
109.7 Re-inspections 
A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work or which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. 
This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. 
Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. 
To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall pay the re-inspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the jurisdiction. 
In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
Section 110 Inspections is amended to read as follows: 
110.3.5 Lathe and gypsum board inspections. 
The exception is deleted in its entirety. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 4(Exh. A), 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODE 

15.04.010 - Adoption of 2016 California Building Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Building Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, including, Appendix C, Group U-"Agricultural Buildings", Appendix F "Rodent Proofing", Appendix I "Patio Covers", and Appendix J "Grading", is hereby adopted by this reference as the Code for the City for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the City providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the amendments to such Building Code as may hereafter be adopted by the State of California shall be made a part of this Chapter without further action by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 5(Exh. B), 12-6-2016 ) 
15.04.020 - Amendments to the California Building Code. 
    The Building Code is amended in part as follows: 
Chapter 18: SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS, Section 1801.1 is amended to add: 
"Where relevant to grading, drainage and soil investigation, 'Building Official' shall also mean and include City Engineer/Director of Public Works or his/her designee." 
Appendix "J" GRADING, Section J103.1 is amended by adding: 
"Wherever the word 'Building Official' is used, it shall also mean and include City Engineer/Director of Public Works or his/her designee." 
Section J109.4 is amended to read: 
"Drainage across property lines. All graded lots shall drain to the street or publicly maintained facility. Cross lot drainage may be allowed at the sole discretion of the City Engineer/Director of Public Works. Drainage across property lines shall not exceed that which existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained onsite or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by the installation of nonerosive down drains or other devices acceptable to the City Engineer." 
Section J110-Erosion Control - first paragraph is amended to read: 
"General. The faces of cut and fill slopes and graded surfaces shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. This control shall be permitted to consist of effective planting and other practicable means." 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 5(Exh. B), 12-6-2016 ) 
15.04.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Building Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 5(Exh. B), 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING FEES 

15.08.010 - Permit issuance fees. 
    The following fees, the amount of which shall be established from time-to-time by action of the City Council, shall be collected prior to the issuance of a permit: 
A.  Plan check fees and deposits. 
B.  Permit fees. 
C.  Re-inspection fees. 
D.  Special inspection fees 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 6, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.08.020 - Additional fee. 
    In addition to the permit fees, the following fee is to be collected prior to the issuance of a permit: 
Strong Motion Instrumentation Program (SMIP), 0.007 percent per $1,000.00 of valuation with a minimum of $0.50 for each permit. (S.B. 1374 Chapter 1152 ALQUIST). 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 6, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.10 - ELEVATOR SAFETY CONSTRUCTION CODE 

15.10.010 - Adoption of 2016 California Elevator Safety Construction Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Elevator Safety Construction Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 7, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the City Elevator Safety Construction Code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 7, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.10.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Elevator Safety Construction Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 7, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.11 - HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE 

15.11.010 - Adoption of 2016 California Historical Building Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Historical Building Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 8, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the City Historical Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 8, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.11.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Historical Building Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 8, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.12 - ELECTRICAL CODE 

15.12.010 - Adoption of 2016 California Electrical Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Electrical Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 3, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the City Electrical Code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 9, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.12.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Electrical Code is an infraction. 
B.  It shall be a violation of this Chapter, punishable as an infraction, for any person, firm or corporation to make connection from a source of electrical energy to an installation for which a permit is required, unless such person, firm or corporation has obtained a certificate of approval from the building inspector that such wiring devices, appliances or equipment are in conformity with all the requirements of this code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 9, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.13 - CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

15.13.010 - Adoption of 2016 California Existing Building Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Existing Building Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 10, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the City Existing Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 10, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.13.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Existing Building Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 10, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.15 - RESIDENTIAL CODE 

15.15.010 - Adoption of the 2016 California Residential Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Residential Code, Title 24 California Code of Regulations, Part 2.5, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the City Residential Code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 11, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.15.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Residential Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 11, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.16 - PLUMBING CODE 

15.16.010 - Adoption of California 2016 Plumbing Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Plumbing Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 5, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 12, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.16.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Plumbing Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 12, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.17 - MECHANICAL CODE 

15.17.010 - Adoption of 2016 California Mechanical Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Mechanical Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 4, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 13, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.17.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Mechanical Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 13, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.19 - ENERGY CODE 

15.19.010 - Adoption of 2016 California Energy Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Energy Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 6, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the City Energy Code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 14, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.19.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Energy Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 14, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.20 - FIRE CODE 

15.20.010 - Title. 
    This Chapter shall be cited as the "Fire Code" of the City, and any reference in the Beaumont Municipal Code or any Chapter thereof to the Fire Code refers to and applies to this Chapter and the Fire Code adopted by reference in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1042, 2-4-14; Ord. No. 1079, § 15, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.20.020 - Adoption of 2016 Fire Code. 
    Subject to the particular additions, amendments and deletions set forth in this Chapter, all of the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions set forth in that certain document being marked and designated as "An Ordinance of the County of Riverside Amending Ordinance No. 787 and Adopting the 2016 California Fire Code as Amended", certified copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City, and each and all of the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions thereof are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this Chapter as though fully set forth at length herein. 
(Ord. 1042, 2-4-14; Ord. No. 1079, § 15, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.20.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued an administrative citation pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.17 or shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. In either case, the amount of the fine shall be the appropriate amount set forth in Section 1.16.030 of this Code. Each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense as specified in Section 1.16.040. 
    Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00 or six months in jail, or both. 
    In addition to the penalties provided in this Section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provision of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated by the City by civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. 
    All remedies herein are cumulative and non-exclusive. 
(Ord. 1042, 2-4-14; Ord. No. 1079, § 15, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.22 - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 

15.22.010 - Adoption of 2016 California Green Building Standards Code. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 11, including any and all amendments thereto that may hereafter be made and adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted as the City Green Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 16, 12-6-2016 ) 
15.22.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements of the Green Building Code is an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 1079, § 16, 12-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 15.24 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

15.24.010 - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302 (General Plans, subsection (d)), 65560 (Open-Space Element of General Plan), and 65800 (Zoning) conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  Certain areas of the City of Beaumont are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses result from land uses that are inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of land development in flood-prone areas increase flood heights and velocities, thereby increasing flood losses. 
C.  Therefore, the City Council of City of Beaumont does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.030 - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas of the City by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land. These regulations are designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in special flood hazard areas; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard area; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy special flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes regulations to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit land uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that land uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.050 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. v "A" Zone." See "Special flood hazard area". 
    "Accessory structure" means a structure that is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than 150 square feet and $1,500.00 in value. 
    "Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
    "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
    "Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    "Area of special flood hazard." See "Special flood hazard area." 
    "Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this Chapter. 
    "Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade - i.e., below ground level - on all sides. 
    "Building." See "Structure". 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before 1978. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    "Flood, flooding, or floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazards areas and the floodway. 
    "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazards areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
    "Floodplain Administrator" is the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. 
    "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    "Floodplain management regulations" means this Chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway." 
    "Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory Floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
    "Fraud and victimization" as related to Section 15.24.220 of this Chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the following facts: (i) that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years; (ii) that buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring; and (iii) future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
    "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    "Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
    "Hardship" as used in Section 15.24.220 et seq. of this Chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.24.160.A; 
b.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.24.160.B; 
c.  The flood openings standard in Section 15.24.160.C.3; and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.24.170. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Market value" is defined in the City of Beaumont substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 15.24.130.B.1. 
    "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    "New construction" , for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after 1978, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after 1978. 
    "Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    "One-hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood." See "Base flood." 
    "Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
    "Public safety and nuisance" as related to Section 15.24.220 et seq. of this Chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damage, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    "Sheet flow area." See "Area of shallow flooding." 
    "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH. 
    "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Chapter. 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this Chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this Chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or ravine areas. 
    "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.060 - Lands to which this Chapter applies. 
    This Chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Beaumont" dated April, 1978, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated October 17, 1978, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this Chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this Chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at City of Beaumont, 550 E. Sixth Street. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.080 - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Beaumont from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.100 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of City of Beaumont, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.115 - Severability. 
    This Chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this Chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.120 - Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. 
    The Director of Public Works is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this Chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.130 - Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine: 
1.  Permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Beaumont; and 
5.  All Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
B.  Develop Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
1.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "Market Value." 
2.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
C.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.24.070, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 15.24.160 et seq. Alternatively, a base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995. 
D.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
1.  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
2.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
a.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building Permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the City clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
E.  Document Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Section 15.24.160.C.1 and Section 15.24.190 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.24.160.C.2 (elevation or flood proofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Sections 15.24.160.C.3 (wet flood proofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.24.180.A.3 (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.24.210.B (floodway encroachments); and 
6.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
F.  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.24.150. 
G.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this Chapter as specified in Section 15.24.080. 
H.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA. 
I.  Planning. Assure City's General Plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.140 - Development permit. 
    A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any special flood hazard areas established in Section 15.24.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
A.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
1.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
3.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
4.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
5.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.24.070 or Section 15.24.130.C; 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood proofed, as required in Section 15.24.160.C.2 of this Chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
B.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood proofed building meets the flood proofing criteria in Section 15.24.160.C.2. 
C.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.24.160.C.3 of this Chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.24.130.E of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.150 - Appeals. 
    The City Council of City of Beaumont shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.160 - Standards of construction. 
    In all special flood hazard area the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.  Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Flood Proofing. 
1.  Residential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.  In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. 
b.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
c.  In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 15.24.130.C. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.24.160.C.1 or: 
a.  Be flood proofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under Section 15.24.160.C.1, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Section 15.24.160.C.2.a & b are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
3.  Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  For non-engineered openings: 
1.  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
4.  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured homes. 
a.  See Section 15.24.190. 
5.  Garages and low cost accessory structures. 
a.  Attached garages. 
1.  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See Section 15.24.160.C.3. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See Section 15.24.160.B. 
2.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry flood proofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
b.  Detached garages and accessory structures. 
1.  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.24.050, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
a)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
b)  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
c)  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
d)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or flood proofed to or above the BFE; 
e)  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.24.210; and 
f)  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with Section 15.24.160.C.3. 
2.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 15.24.160. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.170 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.180 - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
A.  All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
1.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BPE). 
2.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans. 
3.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the Floodplain Administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation. 
b.  Pad elevation. 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
B.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.190 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
1.  Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15.24.190.A will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.200 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.24.140 of this Chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.24.190.A. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.210 - Floodways. 
    Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City. 
B.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the City shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  If Sections 15.24.210.A and B are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.24.160 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.220 - Nature of variances. 
    The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
    The variance criteria set forth in this section of the Chapter 15 are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to real property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this Chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
    An objective of the City is to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements of this Chapter are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this Chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.230 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.24.120 through 15.24.210 of this Chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.24.050) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this Chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a City official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage, and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County of Riverside Recorder in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
F.  The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
15.24.240 - Appeal Board. 
A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
B.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; and 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
C.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Section 15.24.240.A through 15.24.240.D are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
D.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.24.230.A and the purposes of this Chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 928, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08) 
Chapter 15.26 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS 

15.26.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a formal procedure for individuals with disabilities seeking equal access to housing to request a reasonable accommodation as provided by the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and California's Fair Employment and Housing Act, and to establish criteria to be used when considering such requests. Reasonable accommodation means providing individuals with disabilities, or developers of housing for individuals with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning regulations or policies (including the modification or waiver of certain requirements), when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. 
(Ord. 981, 12-7-2010) 
15.26.020 - Definitions. 
    Whenever the following terms are used in this Chapter, they shall have the meanings established by this Section: 
A.  "Acts:" The Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and California's Fair Employment and Housing Act. 
B.  "Individual with a disability:" As defined under the Acts, a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activity, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment, or anyone who has a record of such impairment. 
(Ord. 981, 12-7-2010) 
15.26.030 - Procedures. 
A.  A written request for reasonable accommodations shall be made by any individual with a disability, or his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities when the application of a land use or zoning regulation or policy acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. 
B.  A request for reasonable accommodation shall state the basis of the request including, but not limited to, a modification or exception to the regulations, standards and practices for the sitting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide an individual with a disability equal opportunity to housing of his or her choice. 
C.  The Director of Planning or designee may request additional information necessary for making a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation that complies with the fair housing law protections and the privacy rights of the individual with a disability to use the specified housing. If additional information is requested, the 45-day time period for making a determination on the request stops running until the additional information is provided. 
D.  The Director of Planning or designee shall issue a written determination within 45 days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation. 
E.  While a request for a reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 981, 12-7-2010) 
15.26.040 - Findings. 
    The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with Acts, shall, if granted, be granted to an individual and shall not run with the land (unless the Director or designee determines that much a modification is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot easily be removed), and shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
A.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities under the Acts; 
B.  Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the Acts; 
C.  Whether the requested accommodations would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; 
D.  Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City's land use and zoning program and; 
E.  Whether there are any alternative reasonable accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant. 
All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodations in the appeals process as set forth in Section 15.26.060. 
(Ord. 981, 12-7-2010) 
15.26.050 - Notice. 
    Notice of the determination shall be provided to abutting owners of the property which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation. The notice shall provide a general description of the accommodation that was deemed necessary for the use of the house or dwelling unit, as a result of the applicant's disability. 
(Ord. 981, 12-7-2010) 
15.26.060 - Appeal of determination. 
A.  A determination by the Director of Planning shall be final unless appealed to City Council within 15 days. 
B.  Only the aggrieved applicant and abutting owners who received notice of the reasonable accommodation determination have a right to appeal the decision. 
C.  An appeal shall be made in writing, pursuant to procedures established in Section 17.02 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 981, 12-7-2010) 
Chapter 15.28 - MOVING BUILDINGS 

15.28.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this Section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "Building" is a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. 
    "Community Development Director" and "Building Inspector" refer to the officials of those titles in this City or their designees. 
    "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. 399 § 1, 1968; Ord. 667 § 2, 1988) 
15.28.020 - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall relocate or move any building without first obtaining a moving permit from the Community Development Director. The fee therefor shall be $200.00 or such greater amount as shall hereafter be set by Resolution of the City Council of the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 399 § 2, 1968; Ord. 423 § 4, 1971; Ord. 667 § 2, 1988) 
15.28.030 - Permit-Application. 
    A person seeking issuance of a permit under this Chapter shall file an application for such permit with the Community Development Director. 
A.  Form. The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by the Community Development Director, and shall be filed in the office of the Community Development Director. 
B.  Contents. The application shall be set forth: 
1.  The description of the building proposed to be moved giving street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of exterior and interior; 
2.  A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be moved, giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the City; 
3.  A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building be removed, giving lot, block and tract number, if located in the City; 
4.  The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved; 
5.  The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved; 
6.  Proposed moving date and hours; 
7.  Any additional information which the Building Inspector shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
C.  Accompanying Papers. 
1.  Tax Certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file with the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which it is to be removed are free of any encumbrances and that all taxes and any City charges against the same are paid in full. 
2.  Certificate of Ownership or Entitlement. The applicant, if other than the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill of sale signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence, that he is entitled to move the building. 
(Ord. 399 §3, 1968; Ord. 667 §2, 1988) 
15.28.040 - Deposit for expense to City. 
    Upon receipt of an application it shall be the duty of the Community Development Director to procure an estimate of the expense that will be incurred for 'inspecting the building and route of moving before and after removal, and in removing and replacing any electric wires, street lamps, or pole lines belonging to the City or any other property of the City, the removal and replacement of which will be required by reason of the moving of the building through the City, together with the cost of materials necessary to be used in making such removals and replacements. Prior to issuance of the permit, the Community Development Director shall require of the applicant a deposit of a sum of money equal to twice the amount of the estimated expense. 
(Ord. 399 §4, 1968; Ord. 667 §2, 1988) 
15.28.050 - General deposit. 
    Any person filing an application under this Chapter, prior to the commencement of any removal, shall furnish to the City satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force at all times during the performance of any of the work permitted under such permit public liability insurance of not less than $500,000.00 for anyone person and $1,000,000.00 for anyone accident, and property damage insurance of not less than $300,000.00, duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this State. 
(Ord. 399 §5, 1968; Ord. 667 §2, 1988) 
15.28.060 - Duties of Building Inspector. 
A.  Inspection. Upon notice from the Community Development Director that the application is complete and fees have been paid, the Building Inspector shall inspect the building and the applicant's equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance of a permit are met and shall make a written report thereon to the Community Development Director, including a report of time and mileage incurred in making the inspection. 
B.  Standards for Issuance. The Community Development Director shall refuse to issue a permit if he finds, based on his observations and the report of the Building Inspector: 
1.  That any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with; 
2.  That the building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the City. 
3.  That the building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the City; and that the building is found not to be free of termites; 
4.  That the building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which owned, if the removal location is in the City; 
5.  That the applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and property would be endangered by its use; 
6.  That zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building in its new location; 
7.  That for any other reason persons or property in the City would be endangered by the moving of the buildings. 
C.  Fees and Deposits. 
1.  Deposit. The Community Development Director shall deposit all fees and deposits, and all bonds or insurance policies, with the City Finance Director. 
2.  Return Upon Non-issuance. Upon his refusal to issue a permit, the Community Development Director shall return to the applicant after deduction of inspection costs all deposits, bonds and insurance policies. 
Permit fees filed with the application and inspection costs shall not be returned. 
3.  Return Upon Allowance for Expense. After the building has been removed, the Community Development Director shall furnish the City Manager with a written statement of all expenses incurred for inspections and in removing and replacing all property belonging to the City, and of all material used in the making of the removal and replacement together with a statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property belonging to the City; provided, however, that if any wires, poles, lamps or other property are not located in conformity with governing ordinances, the City Manager shall authorize the Community Development Director to return to the applicant all deposits, after deducting the sum sufficient to pay for all of the costs and expenses and for all damage done to property of the City by reason of the removal of the building. Permit fees deposited with the application shall not be returned. 
D.  Designate Streets for Removal. The Community Development Director shall procure a list of designated streets over which the building may be moved. The Community Development Director shall have the list approved by the Chief of Police and shall reproduce the list upon the permit in writing. In making their determinations, the Community Development Director and the Chief of Police shall act to assure maximum safety to persons and property in the City and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets. 
(Ord. 399 §6, 1968; Ord. 667 §2, 1988) 
15.28.070 - Duties of permittee. 
    Every permittee under this Chapter shall: 
A.  Use Designated Streets. Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the written permit; 
B.  Notify of Revised Moving Time. Notify the Community Development Director in writing of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application; 
C.  Notify of Damage. Notify the Community Development Director in writing of any and all damage done to property belonging to the City within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred; 
D.  Display Lights. Cause red lights to be displayed during the night time on every side of the building, while standing on a street, in such a manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall at all times erect and maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the building; 
E.  Street Occupancy Period. Remove the building from City streets after four days of such occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the City Manager; 
F.  Comply with Governing Law. Comply with the Building Code, the Fire Zone, the Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and laws upon relocating the building in the City; 
G.  Pay Expenses of Officer. Pay the expense of a Traffic Officer ordered to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury; 
H.  Clear Old Premises. Remove all rubbish and material and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in a safe, sanitary and sightly condition. Such clearing shall be completed no later than 60 days following such removal; 
I.  Remove Service Connection. See that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper. The permittee shall notify the gas, electric and water service companies to remove their services; 
J.  Use Licensed Contractor. Where a building or structure, while in the process of being moved, must be moved on, over or across a public thoroughfare, it may be moved only by a contractor fully licensed as such by the State. 
(Ord. 399 §7, 1968; Ord. 667 §2, 1988) 
15.28.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcing Officers. The Community Development Director, the Building Inspector and the Police Department shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  Permittee Liable for Expense above Deposit. The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damages or costs in excess of deposited amounts or securities, and the City Attorney shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such excessive amount. 
C.  Original Premises Left Unsafe. The City shall proceed to do work necessary to leaving the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition, where the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposit. 
(Ord. 399 §8, 1968; Ord. 667 §2, 1988) 
15.28.090 - Duration of permit. 
    All work pursuant to a permit issued for the removal of a building as set forth in this Chapter shall be completed within 120 days from the date of the issuance of the permit. If such work is not completed within such time limitation, a new permit shall be required. 
(Ord. 399 §10, 1968; Ord. 667 §2, 1988) 
15.28.100 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a period not exceeding 60 days or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 399 §11, 1968; Ord. 667 §2, 1988) 
Chapter 15.32 - GENERAL PLAN REVISION FEES 

15.32.010 - Designated. 
    The following general plan fund fees shall be collected prior to the issuance of a permit: 
A.  Single-family residence, $50.00 per unit; 
B.  Multiple residential units, $50.00 per unit; 
C.  Mobile home park/subdivision, $35.00 per lot; 
D.  Recreational vehicle parks, $25.00 per lot; 
E.  Motels and/or resident hotels, $35.00 per unit; 
F.  Commercial/industrial, $0.05 per square foot. 
(Ord. 503 §1, 1979) 
Chapter 15.36 - BASIC SERVICE FACILITY FEES 

15.36.010 - Established. 
    A basic service facility fee is established for all new living units constructed and/or approved in the City. The fee for mobile home rental parks and recreational vehicle parks shall be due upon approval of the final parcel, subdivision map or conditional use permit, all others upon issuance of building permit. The fee shall be in addition to all other fees in effect. 
(Ord. 506 (part), 1979) 
15.36.020 - Fee schedule. 
    The fee shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
A.  Single-family residence, $500.00; 
B.  Multiple-family residential units, $500.00 per living unit; 
C.  Mobile home rental parks, $500.00 per space; 
D.  Recreational vehicle parks, $500.00 per recreational vehicle space; 
E.  Motels and hotels, $500.00 per unit. 
(Ord. 506 (part), 1979) 
15.36.030 - Amendment by resolution. 
    The fees established in this chapter may be amended by resolution. The fees established in this chapter relate to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the City and are required for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety, for the reasons stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 506 (part), 1979) 
Chapter 15.38 - BUILDING INSPECTOR 

15.38.010 - Enforcement. 
A.  The building inspector is authorized to enforce all provisions of Title 15 of this code, including those uniform codes incorporated into Title 15 by express provisions and Section 17.100.010. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code, the building inspector may arrest a person without a warrant whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his presence which is a violation of any of the provisions stated in subsection A of this section. 
C.  In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section, and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the building inspector making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to appear, as prescribed by Chapter 5 of the California Penal Code, commencing with Section 853.6. The provisions of that chapter shall thereafter apply with reference to any proceeding based upon the issuance of a written notice to appear pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 599 §1, 1984) 
Chapter 15.40 - PERMIT STREAMLINING 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

15.40.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to implement the Permit Streamlining Act (Chapter 4.5, commencing with Section 65920 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code, as added by Assembly Bill 884 Chapter 1200, Statutes of 1977, and as subsequently amended). 
B.  It is further intended by this chapter to ensure that state and local agencies, and the general public have a clear understanding of the specific requirements which must be met in connection with the approval of development projects and to expedite decisions of such projects. 
(Ord. 560 §1 (part), 1983) 
15.40.020 - Applicability-Generally. 
    This chapter applies generally to all defined development projects approved by the City. 
(Ord. 560 §4, 1983) 
15.40.030 - Definitions. 
    Whenever the following words are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning given them in this section, unless otherwise defined. These definitions are intended to clarify but not replace or negate the definitions used in Chapter 4.5 of Division I of Title 7 of the Government Code. 
A.  Administrative appeal. "Administrative appeal" means review, as provided by law, rule, regulation or ordinance, of an approval or denial of an application for a development project either by a body within the public agency or by an agency at another level of government, such as the California Coastal Commission. 
B.  Air Pollution Control District. "Air pollution control district" means any district created or continued in existence pursuant to the provisions of Part 3 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 26 of the Health and Safety Code. 
C.  Applicant. "Applicant" means a person who requests in writing the approval of a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use from one or more public agencies which may be required for a development project proposed by that person. 
D.  Application. "Application" means the form and information submitted by an applicant. The form and information is to be used to determine whether to approve or deny permits or other entitlement for use. It shall also serve as the factual basis from which an Initial Study is conducted to determine potential significant environmental impacts. One development project may require one or more permits from the same public agency, depending on the number of entitlements for use required by individual agency procedures or regulations. 
E.  Approval. "Approval" means the issuance or commitment to issuance by a public agency of each lease, permit, license, certificate or other entitlement for use for a development project for which an application was accepted as complete. The exact date of approval of any development project is determined by each public agency according to its rules, regulations and ordinances, consistent with these guidelines. "Approval" includes all actions required by all public agency departments and organizational units which must act upon the permit in order for it to be validly issued, but does not include administrative appeals. 
F.  CEQA-California Environmental Quality Act. "California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means California Public Resources Code Sections 21000, et seq. 
G.  Combined Environmental Impact Report-Environmental Impact Statements. A "combined EIR/EIS" means an environmental document prepared cooperatively by the state lead agency under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the federal lead agency under the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) to comply with both the California Environmental Quality Act and the National Environmental Protection Act. 
H.  Development. "Development" means the: 
1.  Placement or erection of any solid material or structure on land, in water, or under water; 
2.  Discharge or disposal of solid, liquid, gaseous or 'thermal waste or any dredged material; 
3.  Grading, removing, dredging, mining or extraction of any materials; 
4.  Change in density or intensity of use of land including subdivisions (pursuant to Subdivision Map Act, commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code) or other division of land, except land divisions produced by public agency acquisition of land for public recreation uses, and except the approval or disapproval of final subdivisions maps; 
5.  Change in intensity of use of water or altered access to water; 
6.  Construction, reconstruction, demolition or alteration of any structure; 
7.  Removal or harvesting of major vegetation, except for agricultural operations, kelp harvesting, or timber operations which comply with an approved timber harvest plan submitted pursuant to the Z'berg-Nejedly Forest Practices Act of 1973 (Chapter 8, commencing with Section 4511, of Part 2, Division 4 of the Public Resources Code). 
As used in this section, "structure" includes, but is not limited to, any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and electrical power transmission and distribution line. "Development" does not mean a "change of organization," as defined in Section 56028; a "change of organization of a city," as defined in Section 35027; a "reorganization," as defined in Section 56068; or a "municipal reorganization," as defined in Section 35042 of the Government Code. 
I.  Development project. "Development project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. "Development project" includes a projection involving the issuance of a discretionary permit for construction or reconstruction. "Development project" does not include the issuance of a permit to operate after approval of construction or reconstruction, or any ministerial projects proposed to be carried out or approved by public agencies.' 
J.  Environmental documents. "Environmental documents" means Initial Studies, Notices of Preparation, Negative Declarations, Draft and Final Environmental Impact Reports (EIRs), Notices of Completion and Notices of Determination as defined in the state EIR Guidelines contained in Chapter 3, Division 6, of Title 14 of the California Administrative Code. 
K.  Lead agency. "Lead agency" means the public agency which has the principal responsibility for carrying out or approving a project. "Lead agency" means the same lead agency as determined pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. 
L.  Local agency. "Local agency" means any public agency other than a state or federal agency, board or commission. "Local agency" includes, but is not limited to cities, counties, charter cities, a city and county, districts, school districts, special districts, redevelopment agencies, and any board, commission or organizational subdivisions of a local agency are normally considered part of one local agency and are not separate local agencies. 
M.  Permit Streamlining Act. "Permit Streamlining Act" means Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 65920) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code, as added by Assembly Bill 884 (Chapter 1200, Statutes of 1977), and as subsequently amended. 
N.  Project. "Project" means any activity involving the issuance to a person of a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use by one or more public agencies. "Project" differs in meaning from the same word in the California Environmental Quality Act. "Project" includes but is not limited to activities requiring the following entitlements for use: 
1.  The adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance applied for by a private applicant (pursuant to Government Code Sections 65850, et seq.), which is limited in its effect to only one identified development project site. As used in this section, "site" means a specific, relatively small parcel or contiguous parcels of real property; 
2.  A tentative map or parcel map under the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66410, et seq.); 
3.  A use permit or conditional use permit; 
4.  A variance; 
5.  Review under a discretionary ordinance, such as a design review ordinance; 
6.  Other applicable discretionary approvals. 
"Project" does not include the following activities of a public agency: 
1.  Issuing a contract, grant, subsidy, loan, or other form of financial assistance; 
2.  Taking a legislative or quasi-legislative action, such as issuing rules or regulations; 
3.  Proposing development to be carried out by that public agency; 
4.  Adopting or amending a local agency general plan (pursuant to Government Code Sections 65350, et seq.); or zoning ordinance that regulates an area larger than one identified development project site, or that is proposed by a local agency (pursuant to Government Code Sections 65850, et seq.); or specific plans (pursuant to Government Code Sections 6550, et seq.); 
5.  Renewing, extending or assigning an entitlement for use; provided that no new development is proposed either by the applicant, or by the agency as a condition of approval; 
6.  Approving or denying activities requiring those ministerial permits as defined pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act which can include, but are not limited to building permits, final subdivision maps, occupancy permits, permits to operate, and inspection permits. 
O.  Public agency. "Public agency" means any state' agency, any county, city and county, city, regional agency, public district, redevelopment agency, or other political subdivision. It does not include courts of the state, or agencies of the federal government. 
P.  Responsible agency. "Responsible agency" means a public agency, other than the lead agency, which has responsibility for carrying out or approving a project. It includes all public agencies other than the lead agency from which a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use is required for the development project. 
Q.  Shall, should, may. "Shall is mandatory, "should" is advisory, and "may" is permissive. 
R.  Single administrative entity. "Single administrative entity" means the department or person within the department responsible for coordination of all permits and is able to provide information as to where the project is in the review process. 
S.  State agency. "State agency" means any agency, board, or commission of state government. For all purposes of this chapter, the term "state agency" shall include an air pollution control district. 
T.  Trustee agency. "Trustee agency" means a state agency having jurisdiction by law over natural resources affected by a project which are held in trust for the people of the state. Trustee agencies include: 
1.  The California Department of Fish and Game, with regard to the fish and wildlife of the state; 
2.  The State Lands Commission with regard to state-owned "sovereign" lands; 
3.  The State Department of Parks and Recreation with regard to units of the state park system; 
4.  The University of California with regard to -sites within the Natural Land and Water Reserve System. 
(Ord. 560 § 2, 1983) 
15.40.040 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter does not apply to the following actions: 
A.  Administrative appeals within a local agency or to a state agency. 
B.  Approval or disapproval of a final subdivision map pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code). However, approval or disapproval of a final subdivision map is still subject to Government Code Section 66458, which generally requires the local legislative body to act on a final map within ten days of the filing of the map or at its next regularly scheduled meeting, unless an extension is authorized. In addition, the approval or disapproval of a final subdivision map shall occur within one year from the date on which the final map is filed for approval (as required by Government Code Section 65922(c), and this deadline is not extendable. 
C.  Change in organization or reorganization of the City. 
(Ord. 560 §5, 1983) 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

15.40.050 - Applicability-Zoning procedures and current decision-making structure. 
A.  The provisions of the Zoning Ordinance No. 590, or such other zoning ordinance that may be adopted, are incorporated by reference and are subject to all of the time limitations as specified in this chapter. 
B.  The existing decision-making structure remains intact, so actual decisions continue to be made in the usual manner by the legislative body, planning commission, design review commission and zoning administrator. 
(Ord. 560 §1 (part), 1983) 
15.40.060 - Single administrative entity designated. 
    The single administrative entity is designated as the Planning Department. 
(Ord. 560 §3, 1983) 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT APPLICATIONS 

15.40.070 - Unified form. 
    The City shall upon initial submission provide the applicant with a list of all permits and standards needed to develop the project. A sample, Attachment 1, is on file with the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.080 - Determination of completeness. 
    For any application received on or after January 1, 1983, a written determination must be made within 30 days or else application shall be deemed complete for purposes of the Permit Streamlining Act. This means that the time limits shall begin to run after the thirtieth day if the public agency has not determined in writing whether the application is complete or incomplete. (Reference, Government Code Section 65943.) 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.090 - Incomplete-Procedures. 
    In the event the application is determined not to be complete, the agency's determination shall specify those parts of the application which are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which they can be made complete. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.100 - Local permit assistance. 
    The City shall assist the applicant to make the application complete within 30 days after receiving the application. The determination whether an application is complete or incomplete may be made by agency staff, and should be transmitted to the address of the applicant indicated on the application form. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.110 - Requests for further information-Effect. 
A.  After the City accepts an application as complete, the agency shall not subsequently request of an applicant any new or additional information which was not required as part of the application originally determined to be complete. However, the City may, in the course of processing the application, request the applicant to clarify, amplify, correct, or otherwise supplement the information required for the original complete application. Making a request for supplemental information does not waive, extend or delay the time limits prescribed in this chapter for a decision on the completed application. 
B.  This section shall not be construed as requiring an applicant to submit with the initial application all of the information which shall be required in order to take final action on such application. Prior to accepting an application, the City shall inform the applicant in writing of any information which will subsequently be required from the applicant in order to complete final action on such application. However, the application shall contain enough information for the lead agency to prepare an Initial Study under CEQA. 
C.  This section shall not be construed as limiting the ability of the City to request and obtain information which may be needed in order to comply with the provisions of CEQA (California Environmental Quality Act). Therefore, the City shall request, and the applicant then shall supply, any additional information needed to prepare adequate environmental documents as identified by the City, responsible agencies, commenting agencies, and agencies with jurisdiction by law (as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act) and the general public to assure that the environmental review process can be utilized to shape the design of a project. Further, some of the environmental data needed for decision on a permit may be gathered during the review process rather than supplied with the initial application. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
ARTICLE IV. - TIME LIMITS 

15.40.120 - Decisions-Lead agency. 
    The City which is the lead agency for a development project shall after review and certification of an EIR, completion of a Negative Declaration, or other means of compliance with CEQA through City Resolution No. 1980-45, or such other subsequently adopted ordinance or resolution, approve or disapprove such project within one year from the date on which an application requesting approval of such project has been received and accepted as complete by the City. All time limits specified by the lead agency are maximum time limits for approving or disapproving development projects. All City public agencies shall, if possible, approve or disapprove development projects in shorter periods of time. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.130 - Decisions-Responsible agency. 
A.  Any other public agency which is a responsible agency for a development project shall approve or disapprove such project within whichever of the following periods of time results in a later deadline date: 
1.  Within 180 days from the date on which the lead agency has approved or disapproved such project; or 
2.  Within 180 days of the date on which a completed application for such project has been received and accepted as complete by the responsible agency. This 180-day period begins for each agency when the application has been accepted as complete by that agency, regardless of the status of applications for the same development project with other responsible agencies. 
B.  The applicant should provide the responsible agency with written documentation of the date of the lead agency's approval or disapproval of the project immediately upon such agency's action. 
C.  All time limits specified for responsible agencies are maximum time limits for approving or disapproving development projects. All responsible agencies shall, if possible, approve or disapprove development projects in shorter periods of time. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.140 - Waivers. 
    In the event that a combined environmental impact report-environmental impact statement is being prepared on a development project pursuant to Section 21083.6 of the Public Resources Code, the City may waive the time limits required by this chapter. To waive these time limits, the City must first find that a combined EIR/EIS would be shorter than to prepare each document separately. The lead agency then shall approve or disapprove such project within 60 days after the combined environmental impact report-environmental impact statement has been completed and adopted. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.150 - Inapplicable-When. 
    The time limits specified by this chapter shall not apply in the event that federal statutes or regulations require time schedules which exceed such time limits, or to applications to appropriate water where such applications have been protested pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 1330) of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Water Code, or to petitions for changes pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 1700) of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Water Code. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.160 - Extension. 
    The time limits specified in this chapter may be extended once for a period not to exceed 90 days upon consent of the City and the applicant. The City shall not require the applicant to waive time limits specified in the Permit Streamlining Act or consent to an extension of time as part of the initial permit application. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.170 - Moratorium-Effect. 
    A moratorium on approving development projects that is adopted by the City does not automatically waive or extend the time limits specified by this chapter. Instead, a moratorium can provide the basis for the City to refuse in writing to accept an application as complete or to formally deny a development project application, within the time limits specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 560 56 (part), 1983) 
15.40.180 - Administrative appeals-Suspension. 
    The time limits specified in this chapter shall be suspended in the event of an administrative appeal. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.190 - Failure to meet. 
    In the event that the City or responsible agency fails to act to approve or to disapprove a completed application for a development project within the time limits specified in this chapter, such failure to act shall deem the application automatically approved. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.200 - Conditional approvals. 
    The City may establish reasonable standard conditions which would automatically be applicable to any development project deemed approved pursuant to this chapter. Such standard conditions shall be consistent with conditions attached to other projects of a similar type and in a similar location when previously approved by the City. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.210 - Denials-Effect. 
A.  In the event that information needed for the reasons shown in subdivisions 1 through 4 of this subsection is not provided by the applicant or cannot be developed by the City within the time limits specified by this chapter, the City may deny a permit for a development project to allow time to obtain the needed information. Information whose absence would constitute a reason for such a denial are: 
1.  Information which is to be supplied by the applicant and is necessary to prepare a legally adequate environmental document; 
2.  The results of year-long studies conducted by or prepared under contract for the City, when such results are necessary to prepare a legally adequate environmental document; 
3.  Information necessary to prepare a supplemental Environmental Impact Report in compliance with Public Resources Code Section 21166; or 
4.  Information without which the City's decision to approve would not be supported by substantial evidence. 
B.  Denials for these reasons may be deemed by the City to be a denial without prejudice to the applicant's right to reapply for the same permit. If a reapplication is made, it should be handled expeditiously by the City. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.220 - CEQA compliance. 
    The City is required to complete and certify for private projects an environmental impact report within one year, or complete a negative declaration within 105 days. These time limits shall begin and run concurrently, and not consecutively, with the one-year time limit for the City to approve or disapprove a development project according, to this chapter except as provided by this section. 
A.  Subject to the one-year maximum time limit plus extension as described in Section 15.40.160, when existing statutes require the City to approve or deny a permit application within a period of time of less than six months or else the permit application will be approved by operation of law, such time period shall not begin to run until the environmental documentation required by the California Environmental Quality Act is completed and certified by the lead agency. Such permits would be, but are not limited to: 
1.  Action on a tentative subdivision map by a local government, pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 66452) of Chapter 3; Division 2, Title 2 of the Government Code; 
2.  Action on a zoning variance permit; 
3.  Action on a special (conditional) use permit; 
4.  Action on a permit issued by a design review commission; 
5.  Action on a sign permit; and 
6.  Action on other discretionary permit(s) subject to subsection A of this Section. 
B.  In such case, the environmental document shall be completed or certified and the decision on the application shall be made by the City within one year from the date on which an application requesting approval of such project has been received and accepted as complete by such agency pursuant to the Permit Streamlining Act. This one-year time limit may be extended once for a period not to exceed ninety days upon consent of the City and the applicant. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
15.40.230 - Multi-permit projects. 
A.  In the event that a development project requires more than one approval by the City, the agency may establish time limits: 
1.  For submitting the information required in connection with each separate request for approval; and 
2.  For acting upon each such request; provided, however, that the time period for acting on all such requests shall not, in aggregate, exceed those limits specified in this chapter. 
B.  The City should require the applicant to either submit a series of permit applications according to an established schedule, or require the applicant to file all applications simultaneously using a combined single unified application form. 
C.  The City may, however, allow an applicant to apply for each request for approval individually without adhering to a schedule, in which case each application will be processed and decided separately according to the time limits specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 560 §6 (part), 1983) 
Chapter 15.42 - EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL BUILDINGS 

15.42.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings. The provisions of this Chapter are intended as minimum standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of life loss or injury. Compliance with these standards will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent earthquake damage to rehabilitated buildings. This Chapter does not require alteration of existing electrical, accessibility. plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems unless they constitute a hazard to life or property. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
15.42.020 - Scope. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all existing buildings not exceeding two stories in height having at least one unreinforced bearing wall as defined herein. 
    Exceptions: This Chapter shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Buildings classified as essential facilities in Table No. 23-K, 1988 Uniform Building Code. 
2.  Buildings classified as hazardous facilities in Table No. 23-K, 1988 Uniform Building Code. 
3.  Detached dwellings. 
4.  Detached apartment houses containing less than five dwelling units which are used solely for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 695, §1, 1991) 
15.42.030 - Alternate materials and methods of construction. 
    Alternate materials, designs and methods of construction may be approved by the Building Official in accordance with the 1988 Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
15.42.040 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
    Cross walls: Cross walls are interior walls of masonry or wood frame construction with surface finish of wood, lath and plaster, minimum one-half-inch thick gypsum wallboard of solid horizontal wood sheathing. In order to be considered as a cross wall within the intent of this Chapter, cross walls shall be spaced not more than 40 feet apart in each story, and shall be full story height with a minimum length of one and one-half times the story height. 
    Unreinforced masonry bearing wall building: A building containing a minimum of one wall having the following characteristics: 
1.  Provides the vertical support for a floor or roof. 
2.  The total superimposed load is over 100 pounds per linear foot. 
3.  The area of reinforcing steel, if any, is less than 50 percent of that required by section 2407(h)4B of the 1988 Uniform Building Code. 
In an unreinforced masonry bearing wall building as defined above all unreinforced masonry walls (including non-bearing walls) shall be reinforced as per this Chapter. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
15.42.050 - Administration. 
A.  Service of Order. The Building Official shall issue an order, as provided in Subsection B, to the owner of each building within the scope of this Chapter within one year from the effective date of this Chapter. 
B.  Contents of Order. The order shall be in writing and shall be served either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner. The order shall specify that the building has been determined by the Building Official to be within the scope of this Chapter and, therefore, is required to meet the minimum standards of this Chapter. The order shall specify the degree of compliance required by this Chapter and shall be accompanied by a copy of this Chapter and shall specify the time limits for compliance. 
C.  Appeal from Order. The owner or the owner's authorized agent may appeal to the Planning Commission the Building Official's initial determination that the building is within the scope of this Chapter. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 60 days from the service date of the order described in Subsection B. Any such appeal shall be decided by the Planning Commission no later than 60 days after the date that the appeal is filed. Such appeal shall be made in writing upon appropriate forms provided therefore by the Building Official and the grounds thereof shall be stated clearly and concisely. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. Any person not satisfied with a determination by the Planning Commission may appeal said determination by the manner set forth in Section 17.70.200b, 7, 8, and 9 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
Appeals or requests for modifications from any other determinations, orders, or action by the Building Official pursuant to this Chapter, shall be made in accordance with the appeal procedures established in Section 17.70.200b of this Code. 
D.  Recordation. At the time that the aforementioned order is served, the Building Official shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of Chapter 15.42, Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings. The certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been ordered to structurally analyze the building and to structurally alter or demolish it where it is not found to comply with this Chapter. 
E.  Termination of Status. If the building is found not be within the scope of this Chapter, or as a result of structural alterations or an analysis is found to be structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic forces required by this Chapter; or is demolished; the Building Official shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a certificate terminating the status of the subject building as being classified within the scope of this Chapter. 
F.  Enforcement. If the owner fails to comply with any order issued by the Building Official pursuant to this Chapter within any of the time limits set forth in Section 15.42.060, the Building Official shall order the entire building vacated and to remain vacated until such order has been complied with. If compliance with such order has not been accomplished within 90 days after the date the building has been ordered vacated, or by such additional time as may have been granted by the City Council, the Building Official may initiate proceedings in accordance with the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
15.42.060 - General requirements. 
A.  General. Unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings subject to this Chapter shall undergo structural alterations necessary to comply with the minimum requirements set forth in this Chapter. As an alternate, said buildings may be demolished subject to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code. 
B.  Mandatory Requirements. 
1.  Compliance with Standards. Unreinforced masonry buildings shall comply with provisions of this Chapter. Should an owner elect to strengthen a building beyond the mandatory requirements set forth herein, such additional strengthening work shall comply with other recognized standards as approved by the Building Official. 
2.  Change in Use. After the effective date of' this Chapter the time limits set forth in Table No. 15.42-A shall not apply to any building which will undergo a change of use or occupancy which will result in the building being classified as a Group A Occupancy having an occupant load of 100 or more. Before such building may be used or occupied as a Group A Occupancy it shall be made to comply with provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Responsibility of Owner. The owner of each building within the scope of this Chapter shall cause a structural analysis of the building to be made by civil or structural engineer licensed by the State of California. If the building does not meet the minimum earthquake standards specified in this Chapter, the owner shall either cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such standards; or shall initiate proceedings for demolition of the building. Within 270 days after the service of the order specified in Section 15.42.050, the owner shall comply with the requirements set forth in this Subsection by submitting to the Building Official one of the following: 
1.  A structural analysis which shall demonstrate that the building meets the minimum requirements of this Chapter; or 
2.  A structural analysis and plans for proposed structural alterations necessary to make the building comply with the minimum requirements of this Chapter; or 
3.  An application for the demolition of the building. 
After plans are submitted and approved by the Building Official, the owner shall obtain a building permit, commence and complete the required construction or demolition within the time limits set forth in Table No. 15.42-A. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
15.42.070 - Material requirements. 
A.  Existing Materials. All existing materials utilized as part of the lateral force resisting system shall be in sound condition or shall be removed and replaced with new materials. 
B.  Existing Unreinforced Masonry. 
1.  General. Unreinforced masonry walls shall be tested as specified in this Subsection. Masonry that does not meet or exceed the minimum standards established by this Chapter shall be removed and replaced by new materials or shall have its structural functions replaced by new materials and anchored to supporting elements. 
2.  Lay-up Walls. The facing and backing shall be bonded so that not less than four percent of the wall surface of each face is composed of solid headers extending not less than four inches into the backing. The distance between adjacent full-length headers shall not exceed 24 inches either vertically or horizontally. In walls in which a single header does not extend through the wall, headers from opposite sides shall overlap at least four inches, or headers from opposite sides shall be covered with another header course overlapping the header below at least four inches. Wythes of walls not bounded as described above shall be considered as veneer. The veneer wythe shall not be included in the effective thickness used in calculating the height to thickness ratio of the wall unless it is bonded and anchored to the backing in a manner acceptable to the Building Official. 
3.  Mortar. 
a.  Tests. The quality of mortar in unreinforced masonry walls shall be determined by performing in place shear tests in accordance with Standard 15.42-1. Alternate methods of testing may be approved by the Building Official. 
b.  Location of Tests. Shear tests shall be taken at locations representative of the mortar conditions throughout the entire building. The exact test location shall be determined at the building site by the engineer in responsible charge of the structural design work. An accurate record of such tests and their location in the building shall be recorded and these results shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval as part of the structural analysis. 
c.  Number of Tests. The minimum number of tests per wall or line of wall elements providing a common line of resistance to lateral forces shall be as follows: Two tests per wall with a minimum total number of eight tests or one test per 1,500 square feet of wall area, whichever results in the greater number of tests. 
d.  Minimum Quality Mortar. 
(i)  Mortar shear test values, v to ' shall be obtained for each in-place shear test in accordance with the following equation: 
v to = v test - PD+L lAW···················· (7-1) 
WHERE: 
V to = Mortar shear test value, in psi. 
V test = Shear stress at incipient cracking for each in-place test per Standard to 15.42-1. 
PD+L = Actual dead plus live load in place at the time of testing, pounds. 
AW = Area of the wall supporting PD+L at each in-place shear test. 
(ii)  Individual unreinforced masonry walls with Vto less than 30 psi shall be pointed prior to retesting. 
(iii)  The mortar shear strength, Vto ' is the value in psi that is exceed by 80 percent of all of the mortar shear test values, Vto. 
(iv)  Unreinforced masonry with mortar shear strength, Vto ' less than 30 psi shall be removed or pointed and retested or treated as veneer. 
C.  Pointing. All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall be pointed according to Standard No. 15.42-2. Nothing shall prevent pointing with mortar of all masonry wall joints before the tests are made. 
(Ord. 695 §14, 1991) 
15.42.080 - Quality control. 
A.  Pointing. Special inspection shall be provided during preparation and mortar pointing. 
B.  Shear Tests. In-place shear tests shall comply with Section 15.42.070B and Standard 15.42-1. 
C.  Existing Floor Level Wall Anchors. If existing rod anchors are to be utilized as all or part of the required wall anchorage system at the floor level, not less than five percent of such existing rod anchors shall be tested by an approved testing laboratory. The minimum number of anchors tested shall be four per floor, with two tests at walls with joists framing into the wall and two tests at walls with joists parallel to the wall but not less than ten percent of the total number of existing tension anchors at each level. The test apparatus shall be supported on the masonry wall at a minimum distance of the wall thickness from the anchor tested. The rod anchor shall be given a preload of 300 pounds prior to establishing a datum for recording elongation. The tension test load reported shall be recorded at one-eighth inch relative movement of the anchor and the adjacent masonry surface. Results of all tests shall be reported. The report shall include the test results as related to the wall thickness and joint orientation. Ends of existing anchors shall be secured into the wood framing by an approved method. 
D.  Testing of Bolts. One-fourth of new embedded bolts in unreinforced masonry walls shall be tested by a special inspector using a torque calibrated wrench to the following minimum torques: 
1/2" diameter bolts or dowels = 40 foot-lbs. 
?" diameter bolts or dowels = 50 foot-lbs. 
3/4" diameter bolts or dowels = 60 foot-lbs. 
No bolts exceeding 3/4" diameter shall be used. Nuts shall be installed over malleable iron or cut plate washers when bearing on wood and heavy cut washers when bearing on steel. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
15.42.090 - Allowable design values. 
A.  Tension Anchors. Allowable values for tension anchors are given in Table No. 15.42-B. A one-third increase is not allowed for values listed in this Table. 
B.  Other Materials. Allowable values not specified in this Chapter shall be as specified elsewhere in the 1988 Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
15.42.100 - Detailed system design requirements. 
A.  Lateral Force on Elements or Structures and Nonstructural Components. Parts or portions of structures, nonstructural components and their anchorage to the main structural system shall be designed for lateral forces in accordance with the following formula: 
Fp = Cp Wp ···················· (10-1) 
W shall be as defined in Section 2312(c) of the Uniform Building Code. The value of Cp need not exceed the values set forth in Table No. 15.42-C. 
B.  Height to Thickness Limitations. Unreinforced masonry wall height to thickness ratios shall not exceed the ratios set forth in Table No. 15.42-D. If a wall height to thickness ratio exceeds the specified limits, the wall shall be laterally supported by bracing members complying with Subsection C. 1 or with Subsection C.2 Bracing systems shall be designed in accordance with Section 15.42.100A. 
C.  Bracing Methods. 
1.  Vertical Bracing Members. vertical bracing members shall be attached to floor and roof construction for their design loads independent of required wall anchors. Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not exceed one-half the unsupported height of the wall nor ten feet. Deflection of such bracing members at design loads, as determined from Section 2312(g)2 (1988 Uniform building Code) and Formula (12-10), shall not exceed one-tenth of the wall thickness. 
2.  Wall Bracing. The wall height may be measured to bracing elements other than a floor or roof. Horizontal spacing of the bracing elements and wall anchors shall not exceed six feet on center nor six times the wall thickness, whichever is less. Bracing elements shall be detailed to minimize the horizontal displacement of the wall by the vertical displacement of the floor or roof. 
D.  Wall Anchorage. 
1.  Anchor Locations. Unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at the roof and floor levels and at vertical bracing members in order to resist the forces specified in this Section. 
2.  Wall Anchor Requirements. Wall anchors shall be tension bolts through the wall having a maximum spacing of six feet or six times the wall thickness, whichever is less. Alternate anchors shall be combination tension and shear bolts complying with the requirements set forth in Table No. 15.42-B. Tension bolts used to resist required forces may be assumed to develop the allowable values listed in Table No. 15.42-B. If access to the exterior face of a masonry wall is prevented by proximity of an existing building or when the appearance of 'through the wall tension anchors will affect the architectural appearance of the building, embedded bolts conforming to Table No. 15.42-B may be used. Wall anchors shall be secured to the rafters or joists to transfer the required forces into roof or floor sheathing. 
3.  Minimum Wall Anchorage Force. Anchorage of masonry walls to each floor or roof shall resist a minimum force determined by Formula (10-1) or 200 pounds per linear foot, whichever is greater, acting normal to the wall at the level of the floor or roof. Existing wall anchors installed under previous permits must meet or must be upgraded to meet the requirements of this Chapter. 
4.  Anchors at Corners. At the roof and floor levels, combination tension and shear anchors shall be provided within two feet horizontally from the inside of the corners of the walls. 
E.  Parapets. Parapets and exterior wall appendages not capable of resisting the forces specified in this Section shall be removed, stabilized or braced to insure that the parapets and appendages remain in their original position. The maximum height of an un-braced unreinforced masonry parapet above the level of tension anchors shall not exceed one and one-half times the thickness of the parapet wall. If the required parapet height exceeds this maximum height, a bracing system designed for the force determined by formula (10-1) shall be installed to support the parapet. Parapet corrective work shall be performed in conjunction with the installation of tension roof anchors. The maximum height of a parapet above the horizontal supports shall be 12 inches. 
F.  Veneer. 
1.  Unreinforced masonry walls which carry no design loads other than their own weight may be considered as veneer if they are adequately anchored to new supporting elements. 
2.  Veneer shall be anchored with approved anchor ties, conforming to the required design capacity specified in this Code and placed at a maximum spacing of 24 inches with a maximum supported area of two square feet. 
Exception: Existing veneer anchor ties may be acceptable provided the ties are in good condition and conform to the following minimum size, maximum spacing and material requirements. 
Existing veneer anchor ties shall be corrugated galvanized iron strips not less than one inch in width, eight inches in length and one-sixteenth of an inch in thickness or equal and shall be located in every alternate course in the height of the wall at a spacing not to exceed 18 inches on centers horizontally. As a result, such ties may be laid in every fourth course vertically at a spacing not to exceed nine inches on centers horizontally. 
3.  The location and condition of existing veneer ties shall be verified as follows: 
a.  An approved testing laboratory shall verify the location and spacing of the ties and shall submit a report to the Building Official for approval as a part of the structural analysis. 
b.  The veneer in a selected area shall be removed to expose a representative sample of ties (not less than four for inspection by the Building Official. 
G.  Mortar Joints. All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall be pointed with Type S or N mortar. Masonry cements shall not be used. Prior to any pointing, the wall surface must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. All preparation and pointing shall be done under continuous inspection by a special inspector certified to inspect masonry or concrete. At the conclusion of the project, the special inspector shall submit a written report to the Building Official setting forth the portion of the work inspected. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
15.42.110 - Tables and Standards. 
    For Time Limits and Technical Specifications see Table Nos. 15.42-A, 15.42-B, 15.42-C, and 15.42-D; Standard Nos. 15.42-1 and 15.42-2: 
TABLE NO. 15.42-A
TIME LIMITS FOR COMPLIANCE (3) Required Action By Owner Within Obtain Building 
Permit Within Commence 
Construction Complete 
Construction Anchorage Installation 1 Year (1) 180 Days (2) 2 Years (2) Buildings to be Demolished 1 Year (1) 180 Days (2) 2 Years (2)  
(1) Measured from the date of the order. 
(2) Measured from the date of building permit issuance. 
(3) These time limits shall not apply to a change of occupancy involving a Group A Occupancy having an occupant load of 100 or more. See Section 15.42.060B2. 
TABLE NO. 15.42-B
ALLOWABLE VALUES FOR TENSION ANCHORS Type of Installation Allowable Values (1) EXISTING TENSION ANCHORS FOR FLOORS AND ROOFS, 
To be tested per Section 15.42.080C. Allowable shall be the 40% of the average of the tests for anchors having the same wall thickness and joist orientation. TENSION BOLTS, 
Bolts extending entirely through unreinforced masonry walls secured with bearing plates on far side of a 3 wythe minimum wall with a bearing plate having an area of at least 30 square inches. (2)(3) 1800 lbs. per bolt. 
900 lbs. for 2 wythe walls. COMBINATION TENSION AND SHEAR BOLTS, 
Combination tension and shear bolts are tension bolts centered in a 21/2 inch diameter by 8 inch minimum depth hole with dry-pack or nonshrink grout around the circumference of bolt. Same as for tension bolts. EMBEDDED BOLTS, 
Bolts extending to the exterior wall with a 21/2 inch round plate under the head and drilled at an angle of 221/2 degrees to the horizontal. Bolts shall be centered in 21/2 inch diameter holes with dry-pack or non-shrink grout around circumference of bolts. Bolts shall be tested per Section 15.42.080D. (2)(3) Same as for tension bolts.  
(1) A one-third increase in allowable stresses is not allowed. 
(2) Bolts to be 1/2-inch minimum in diameter. 
(3) Drilling for bolts and dowels shall be done with an electrical rotary drill. Impact tools shall not be used for drilling holes or tightening anchors and shear bolt nuts. 
TABLE NO. 15.42-C
HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTOR "Cp" FOR PARTS OF PORTIONS
OF BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES Part or Portion of Buildings Direction of Force Value of Cp Exterior bearing and nonbearing walls; interior bearing walls and partitions; interior nonbearing walls and partitions over 10 feet in height. Normal-to-flat surface 0.20 Cantilever parapet and other cantilever walls, Except retaining walls. Normal-to-flat surface 1.00 Exterior and interior ornamentations and appendages. Any direction 1.00 Prefabricated structural elements, other than walls, with force applied at center of gravity of assembly. Any horizontal 
direction 0.30 Connections for exterior panels or elements. Any direction 2.00  
TABLE NO. 15.42-D
ALLOWABLE VALUE OF HEIGHT-THICKNESS RATIO OF 
UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS WITH MINIMUM QUALITY MORTAR (1) Buildings with Crosswalls as 
Defined by Section 15.42.040 All Other Buildings Walls of one-story buildings 16 13 First-story walls of two-story buildings 16 15 Walls in top story of two-story buildings 14 9  
(1) Minimum quality mortar shall be determined by laboratory testing in accordance with Section 15.42.070B3. 
STANDARD NO. 15.42-1
IN-PLACE MASONRY SHEAR TESTS 
The bed joints of the outer wythe of the masonry shall be tested in shear by laterally displacing a single brick relative to the adjacent bricks in the same wythe. The head joint opposite the loaded end of the test brick shall be carefully excavated and cleared. The brick adjacent to the loaded end of the test brick shall be carefully removed by sawing or drilling and excavating to provide space for a hydraulic ram and steel loading blocks. Steel blocks, the size of the end of the brick, shall be used on each end of the ram to distribute the load to the brick. The blocks shall not contact the mortar joints. The load shall be applied horizontally, in the plane of the wythe, until either a crack can be seen or slip occurs. The strength of the mortar shall be calculated by dividing the load at the first crack or movement of the test brick by the nominal gross area of the sum of the two bed joints. 
STANDARD NO. 15.42-2
POINTING OF UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS 
POINTING 
The old mortar should be cut out, by means of a toothing chisel or a special painter's grinder, to a uniform depth of three-quarters inch (3/4"), or until sound mortar is reached. Care must be taken not to damage the brick edges. All dust and debris must be removed from the joint by brushing, blowing air or rinsing with water. 
Mortar mix shall be Type "5" or "N" proportions as called for in the construction specification. The tuck-pointing mortar should be pre-hydrated to reduce excessive shrinkage. The proper pre-hydration process is as follows: 
All dry ingredients should be thoroughly mixed. Only enough clean water should be added to the dry mix to produce a damp, workable consistency which will retain its shape when formed into a ball. The mortar should stand in this dampened condition for one (1) to one and one-half (11/2) hours. 
The joints to be tuck-pointed should be dampened, but to ensure a good bond, the brickwork must absorb all surface water. Add water to the pre-hydrated mortar to bring it to a workable consistency which is somewhat drier than conventional mortar. The mortar should be packed tightly into the joints in thin layers not to exceed one-quarter inch (1/4"). Each layer should become "thumbprint hard" before applying the next layer. The joints should be tooled to match the original profile after the last layer of mortar is "thumbprint hard". 
RELAYING OF BRICK 
Replacement bricks must match the originals with respect to size, color, and texture where exposed. A tuck-pointing toothing chisel should be used to cut out the mortar which surrounds the affected units. Power driven impact tools are not allowed. Once the units are removed, all of the old mortar shall be carefully chiseled out and all dust and debris shall be swept out with a brush. If used brick is to be relayed, it shall be cleaned of all old mortar. The brick surfaces in the wall shall be dampened before new units are placed, but the masonry should absorb all surface moisture to ensure a good bond. The appropriate surfaces of the surrounding brickwork and the replacement brick should be buttered with mortar. The replacement brick should be centered in the opening and pressed into position. The excess mortar should be removed with a trowel. Pointing around the replacement brick will help to ensure full head and bed joints. When the mortar becomes "thumbprint hard", the joints shall be tooled to match the original profile. 
(Ord. 695 §1, 1991) 
Chapter 15.44 - BUILDING OCCUPANCY PLACARDS 

15.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to authorize standardized placards to be used by the City Building Official and his or her authorized representatives to provide public notice and warning of the potential for unsafe buildings and structures following a natural or man-made event, such as fire or earthquake. 
(Ord. 949, 5/5/09) 
15.44.020 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this Chapter are applicable to all public and private residential, commercial and industrial buildings and structures within the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 949, 5/5/09) 
15.44.030 - Authorized placards. 
A.  The following placards are hereby authorized, by title and content: 
1.  Placard Title: "INSPECTED-LAWFUL OCCUPANCY PERMITTED": this placard shall inform the reader that the structure's exterior or exterior and interior has been inspected and that no apparent structural hazard was found. The reader shall also be informed and he/she is to report any unsafe condition that is subsequently discovered. 
2.  Placard Title: "RESTRICTED USE": this placard shall inform the reader that the structure has been inspected and shall identify generally the structural defects found after inspection. The reader shall also be informed of any restrictions regarding entry into the structure, and/or its occupancy and lawful use. 
3.  Placard Title: "UNSAFE-DO NO ENTER OR OCCUPY": this placard shall inform the reader that the placard is not intended to be a demolition order, that the structure has been inspected and found to be unsafe to occupy, and shall contain an order not to enter the structure as entry may result in serious injury or death. 
B.  All placards shall contain the following standard provisions: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the department of the City posting the placard; 
2.  The address of the structure; 
3.  The date and time the structure was inspected; 
4.  A list of the unsafe conditions, if applicable; 
5.  The following warning, to be printed at the bottom of each placard: 
"It is a violation of law to remove, alter or cover this placard without the prior written consent of the City of Beaumont Building Official." 
C.  All placards shall have a minimum size of 81/2" × 11", and the title of each placard shall be printed in letters that are not less than one-half inch tall. 
(Ord. 949, 5/5/09) 
15.44.040 - Unauthorized tampering with placard-Penalty. 
A.  Any person who removes, alters or covers a placard without the prior written consent of the City of Beaumont Building Official may be issued a citation; provided, however, that the remedies prescribed in this Section are intended to be in addition to any other procedures or penalties prescribed by law. 
B.  Any person removing, altering or covering a placard without the prior written consent of the City of Beaumont Building Official shall be guilty of an infraction, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 36900 and the penalties provided therein, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of $100.00 for the first conviction, $500.00 for the second conviction within one year, and $1,000.00 for the third and each additional conviction within one year. 
(Ord. 949, 5/5/09) 
Chapter 15.46 - EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCEDURES FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 

15.46.010 - Findings and purpose. 
a.  Subsection (a) of Government Code section 65850.5 states that the implementation of consistent statewide standards to achieve the timely and cost-effective installation of solar energy systems is a matter of statewide concern and it is the policy of the State to promote and encourage the use of solar energy systems and to limit obstacles to their use. 
b.  Subsection (a) of Government Code section 65850.5 further states that it is the intent of the Legislature of the State that local agencies "not adopt ordinances that create unreasonable barriers to the installation of solar energy systems, including, but not limited to, design review for aesthetic purposes, and not unreasonably restrict the ability of homeowners and agricultural and business concerns to install solar energy systems," and "encourage the installation of solar energy systems by removing obstacles to, and minimizing costs of, permitting solar energy systems." 
c.  The purpose of this ordinance is to adopt an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems that complies with the Solar Rights Act, as amended by Assembly Bill 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of such systems while protecting public health and safety. 
d.  This ordinance shall apply to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems permitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance are not subject to the requirements set forth herein unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small residential rooftop solar energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
( Ord. No. 1063, § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-2015 ) 
15.46.020 - Authority. 
    This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution, Government Code section 65850.5, and Health & Safety Code section 17959.1. 
( Ord. No. 1063, § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-2015 ) 
15.46.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
a.  Electronic submittal. The utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Email; 
(2)  Internet; 
(3)  Facsimile. 
b.  Small residential rooftop solar energy system. A solar energy system which meets all of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
(2)  A solar energy system that (i) conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the County; (ii) all state and County health and safety standards; and (iii) all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the County. 
c.  Solar energy system. A system which is an accessory use to any residential, commercial, industrial, mining, agricultural or public use, used primarily (i.e. more than 50 percent) to reduce onsite utility usage, and which is either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device the primary purpose of which is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for electric generation, space heating, space cooling, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building, the primary purpose of which is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for electric generation, space heating, space cooling, or water heating. 
d.  Specific, adverse impact. A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
( Ord. No. 1063, § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-2015 ) 
15.46.040 - Exemptions. 
    This ordinance shall not apply to solar energy systems that are not small residential rooftop solar energy systems. All other solar energy systems, including residential rooftop solar energy systems greater than 10 kilowatts, shall be processed under conventional permit issuance procedures, and the provisions of this ordinance shall not apply. 
( Ord. No. 1063, § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-2015 ) 
15.46.050 - Small residential rooftop solar energy systems checklists and standard plans. 
a.  On or before September 30, 2015, the Building Official shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary expedited review process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems, including standard plans and checklists. The checklists shall set forth all requirements with which the small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. 
b.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklists, shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklists and standard plans, contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
c.  The Building Official may modify the checklists and standard plans found in the California Solar Permitting Guidebook due to unique climactic, geological, seismological, or topographical conditions. 
d.  The checklists and standard plans for small residential rooftop solar energy systems adopted by the Building Official, as well as all other required permitting documentation shall be published on the City's website. If the Building Official modifies the checklists and standard plans found in the California Solar Permitting Guidebook, he shall document the unique climactic, geological, seismological or topographical conditions requiring such modifications and shall also include such documentation on the City's website. 
( Ord. No. 1063, § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-2015 ) 
15.46.060 - Application review. 
a.  The applicant may submit the application and related documentation for a small residential rooftop solar energy system by electronic submittal, with all required permit processing and inspection fees, as specified on the City website. Electronic signatures shall be accepted by the Building and Safety Department on all electronic submittals in lieu of a wet signature. 
b.  An application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system shall be deemed complete when Building and Safety Department staff determines that the application satisfies all the information requirements in the checklists and standard plans. 
c.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
d.  Applications for small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall be administratively reviewed and approved by the Building Official as nondiscretionary permits within in a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, following receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the County's approved checklists, standards plans, and payment of all required permit processing and inspection fees. 
e.  The Building Official may require the applicant to apply for a plot plan pursuant to California Building Code Section 107 and all provisions of California Building Code Section 107 shall apply if the Building Official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the proposed small residential rooftop solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. 
f.  Approval of an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system shall not be based or conditioned on the approval of an association, as defined in section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
g.  Approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility. 
( Ord. No. 1063, § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-2015 ) 
15.46.070 - Inspection. 
a.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by staff for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
b.  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner. 
c.  A separate fire inspection may be performed if an agreement with the local fire authority does not exist to perform safety inspections on behalf of the fire authority. 
d.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 1063, § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-2015 ) 
Chapter 15.48 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS 

15.48.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to create an expedited, streamlined Electric Vehicle Charging Station permitting process that complies with Government Code section 65850.7 to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. 
( Ord. No. 1089, § 4(Exh. A), 8-15-2017 ) 
15.48.020 - Applicability. 
a.  This chapter applies to the permitting of all Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in the City. 
b.  Electric Vehicle Charging Stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance are not subject to the requirements of this ordinance unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of an Electric Vehicle Charging Station in such a way as to require a new permit. 
( Ord. No. 1089, § 4(Exh. A), 8-15-2017 ) 
15.48.030 - Definitions. 
a.  For the purpose of this Chapter, words and terms shall be defined as set forth in this Section. Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in other codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this Section, such terms shall have ordinary accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
b.  An "Electric vehicle charging station" means the following: 
i.  Any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this section, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
c.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of the following: 
i.  Any computer based electronic plan review software maintained, operated, and utilized by the City while receiving applications through the internet. 
d.  "Specific adverse impact" means the following: 
i.  A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
( Ord. No. 1089, § 4(Exh. A), 8-15-2017 ) 
15.48.040 - Requirements. 
a.  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable health and safety standards and the requirements imposed by the state and the City, local Fire Department and utility provider. 
b.  Electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
( Ord. No. 1089, § 4(Exh. A), 8-15-2017 ) 
15.48.050 - Application and documents. 
a.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station application shall be made available on the publicly accessible City website. 
b.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents through City utilized computer based software shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants. 
c.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
d.  The Building and Safety Division shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
e.  The Building and Safety Division may refer to the recommendation contained in the most current version of the Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist and the Zero-Emissions Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research, when adopting the electric vehicle charging permit process and checklist. 
f.  If the Building Official determines, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety, the Building Official shall make written findings to support this determination and may require the applicant to apply for a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.02.100 of the Beaumont Municipal Code or an administrative use permit should one be adopted in the future for electric vehicle charging stations. The decision of the Building Official on an application for an electric vehicle charging station becomes final unless the decision is appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.020.030 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 1089, § 4(Exh. A), 8-15-2017 ) 
15.48.060 - Permit review requirements. 
a.  The Building Official shall implement an administrative review process to expedite approval of electric vehicle charging stations. Where the application meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standards and there are no specific, adverse impacts upon public health or safety, the Building and Safety Division shall complete the building permit approval process, which is nondiscretionary. Review of the application for electric vehicle charging stations shall be limited to the Building Official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate, or maintain an electric vehicle charging station without such a permit for such work, and the permit shall be secured from the Building Official by the owner or the owner's agent. 
b.  If a permit application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the permit application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
c.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
d.  A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. 
e.  Any permit approvals, which are granted pursuant to the provision of this Chapter, shall not authorize an applicant to connect the electric vehicle charging station to the electricity grid of the public utility. Any such connection shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the public utility. 
f.  The Building Official shall have access to the premises described in a permit for the electric vehicle charging station in order to inspect the progress of the work. 
( Ord. No. 1089, § 4(Exh. A), 8-15-2017 ) 
15.48.070 - Fees. 
    The City Council may establish by resolution fees that shall be charged for permits issued under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1089, § 4(Exh. A), 8-15-2017 ) 
TITLE 16 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history: Ord. 324, 393, 397, 424, 430, 471 and 483. 

Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

16.04.010 - Authority. 
A.  This title is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of 1975 with current amendments. 
B.  All land divisions in the incorporated area of the City, as defined in this title, are subject to all of the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
C.  The provisions of this title are adopted to promote orderly growth and development of the City; to protect existing and future citizen rights; to develop a harmonious and workable relationship between the citizens of the City, employees of the City and applicants for land division; and to provide a means whereby the process, from submission to approval, is completed in a minimum time frame. 
(Ord. 547 §1.1, 1983) 
16.04.020 - Advisory agencies. 
    The City Planning Commission is designated as the "advisory agency" charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of all proposed parcel map land divisions and tentative subdivision maps in the City. The Planning Commission is authorized to conditionally approve or disapprove all tentative parcel maps and tentative subdivision maps and land divisions and submit to the City Council for final approval. 
(Ord. 547 §1.2, 1983) 
16.04.030 - Land Division Committee. 
    There is created a Land Division Committee to act in an advisory capacity on all land divisions to the designated advisory agencies. 
A.  The Land Division Committee shall consist of representatives from the following departments and districts: 
1.  Planning Department; 
2.  Engineering Department; 
3.  Department of Building and Safety; 
4.  Public Works Department; 
5.  Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District; 
6.  Fire Department. 
B.  The representative from the Planning Department shall be the chairman and shall coordinate recommendations from the other departments and districts. 
C.  The Land Division Committee shall consider all land division maps and report its findings and recommendations on subdivision maps and parcel maps to the advisory agency that has jurisdiction over the map. 
D.  The Land Division Committee shall meet at least once each month and shall hold such additional meetings as may be required. 
(Ord. 547 §1.3, 1983) 
16.04.040 - Appeal Board. 
    The City Council is established as the Appeal Board to which the land divider or any interested person may appeal from any action of the advisory agency with respect to tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps. 
(Ord. 547 §1.4, 1983) 
Chapter 16.08 - DEFINITIONS 
I. - GENERAL DEFINITIONS 

16.08.010 - Generally. 
    In this title, unless the context otherwise requires, the words set out in this chapter shall have the meanings set out in Sections 16.08.020 through 16.08.540. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(part), 1983) 
16.08.020 - Advisory agency. 
    "Advisory agency" means the Planning Commission for all tentative subdivision maps, including parcel maps. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(A), 1983) 
16.08.030 - Building Director. 
    "Building Director" means the Director of Building and Safety of the City. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(B), 1983) 
16.08.040 - City Engineer. 
    "City Engineer" means the Engineer of the City. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(C), 1983) 
16.08.050 - Department of Transportation. 
    "Department of Transportation" means the Department of Transportation of the State. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(E), 1983) 
16.08.060 - Flood Control Engineer. 
    "Flood Control Engineer" means the Chief Engineer of the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(F), 1983) 
16.08.070 - Health Officer. 
    "Health Officer" means the Health Officer of the County. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(G), 1983) 
16.08.080 - Land use ordinance. 
    "Land use ordinance" means the ordinance codified in Title 17 of this Code. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(M), 1983) 
16.08.090 - Planning Director. 
    "Planning Director" means the Planning Director of the City. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(H), 1983) 
16.08.100 - Public Works Director. 
    "Public Works Director" means the Director of Public Works of the City. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(I), 1983) 
16.08.110 - Recorder. 
    "Recorder" means the Recorder of the County. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(J), 1983) 
16.08.120 - Road Commissioner. 
    "Road Commissioner" means the Road Commissioner and County Surveyor of the County. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(K), 1983). 
16.08.130 - Staff. 
    "Staff" means the employees of the City. 
(Ord. 547 §2.1(L), 1983) 
II. - TECHNICAL DEFINITIONS 

16.08.140 - Contiguous units. 
    "Contiguous units" means adjacent parcels of land which shall be considered contiguous even if separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(A), 1983) 
16.08.150 - Design. 
    "Design" means: 
A.  Street alignments, grades and widths; 
B.  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; 
C.  Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; 
D.  Fire roads and firebreaks; 
E.  Lot size and configuration; 
F.  Traffic access; 
G.  Grading; 
H.  Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; 
I.  Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire land division as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan of the City or any adopted specific plan. 
(Ord. 547 § 2.2(B), 1983) 
16.08.160 - General plan. 
    "General plan" means the general plan of the City including the elements thereof, as required by Section 65300 et seq. of the Government Code as adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(C), 1983) 
16.08.170 - Improvement. 
    "Improvement" means such street work, surveys and monuments and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the land divider on the land to be used for public or private street, highways, ways, and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. "Improvement" also means such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the land divider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity or by any combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to insure conformity and implementation of the conditions of approval of the tentative map and the general plan of the City and any adopted specific plan. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(E), 1983) 
16.08.180 - Improvement standards. 
    "Improvement standards" means the standards set forth in the ordinance codified in this title and other ordinances related to the development of land as a subdivision or parcel map division. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(F), 1983) 
16.08.190 - Land division. 
    "Land division" means both subdivision and parcel map divisions of land as defined in this section: 
A.  "Subdivision" means the division of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease, gift or financing, whether immediate or future, except the land divisions described in subsection B of this section shall qualify as parcel map divisions. 
B.  "Parcel map division" means the division of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease, gift or financing, whether immediate or future, if any of the following conditions prevail: 
1.  The land is divided into four or less parcels; 
2.  The whole parcel before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a fully improved maintained public street or highway, and no dedication or improvements as normally required under this title are required for the land division; 
3.  Each parcel created by the land division has a gross area of not less than 20 acres up to 40 acres and each parcel has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; 
4.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway; is part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development; and is approved as to street alignment and width; 
5.  Each parcel created by the "land division has a gross area of 40 acres and more, or each of which is not less than a quarter of a quarter section. 
B.  "Land division" does not include: 
1.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks; 
2.  Agricultural, gas, oil or mineral leases; 
3.  Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the California Health and Safety Code; 
4.  The division of land caused by the acquisition of a property interest by a public utility for operating public utility purposes, or the conveyance of land by a public utility to a contiguous ownership; 
5.  A lot line adjustment solely for the purpose of increasing or adjusting the size of an adjacent lot or parcel; provided, that the lot line adjustment does not reduce the original parcels below the zoning development standards applicable to the land, no additional parcels are created and the adjustment is approved by the Planning Director in accordance with Section 16.68.010. 
(Ord. 547 S2.2(D), 1983) 
16.08.200 - Land project. 
    "Land project" means a land division as defined in Section 11000.5 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(G), 1983) 
16.08.210 - Minor change. 
    "Minor change" means a modification of an approved tentative map that involves a change of lot lines, lot shape, lot dimensions, street alignment width or grade, grading proposals or other elements that do not change the basic design or improvements required in the approved tentative map and the conditions thereof. 
(Ord. 547 § 2.2(H), 1983) 
16.08.220 - Planned residential development. 
    "Planned residential development" means residential development including, but not limited to, statutory and non-statutory condominiums, cluster housing, townhouses and community apartments, that is permitted reduced lot area, width and depth requirements and building setback requirements, by integrating into the overall development open space and outdoor recreational facilities, and which may include recreational and public assembly buildings intended for the use of the residents of the project, within the development. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(M), 1983) 
16.08.230 - Public access. 
    "Public access" means: 
A.  A dedication to public use to the City, or to the County to the required width for road purposes. 
B.  A permanent written easement for road purposes to the required width from the State or Federal Government. 
C.  An access road as defined in this title that has been open to the public without posting for five years or more, provided adequate evidence thereof is submitted to and approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(L), 1983) 
16.08.240 - Revised tentative map. 
    "Revised tentative map" means a modification of an approved tentative map wherein the design of the land division is changed from the approved tentative map, but there is no substantial change in concept from the original approved map. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(I), 1983) 
16.08.250 - Specification. 
    "Specific plan" means a plan adopted by the Council that is based upon the general plan of the City, as provided in Section 65450 et seq. of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(J), 1983) 
16.08.260 - Storm frequency of one in 100 years. 
    "Storm frequency of one in 100 years" means a storm that will probably be equaled or exceeded on the average of once every 100 years. It does not follow, however, that such a storm will be equaled or exceeded once in every 100-year period, or that, having occurred once, it will not occur again for 100 years. It may occur several times in a 100-year period but over a sufficient length of time the average is expected to be once in 100 years. 
(Ord. 547 §2.2(K), 1983) 
III. - STREET AND HIGHWAY DEFINITIONS 

16.08.270 - Access road. 
    "Access road" means a road with a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet, or a part-time street having a minimum right-of-way of 40 feet, which provides access to a division of land from an existing maintained highway. If the land division is a parcel map creating four or less parcels, the minimum right-of-way for a part-width street may be reduced to 30 feet. Use of an access road for new land divisions is permitted only where there is a reasonable probability of full road improvements being made in the foreseeable future. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(10), 1983) 
16.08.280 - Alley. 
    "Alley" means a secondary means of access to property and is located at the rear or side of the property. Minimum right-of-way width shall be 20 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(11), 1983) 
16.08.290 - Arterial highway. 
    "Arterial highway" means a divided highway primarily for through traffic to which access from abutting property shall be kept at a minimum. Intersections with other streets or highways shall be limited to approximately one-quarter mile intervals. Minimum rights-of-way width shall be 110 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(3), 1983) 
16.08.300 - Barrier strip. 
    "Barrier strip" means a strip of land one foot or more in width dedicated to the City for street purposes and access control at the end of a dead-end street or along the side of a part-width dedicated street or other public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(1), 1983) 
16.08.310 - Bicycle way. 
    "Bicycle way" means an area either within or outside the right-of-way of a dedicated street where bicycle travel is the designated use. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(2), 1983) 
16.08.320 - Collector street. 
    "Collector street" means a street which is intended to serve intensive residential land use, multiple-family dwellings, or to convey traffic through a subdivision to roads of equal capacity or greater. Minimum right-of-way width shall be 66 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(6), 1983) 
16.08.330 - Cul-de-sac street. 
    "Cul-de-sac" means a road open at one end only, with special provisions for turning around and which may be further extended in adjoining property. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(13), 1983) 
16.08.340 - Dead-end street. 
    "Dead-end street" means open at one end only, without provisions for turning around and which may be further extended in adjoining property. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(14), 1983) 
16.08.350 - Expressway. 
    "Expressway" means a highway for through traffic to which access from abutting property is restricted. Intersections with other streets or highways shall be limited to approximately one-half mile intervals. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(1), 1983) 
16.08.360 - Freeway. 
    "Freeway" means a highway upon which the abutter's rights of access is controlled and which provides separated grades at intersecting streets. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(2), 1983) 
16.08.370 - Frontage road or service road. 
    "Frontage road or service road" means a local street auxiliary to and adjacent to freeways, expressways, arterial highways, major highways and secondary highways. Minimum right-of-way width shall be 52 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(12), 1983) 
16.08.380 - General local street. 
    "General local street" means a through street serving 100 or more single-family lots with at least one end terminating at a road of greater capacity. Minimum right-of-way width shall be 60 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(7), 1983) 
16.08.390 - Highway or street. 
    "Highway" or "street" means a right-of-way within which improvements are constructed for the conveyance of vehicular traffic and includes all highways, streets, roads and alleys. Said rights-of-way and improvements shall be in conformity with City Engineering Department Standards and Specifications as set forth in Resolution No. 1980-35. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(part), 1983) 
16.08.400 - Major highway. 
    "Major highway" means a highway intended to serve property zoned for major industrial and commercial uses, or to serve through traffic. Intersections with other streets or highways shall be limited to approximately one-eighth mile intervals. Minimum rights-of-way width shall be 100 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(4), 1983) 
16.08.410 - Median. 
    "Median" means that portion of a divided highway separating the traveled-way for traffic in opposite directions. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(3), 1983) 
16.08.420 - Multilane demand. 
    "Multilane demand" means that projected traffic volume will exceed the nominal capacity of a two-lane street section when such projected traffic volume is determined by a rational method of traffic generation employing land use techniques and traffic engineering principles. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(3), 1983) 
16.08.430 - Outer separation. 
    "Outer separation" means the area between the traveled-way of a highway for through traffic and a frontage road or service road. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(5), 1983) 
16.08.440 - Part-width street. 
    "Part-width street" means any street, the improved width of which, is less than the width necessary for a normal full-width street. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(6), 1983) 
16.08.450 - Pedestrian way/sidewalk. 
    "Pedestrian way/sidewalk" means a right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians and not intended for use by motor vehicles of any kind. A pedestrian way may be located within or without a street right-of-way. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(7), 1983) 
16.08.460 - Private street. 
    "Private street" means a street for which access control is permitted by land division design, posting or gating. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(15), 1983) 
16.08.470 - Restricted local street. 
    "Restricted local street" means a local street where, due to unusual conditions, it is impractical to provide for a wider right-of-way. Minimum right-of-way width shall be 50 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(9), 1983) 
16.08.480 - Right-of-way. 
    "Right-of-way" means the entire width of property for the use of highways, flood and drainage works, overhead and underground utilities, or any related improvements. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(8), 1983) 
16.08.490 - Roadside strip. 
    "Roadside strip" means the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadbed, extending to the right-of-way line in which sidewalks, plantings, utilities, bank slopes and related facilities may be located. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(9), 1983) 
16.08.500 - Roadway. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of the highway including roadbed, all slopes, side ditches, channel, waterways and all other related facilities which are located within a road right-of-way. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(10), 1983) 
16.08.510 - Roadbed. 
    "Roadbed" means that portion of the roadway extending from curb face to curb face or to outside line of improved shoulders. Divided highways shall be considered as having two roadbeds. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(11), 1983) 
16.08.520 - Secondary highway. 
    "Secondary highway" means a highway intended to serve property zoned for multiple residential, secondary, industrial or commercial uses, or to serve through traffic. Minimum right-of-way width shall be 88 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(5), 1983) 
16.08.530 - Short local street. 
    "Short local street" means a residential street limited by subdivision design to serve less than 100 single-family dwellings. Minimum right-of-way width shall be 60 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(A)(8), 1983) 
16.08.540 - Traveled way. 
    "Traveled way" means that portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes. 
(Ord. 547 §2.3(B)(12), 1983) 
Chapter 16.12 - STANDARDS OF LAND DIVISION-GENERAL 

16.12.010 - Conformance. 
A.  All land divisions shall conform to the general plan of the City; with all applicable specific plans; with the requirements of the land use ordinance and other ordinances; and with the requirements of this title except as provided hereafter provided. 
B.  Exceptions from the requirements of this title relating to the design or improvement of land divisions shall be granted only when it is determined that there are special circumstances applicable to the property, such as, but not limited to, size, shape or topographical conditions, or existing road alignment and width, and that the granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or be damaging to other property in the vicinity. 
C.  Application for exceptions shall be made in writing, as a variance application, stating fully the reasons and justification for the requested exception, and shall be filed with the tentative map. 
(Ord. 547 §3.1, 1983) 
16.12.020 - General street design. 
A.  The street system in the proposed land division shall relate, in general, to the existing streets in the area adjoining the proposed land division. 
B.  The proposed street plan shall give consideration to the future land division of adjoining undivided property. 
C.  All streets shall be designed to serve the proposed use of the abutting land. 
D.  When improvements are required, part-width boundary streets in a land division adjacent to undivided land shall have a minimum right-of-way of 30 feet. 
E.  When no improvements are required, part-width boundary streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 30 feet. 
F.  Additional right-of-way or easements shall be provided where necessary to accommodate roadway slopes, drainage structures, and other facilities related to land division improvements 
G.  When consistent with existing development; access to residential property along freeways, expressways, arterial highways, major and secondary highways for residential subdivisions, one of the following shall apply: 
1.  A frontage road or service road; 
2.  A street separated by a tier of lots. 
H.  Design of streets shall make provisions for railroads, parkways, expressways, grade separations, flood control channels, prevailing geological conditions and local drainage facilities. 
I.  Whenever lots of a proposed land division abut on a dead-end road or a cul-de-sac exceeding 1,000 feet in length, or 500 feet in a high fire hazard area, or whenever a proposed land division lies more than 1,000 feet from a publicly maintained road, or 500 feet from a high fire hazard area, alternate or secondary access shall be provided, unless waived as part of the tentative map review. Documentation and improvement for such access shall be determined as part of the tentative map review. 
J.  Where cul-de-sac streets are proposed, the turnaround shall have a right-of-way diameter of not less than 90 feet. 
K.  Dead-end and part-width streets shall not be permitted if it is determined that adjacent land use or topographical features will preclude the extension or widening of such streets. Dead-end streets shall so designed that access to abutting property shall be physically possible. 
L.  On land divisions where improvements are not required, the centerline alignment of the street right-of-way shall be in accordance with City standards and ordinances. 
(Ord. 547 §3.2, 1983) 
16.12.030 - Private streets. 
A.  Private streets may be permitted when it is determined that there is adequate provision for their construction and continued maintenance; that the welfare of the occupants of the development will be adequately served; and that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Private streets, other than interior streets of planned residential developments, shall be required to be offered for dedication to public use. All dedicated private streets shall meet the width requirements set by the City and shall be constructed in accordance with Improvement Standards of the City of Beaumont Resolution No. 1980-35. All offers of dedication shall remain in effect and shall be irrevocable unless abandoned under the Street and Highways Code. 
C.  All streets that are permitted to be private, whether offered for dedication or not, may provide for access control by land division design, posting or gating. 
D.  Interior streets of a planned residential development, if not offered for dedication, shall be constructed to minimum widths of 40 feet for minor interior access and 44 feet for major interior access in accordance with Improvements Standards of Resolution No. 1980-35; however, reduced widths may be permitted when either of the following conditions occur: 
1)  Where the design and topography permit the taking of access only on one side of the street; and 
2)  Where 25 percent of the slope of the land is on a grade of 25 percent or greater. 
E.  When a special design for a cul-de-sac, length of a street terminating in a cul-de-sac, landscaped median, or any other improvement design is proposed and is not provided for in this title or in the Improvement Standards of Resolution No. 1980-35, the design shall first be submitted to the City Engineer for approval in accordance with Sections 16.04.010 through 16.04.040. 
F.  Sidewalks shall be required to be constructed in conjunction with dedicated or non-dedicated private streets unless it is determined by the approving body to be unnecessary, considering the design of the development. Sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with the Improvement Standards of Resolution No. 1980-35. 
G.  Improvement plans, agreements and bonds shall be required for all dedicated and non-dedicated private streets in accordance with the applicable provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 547 §3.3, 1983) 
16.12.040 - Street grades. 
A.  Street grades shall not exceed six percent except they may be increased to and may exceed 15 percent only when engineering design shows that the grade proposed is safe and that the lesser grade would deny access to land appropriate for use. 
B.  Street grades of less than 0.35 percent may be approved only when engineering design shows that local drainage provisions are adequate and steeper gradients cannot be obtained. 
(Ord. 547 §3.4, 1983) 
16.12.050 - Street alignment. 
    Curves of streets with right-of-way width of 60 feet or less shall have a minimum centerline radius of 300 feet in comparatively level locations and shall have a minimum centerline radius of 150 feet in comparatively steep hillside locations. 
(Ord. 547 §3.5, 1983) 
16.12.060 - Intersections-General. 
A.  All street connections shall be at as near right angles as possible. 
B.  Street-to-street centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall not be permitted, except that in special design cases offsets of less than five feet may be used when approved by the City Engineer 
C.  Curb returns shall be as follows: 
1.  A minimum curb return radius of 25 feet shall be provided at intersecting streets designated as collector or local streets. 
2.  A minimum curb return radius of 35 feet shall be provided when one or both of the intersecting streets is designated as a secondary highway or greater. 
1)  In hillside areas, the curb return radius may be modified if required because of the topography. 
D.  Corner cutbacks shall be established as provided in City Standard No. 805. 
E.  Frontage road connections providing access to the main highway shall incorporate a bulb in conformance with City Standards No. 802. 
F.  Median openings or crossovers between opposing lanes of a divided highway shall be located only at approved intersections at intervals of not less than 500 feet. 
(Ord. 547 §3.6, 1983) 
16.12.070 - Alleys. 
A.  Improved alleys not less than 20 feet in width may be required at the rear of all lots. 
B.  Alley intersections shall have minimum corner cutback of 25 feet. 
C.  Dead-end alleys shall provide an adequate turnaround. 
D.  Part-width alleys shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. 547 §3.7, 1983) 
16.12.080 - Lots. 
A.  Lot size shall be not less than the minimum required by the zoning classification applicable to the subject property, and shall be consistent with the general plan for the City 
B.  Corner lots shall be designed to provide a building site equal to that required for interior lots in the same zone. 
C.  When lots 18,000 square feet or less are proposed, the depth of lots shall not exceed two and one-half times the width. When lots greater than 18,000 square feet are proposed, the depth shall not exceed four times the width. 
D.  When lots are crossed by major public utility easements, each lot shall have a net usable area of not less than 3,600 square feet, exclusive of the utility easement. 
E.  When the access portion of a corridor access lot (flag lot) abuts a through street, the width of the access strip shall be no less than 24 feet with 12 feet of paving. In no case shall the length of the access strip exceed 500 feet. When the access portion abuts a dead-end street or cul-de-sac, the combined length of the street and the access strip shall be no more than 1,000 feet. 
F.  Side lot line shall be at approximately right angles or radial to the street centerline, except where terrain or other restrictions make such design impractical. 
G.  Lots less than two acres shall not have double street frontage except that in hillside areas where the topography requires, lots may about two or more streets; provided, that the frontage and vehicular access is from only one such street. 
H.  No lot shall be divided by a city, county, school district or other taxing agency boundary line. 
(Ord. 547 §3.8, 1983) 
16.12.090 - Inclusions. 
A.  Any contiguous property that is owned by the land divider shall be included within the boundaries of a land division when necessary or desirable in the design or improvement of the land division. 
B.  Any contiguous property that is owned by the land divider, but not included within the boundaries of the land division, shall be of such size and shape as to conform to the provisions of this title, the land use ordinance, the general plan of the City, or any adopted specific plan; otherwise it shall be included within the boundaries of the land division. 
(Ord. 547 §3.9, 1983) 
16.12.100 - Required access. 
A.  No land division final map shall be recorded unless public access is provided from the land division to a City, County, State or federal road that is maintained for public use. 
B.  The requirement for public access may be waived under the following circumstances: 
1.  If a parcel map creates four or less parcels and public access over intervening lands cannot be offered for dedication, a private road easement may be approved, provided: 
a.  The land to be divided is not zoned for commercial, industrial or multiple-residential use, 
b.  No parcel under one acre in size is created or only two additional parcels are being created, 
c.  The access easement is recorded and not less than 30 feet in width, 
d.  The access easement owned by the land divider is not an exclusive easement or specifically written to prohibit further division of the land; 
2.  If a subdivision map has been previously recorded that permitted private streets without the requirement of offering the streets for dedication, a private road easement may be approved provided the easement grants the new lots unrestricted access rights to the existing private streets. 
C.  Public access is not required 'if each parcel created is 40 acres or more or is quarter section. 
(Ord. 547 §3.10, 1983) 
Chapter 16.16 - TENTATIVE MAPS-GENERAL 

16.16.010 - Tract number. 
A.  Prior to the filing of a tentative map for a land division, a tract number shall be obtained from the Road Commissioner. Any number that is not used within two years from the date it is issued shall become null and void. The land divider shall pay the fee required as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
B.  When the tentative map is a parcel map division, this shall be so indicated thereon. 
C.  The Road Commissioner shall maintain a permanent record of all tract numbers. 
D.  When applying for a tract number, the land divider shall certify that he is a record owner of the property, or that the record owner consents to the filing of the map, or the land divider shall submit such proof of ownership or consent of the owner as shall be necessary for the Road Commissioner. 
E.  When a number has been assigned by the Road Commissioner for a particular parcel or contiguous parcels of land, the land divider shall place the tract number upon each tentative map of the land division and neither the number nor the area of the parcel of land for which the number is issued shall thereafter be changed or altered in any manner upon the tentative map of the land division unless and until a new number has been assigned by the Road Commissioner. 
F.  The Road Commissioner shall not issue tract numbers to different persons for the same parcel of land or any portion thereof without first obtaining a release of the number from the person previously issued such number. 
(Ord. 547 §4.1, 1983) 
16.16.020 - Preliminary corner stakes. 
    Prior to filing a tentative map, the land divider shall place a conspicuous stake identified with a number or corner description and flag at each approximate corner of the property to be divided. The stake shall extend at least three feet above the ground and be identified with a number and corner description. Detailed vicinity maps may be provided in lieu of corner stakes if approved by staff. Failure to place the required stakes or provide detailed maps may cause discontinuance or delay of the processing of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 547 §4.2, 1983) 
16.16.030 - Application. 
A.  Prior to filing a tentative map, the land divider shall obtain an application for a land division, which form shall be furnished by the Planning Director and be completed by the land divider. 
B.  The application shall be for the purpose of: 
1.  Providing and clarifying the information required to be shown on, or to accompany, the tentative map; 
2.  Determining whether the land division conforms to all the requirements of this and other City ordinances; 
3.  Expediting the processing of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 547 §4.3, 1983) 
16.16.040 - Division of land. 
A.  No person shall make any land division, as defined in this title, of real proper City located in the incorporated area of the City, except in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
B.  When a tentative map has been submitted, no grading or construction work shall be performed until the tentative map and the improvement plans for such work have been approved. 
(Ord. 547 §4.4, 1983) 
16.16.050 - Optional procedure. 
    Prior to filing of a tentative map, a land divider may, without payment of fee, discuss the proposed land division with the Planning Department staff. 
(Ord. 547 §4.5, 1983) 
16.16.060 - Date of filing. 
    The date of filing of a tentative map shall be the date on which the map and information required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title have been filed; the fees have been paid; all procedures required by the City of Beaumont Rules Implementing the California Environmental Quality Act to hear a matter have been completed; and, if the land division is within a special study zone for geological hazards when all procedures under Riverside County Ordinance No. 547 have been completed. The time limitations for processing a tentative map shall not begin to run until the tentative map is deemed finally filed upon completion of all requirements during the preliminary filing stage. 
(Ord. 547 §4.6, 1983) 
Chapter 16.20 - TENTATIVE MAPS-INFORMATION REQUIRED 

16.20.010 - Tentative subdivision maps. 
A.  The following information shall be shown on or accompany tentative subdivision maps unless certain items are determined by the staff as not being required for a particular land division: 
1.  Tract number, title of map and legal description of property, not including tract name; 
2.  Name and address of owner and land divider, and name and address of person preparing map; 
3.  Ownership information on additional property owned adjacent or continue to the land to be subdivided; 
4.  Approximate acreage, overall dimensions, north arrow, scale and date; 
5.  Subdivision boundary line and vicinity map showing relationship to surrounding community; 
6.  Names, locations, rights-of-way, widths and improvements of adjacent streets, alleys, railroads and existing structures, both above and below ground; 
7.  Names, locations, widths of rights-of-way for proposed streets, alleys and easements, and the approximate grade of proposed and existing streets and approximate street centerline radii of curves; 
8.  Streets, alleys and rights-of-way providing legal access to the property; 
9.  If private streets are proposed, they shall be so noted on the tentative map; 
10.  Names of utility purveyors and locations of existing public utility easements; 
11.  Watercourses, channels, existing culverts and drain pipes, including existing and proposed facilities for control of stormwaters; 
12.  Land subject to overflow, inundation or flood hazards; 
13.  Any land or right-of-way to be dedicated to public use; 
14.  Identify common areas and open spaces; 
15.  Proposed lot lines and approximate dimensions; 
16.  Adjoining property and lot lines; 
17.  Contours, with maximum interval as follows: 
Slope 
(in percent) Interval 
(in feet) 0 to 4.99 1 5 plus 4  
Copies of U.S.G.S. maps are not acceptable; 
18.  Site grading: 
a.  Whenever any area of the proposed subdivision has a gradient of five percent or more, as measured between natural contours, the following information shall be shown on or accompany the tentative map: 
i.  The proposed cuts and fills in the subdivision. 
ii.  The elevations of all individual building pads in the subdivision 
iii.  The elevations at the perimeter of the subdivision 
iv.  The relationship to adjoining land and development, 
b.  The finished grade elevations on the final grading plan where the gradient is five percent or more shall not vary more than two feet, plus or minus, from the difference in elevations shown on the approved tentative map, 
c.  On gradients less than five percent, when elevations are not shown on the tentative map, the finished grade elevations shall not create cuts or fills of more than four feet, plus or minus, from the natural contour; 
19.  Existing use of property immediately surrounding tract; 
20.  Existing zoning, and proposed land use (single family, multiple-family, business, industrial); 
21.  Two typed sets of gummed labels indicating all the property owners' names, and the mailing addresses, that are within a 300-foot radius of the exterior of the proposed project, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and any update issued by the County Assessor. 
B.  Reports and written statements on the following matters shall accompany the tentative map: 
1.  Proposed method of control of storm water, including data as to amount of runoff, and the approximate grade and dimensions of the proposed facilities; 
2.  A written statement stating that: 
a.  The Beaumont-Cherry Valley Water District has agreed in writing to serve all lots in the land division; or 
b.  The land divider has an acceptable application for a water purveyor permit on file with the department of public health; or 
c.  The land divider has agreed in writing to form a domestic water system under permit from the proper authorities to serve the land division; 
d.  The land divider has filed with the health department information regarding the quantity and quality of water of any wells existing on the property, and the estimated current cost of drilling a well on the property. 
3.  A written statement stating the type of sewage disposal that will be used. If on-site sewage disposal is proposed, the Public Works Director shall require soil percolation tests or other pertinent information. 
C.  If the land division lies within a special studies zone shown on the map prepared by the State Geologist pursuant to the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazard Zone Act, a geologic report or waiver thereof pursuant to the provisions of Riverside County Ordinance No. 547 shall accompany the tentative map. 
(Ord. 547 §5.1, 1983) 
16.20.020 - Tentative parcel maps. 
A.  The following information shall be shown on or accompany all tentative parcel maps unless certain items are determined by the staff as not being required for a particular land division: 
1.  Parcel map identification, title of map, and legal description of property, but not including tract name; 
2.  Name and address of owner and land divider and name and address of person preparing map; 
3.  Approximate acreage, overall dimensions, north arrow, scale and date; 
4.  Land division boundary line and vicinity map showing relationship to surrounding community; 
5.  Map book and page numbers of adjoining land divisions; 
6.  Names, locations, rights-of-way, widths and improvements of adjacent streets, alleys, railroads, and existing structures, both above and below ground; 
7.  Names, locations, widths of rights-of-way for proposed streets, alleys and easements, and the approximate grades of proposed streets and approximate street centerline radii of curves; 
8.  Streets, alleys and rights-of-way providing legal access to the property; 
9.  If private streets are proposed, it shall be so noted on the tentative map; 
10.  Names of utility purveyors and location of existing known public utilities; 
11.  Watercourses, channels, existing culverts and drain pipes, including existing and proposed facilities of control of storm waters; 
12.  Land subject to overflow, inundation or flood hazard; 
13.  Any land or right-of-way to be dedicated to public use and rights-of-way for railroads and other uses; 
14.  Identify common areas and open spaces; 
15.  Proposed lot lines and approximate dimensions; 
16.  Adjoining property and lot lines; 
17.  Contours with maximum interval as follows: 
Slope 
(in percent) Interval 
(in feet) 0 to 4.99 1 5 plus 4  
Copies of U.S.G.S. maps are not acceptable; 
18.  Existing use of property immediately surrounding tentative map; 
19.  Existing zoning and proposed land use (single family, multifamily, business, industrial); 
20.  A statement as to whether the tentative map includes the entire contiguous ownership of the land divider or only a portion thereof; 
21.  A list of the names and addresses of the owners of real property located within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property to be considered, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and any update issued by the County Assessor. 
B.  Reports and written statements on the following matters shall accompany the tentative map: 
1.  Proposed method of control of storm water, including data as to amount of runoff, and the approximate grade and dimensions of the proposed facilities; 
2.  A written statement stating the type of sewage disposal that will be used shall be submitted for all commercial and industrial parcel map as defined in subdivision 4 of subsection B of Section 16.08.190. If on-site sewage disposal is proposed, the Public Works Director shall require soil percolation tests or other pertinent information; 
3.  A written statement shall be submitted for all commercial and industrial maps as defined in subsection 4 of subsection B of Section 16.08.190, stating that: 
a.  The Beaumont-Cherry Valley Water District has agreed in writing to serve all lots in the land division; or 
b.  The land divider has an acceptable application for a water purveyor permit on file with the State Department of Public Health or the County Department of Public Health; or 
c.  The land divider has agreed in writing to form a domestic water system under permit from the proper authorities to serve the land division; or 
d.  The land divider has filed with the health department information regarding the quantity and quality of water of any wells existing on the property, and the estimated current cost of drilling a well on the property; or 
e.  Water is not available, or will not be furnished. 
C.  If the land division lies within a special studies zone shown on the map prepared by the State Geologist, pursuant to the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazard Zone Act, a geologic report or waiver thereof pursuant to the provisions of Riverside County Ordinance No. 547 shall be filed at. The time of the filing of the tentative parcel map. 
(Ord. 547 §5.1, 1983) 
Chapter 16.24 - TENTATIVE MAPS-PROCESSING 

16.24.010 - Filing of tentative maps. 
A.  Preliminary filing shall be as follows: All tentative maps shall be filed with the Planning Director on a preliminary filing basis and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. During the preliminary filing period, the 50-day time limit for processing tentative maps shall not commence to run. Not less than 15 copies of a tentative map shall be filed, which maps shall be drawn to an engineer's scale appropriate to clearly present necessary details, and shall be on pages not less than eighteen inches by 26 inches. 
B.  During the time that the tentative map is considered preliminarily filed: 
1.  The land divider shall comply with the City of Beaumont Rules to. Implement the Provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (C.E.Q.A.) including the preparation of an Environmental Impact Report if one is required. 
2.  The land divider shall comply with Riverside County Ordinance No. 547 and all the requirements of the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Special Studies Zone Act. The land divider shall obtain clearance from the Beaumont-Cherry Valley Water District for all requirements relating to water. 
C.  Actual filing of tentative map: When all requirements of the preliminary filing stage are completed, the Planning Director shall notify the land divider and the tentative map shall then be accepted for filing upon the payment of the required fees as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. 547 §6.1, 1983) 
16.24.020 - Fee for flood protection study. 
A.  A flood protection study fee shall be paid at the time of actual filing of a tentative map as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
B.  When the fee is collected, it shall be paid to the Flood Control District that performs the flood protection study. 
C.  No charge shall be made for a flood protection study on a revised tentative map filed within two years of the original filing unless additional lots have been added. If a resubmitted map has additional lots proposed, a supplemental payment of the normal lot fee multiplied by the additional number of lots will be required. After two years the fee shall be the same as the original fee. 
D.  There shall be no flood protection study fee for reverting subdivided lands to acreage. 
(Ord. 547 §6.2, 1983) 
16.24.030 - Map distribution. 
    Upon the actual filing of the tentative map with the Planning Director, one copy thereof shall be forwarded to each member of the appropriate advisory agency and to each of the following as may be concerned: 
A.  California Department of Transportation; 
B.  City of Banning; County of Riverside; 
C.  The Flood Control District or person designated who will perform flood control and drainage studies; 
D.  Any City, Community Services District, school or other authorized district requesting a copy; 
E.  Any utility purveyor serving the area with its facilities; 
F.  Any others as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. 547 §6.3, 1983) 
16.24.040 - Review by Land Division Committee. 
A.  All tentative maps shall be reviewed by the appropriate section of the Land Division Committee. The land divider and his representative shall be notified of the date and time of the meeting, at which time the land divider may review his proposed map with the committee. 
B.  Upon the completion of its review, the Land Division Committee shall prepare a report and recommendations and shall transmit a copy to the appropriate advisory agency. The report shall be in writing and a copy thereof served on the land divider and his representative at least five days prior to any hearing or action on the map by the advisory agency. 
(Ord. 547 §6.4, 1983) 
16.24.050 - Consideration by the advisory agency. 
A.  Within 50 days after the date of actual filing of a tentative map, a public hearing on the map shall be held before the advisory agency. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least ten days before the hearing by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to owners of real property located within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property to be considered, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County and any update issued by the County Assessor and by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. After closing the hearing, the advisory agency shall file a written report with the City Council recommending approval, approving with conditions or disapproving the tentative subdivision or parcel map, and report its actions directly to the land divider and his authorized agent. 
B.  The advisory agency, upon the request of the land divider, may waive the requirement that a final parcel map be recorded if the advisory agency finds that the proposed land division complies with the requirements as to: 
1.  Area; 
2.  Improvement and design; 
3.  Flood water drainage control; 
4.  Appropriate improved public roads; 
5.  Sanitary disposal facilities; 
6.  Water supply availability; 
7.  Environmental protection; 
8.  Adequate existing survey control; 
9.  Other provisions of this and other applicable ordinances of the City and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 547 §6.5, 1983) 
16.24.060 - Appeal of actions of advisory agency. 
    The land divider or any interested party may appeal the decision of the advisory agency on a tentative subdivision or parcel map, to the City Council within 15 days after the decision of the advisory agency. The appeal shall be filed in the City Manager's Office, stating in writing the basis for the appeal and accompanied by the fee set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. All appeals shall be heard by the Council at a public hearing, on a date within 30 days after the date of the filing of the appeal and notice of public hearing shall be given in the same manner as was given for the original hearing. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall render its decision on the appeal within 20 days. 
(Ord. 547 §6.6, 1983) 
16.24.070 - Extension of the time for processing. 
    All the time limits specified in this title for reporting and acting on tentative maps may be extended by the mutual consent of the land divider and the advisory agency or the Council. 
(Ord. 547 §6.7, 1933) 
Chapter 16.28 - DENIAL OF TENTATIVE LAND DIVISION MAPS 

16.28.010 - General. 
    A tentative subdivision map and a tentative parcel map shall be denied by the advisory agency if the map does not meet all of the requirements of this title, or if the advisory agency or Council makes any of the following findings: 
A.  That the proposed land division is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
B.  That the design or improvement of the proposed land division is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
C.  That the site of the proposed land division is not physically suitable for the proposed density of the development; 
D.  That the site of the proposed land division is not physically suitable for the proposed density of the development; 
E.  That the design of the proposed land division or proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidable injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
F.  That the design of the proposed land division or the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems; 
G.  That the design of the proposed land division or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through, or use of, property within the proposed land division. The Council may approve a land division if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided and that they will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 547 §7.1, 1983) 
16.28.020 - Land projects. 
A.  A tentative land division map for any land project as defined in the Business and Professions Code Section 11000.5 shall not be approved unless: 
B.  A specific plan covering the area proposed to be included within the land project has been adopted by the Council. 
C.  It is determined that the proposed land project, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the adopted specific plan for the area 
(Ord. 547 §7.2, 1983) 
Chapter 16.32 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

16.32.010 - Revised tentative maps. 
A.  Any revised tentative map shall comply with all of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title in effect at the time the revised map is approved. 
B.  Proceedings on a revised tentative map shall be conducted in the same manner as for the original approval of a tentative map except those procedures that are not applicable. The approval or conditional approval of a revised tentative map shall annul approval of the previous tentative map, but the approval thereof shall not extend the time within which the final map may be filed. 
(Ord. 547 §8.1, 1983) 
16.32.020 - Minor changes. 
A.  A request for approval of a minor change to an approved tentative map shall be filed with the Planning Department, accompanied by the fee specified by the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office, and referred to the Land Division Committee. The request shall be reviewed by the Land Division Committee, which committee shall make a written recommendation thereon to the advisory agency. 
B.  The advisory agency shall consider the matter, review the recommendation of the Land Division Committee, and make a decision on the request. An appeal of the advisory agency decision may be made to the City Council. The decision of the Council on the minor change shall be final. 
C.  A minor change shall not require a noticed public hearing; however, the advisory agency or the City Council may, at their discretion, allow testimony to be given on the proposed change. The advisory agency or Council may make a final decision on the matter when it initially appears on its agenda, or it may continue the matter without the consent of the land divider. The approval by the advisory agency or Council of a minor change shall not affect the time period within which the land divider must prepare and file the final map. 
(Ord. 547 §8.2, 1983) 
16.32.030 - Division into units. 
A.  If a land divider proposes to file a final map on only a portion of land shown on an approved tentative map, he shall file an application with the Planning Director accompanied by the fee as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
B.  The Planning Director shall refer the application to the Land Division Committee for its review. 
C.  No unit map shall be approved unless it is complete and in compliance with all of the provisions of this title, including fire protection, flood control, traffic circulation, access and environmental considerations and with all conditions of approval of the tentative tract. 
D.  The unit will be identified by the approved tentative map number with a dash number designating said unit. The unit number shall be obtained from the Road Commissioner upon payment of the fee specified in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. Units shall be recorded in the order as indicated by the unit number. The last unit within a tentative map to be recorded will not bear a unit number. 
(Ord. 547 §8.3, 1983) 
16.32.040 - Expiration of approved tentative maps-Extension of time. 
A.  Tentative Subdivision Maps. An approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision map shall expire 24 months after such approval unless within that period of time a final map shall have been approved and filed with the County Recorder. Prior to the expiration date, the land divider may apply in writing for an extension of time. Each application shall be made to the advisory agency 30 days prior to the expiration date of the tentative map and shall be accompanied by the fee set forth by the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. The advisory agency shall forward to the Council an approval or denial of the application. The Council may extend the date on which the map expires for one year. 
B.  Tentative Parcel Maps. An approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall expire 24 months after such approval, unless within that period of time a final map shall have been approved and filed with the County Recorder. Prior to the expiration date, the land divider may apply in writing for an extension of time period. Each application shall be made to the advisory agency 30 days prior to the expiration date of the tentative map, and shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. The advisory agency may extend the date on which the map expires for one year. The advisory agency shall report its action directly to the land divider. 
C.  An extension of time shall not be granted unless the land division conforms to the general plan and is consistent with zoning and with the applicable schedule of improvements in effect at the time an extension is granted. 
(Ord. 547 §8.4, 1983) 
Chapter 16.36 - FINAL LAND DIVISION MAPS 

16.36.010 - General. 
    After the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and prior to the expiration of such map, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final map thereof prepared in accordance with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. 
(Ord. 547 §547 § 9.1, 1983) 
16.36.020 - Subdivision boundary plat requirements. 
A.  Surveys made in preparation of final land division maps shall be in accordance with standard practices and principles of surveying and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Before the final map of a subdivision will be accepted by the City Engineer for checking, the land divider shall submit and obtain approval by the Road Commissioner of a map showing: 
1.  A boundary survey of the land division, including all courses and distances to compute a closure; 
2.  Sufficient data to prove the method by which the boundary was determined, including a description of all corners found or set, adjoining maps or property lines of record; 
3.  The map shall be drawn on 18 inches by 26 inches minimum sheets of reproducible material. 
C.  The City Engineer may waive the boundary plat if sufficient survey information is of record. 
D.  Wherever the City Engineer has established the centerline of a street, that data shall be considered in making the surveys and in preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be indicated and public record, relating to the monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated. The final map shall show City boundaries adjoining the division of land. 
(Ord. 547 §9.2, 1983) 
16.36.030 - Preliminary filing of final subdivision map. 
A.  When a boundary survey map is approved or waived by the City Engineer, the subdivider may then file his final map for preliminary checking in the office of the City Engineer. Five positive prints shall be filed with the City Engineer to be distributed as follows: 
1.  Two to the City Engineer; 
2.  One to the Planning Department; 
3.  One to the appropriate flood control agency. 
B.  The final map shall be accompanied by the following: map checking fees as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
C.  Improvement plans shall be accompanied by the following: Two sets of prints of plans of the proposed improvements together with the plan checking fee as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
D.  Prior to the recordation of the final map, the following items shall be provided and approved: 
1.  A copy of the approved Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CC & R's) that are to be recorded with the final map; 
2.  Evidence of title in the form of a current preliminary title report issued by a California title company, showing the names of persons having any record title interest in the land to be divided, together with the nature of their respective interests therein. In the event that any dedication is to be made for public use of any property shown on a final land division map, a subdivision guarantee shall be issued by a California title company. The consent of the owner or owners of any contingent reversionary interest in the lands to be subdivided is not necessary and need not be named in the guarantee of title. 
3.  All request for waivers of signatures as proved in the Subdivision Map Act shall be required. 
4.  Utility plans required shall be as follows: 
a.  An original and three positive prints of each map showing the proposed water distribution and sewage collection systems, signed by the purveyors and a registered civil engineer; each system shall comply with all applicable State, County and City regulations. The City Fire Department shall also sign the water plan when conditions include fire protection. 
b.  Letters from other utility purveyors that will serve the land division certifying that satisfactory provisions have been made with each of the said public utility purveyors as to location of their facilities and construction thereof. 
(Ord. 547 §9.5, 1983) 
16.36.040 - Preliminary filing of final parcel map. 
    After a tentative parcel map is approved, the land divider may cause a final parcel map to be prepared and submitted to the City Engineer. The land divider shall submit the following: 
A.  Two prints of the final parcel map with the plan checking fee as required in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
B.  Two prints each of any required improvement plans with plan checking fee as required in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
C.  Evidence of title in the form of a current preliminary title report issued by a California title company showing the names of persons having any record title interest in the land to be divided, together with the nature of their respective interests therein. In the event that any dedication is to be made for public use of any property shown on a final parcel map, a subdivision guarantee shall be issued by a California title company. 
(Ord. 547 §9.4, 1983) 
16.36.050 - Data required-Final land division maps. 
A.  Final subdivision and parcel maps shall conform to all of the following provisions: 
1.  Each map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or good quality polyester base film, including certificates, except that such certificates may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque material when recommended by the City Engineer and authorized by the County Recorder. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. The size of each sheet shall be 18 inches by 26 inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. 
2.  Each map shall bear the number as assigned by the Road Commissioner which shall be followed by a subtitle consisting of a general description of all the property being divided by reference to record maps, and to section surveys or ranchos. Reference shall be spelled out and worded identically with original records, with complete reference to proper book and page of record. 
3.  All sheets shall be numbered, the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown, and the number of sheets used shall be set forth on each sheet. An adequate number of sheet shall be submitted to clearly present all pertinent data. 
4.  When required by the City Engineer, a location map shall be placed on the final map which indicates the location of the proposed land division and its relationship to existing streets and highways. 
5.  Prior to recording, the certificates and acknowledgments required by the Subdivision Map Act shall appear on the maps. 
6.  The Recorder's certificate shall be placed in the upper right hand corner of the first sheet only on multi-sheet maps. 
7.  The surveyor's or engineer's certificate shall state that the survey was made by him or under his direction, that the survey is true and complete as shown, that all monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated and are sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced, that the map conforms to the approved tentative map and conditions of approval thereof, and that all provisions of the applicable State and local ordinances have been complied with. 
8.  The number, scale, north point and sheet number shall be shown on each sheet of map. The map shall be drawn at a suitable engineer's scale to identify and describe all essential details clearly. If no more than two map sheets are used, an index showing the division of land with lots numbered as shown on the map, shall be shown. A boundary survey shall be shown on one sheet. 
9.  A land division name shall not be shown on the map. 
10.  The exterior boundary of the land within a land division shall be indicated by a distinctive delineation and clearly designated. 
11.  A statement labeled "Map Notes" shall be shown on one sheet of the map. The statement shall include the basis of bearings; the monuments that were found; the monuments and points that were set, with reference to Resolution No. 1980-35 standards; and a key to the symbols and abbreviations and such other information required by the City Engineer. 
12.  Lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number "1," with no omissions or duplications. Each lot shall be shown in its entirety on one sheet. Lots used for streets, alleys, or barrier strips shall be lettered. Easements shall be clearly identified. 
13.  Where a part-width street is shown on a map, the centerline of the improvements shall be monumented and shown correctly, as related to the full future width of the street. 
14.  Preparation of maps shall conform to County standards, as found in policies and ordinances, except as modified by the City Engineer and approval of the City Council. 
15.  For each centerline intersection monument set, the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey has been made, shall furnish the City Engineer a set of notes showing clearly four reference monuments. 
B.  The following data shall be shown on each final subdivision and parcel map: 
1.  Dates of survey and the name of the registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor responsible for the preparation of the maps; 
2.  Locations and names, without abbreviations, of all adjoining, existing and proposed streets and the location of alleys. Proposed public areas and easements shall also be identified; 
3.  Gross area of land division, and the net acreage, computed to nearest 0.01 acres, on all lots containing one acre or more. Lot lines shall be shown by solid lines; 
4.  Centerlines of all streets and lengths, tangent, radius and central angle or radial bearings on all points on curves and the bearings of radial lines to each lot corner on a curve; the width of each street, the width of the portion being dedicated and the width of existing dedications; and the widths of rights-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage channels and other easements appearing on the map; 
5.  Sufficient data to determine readily the bearing and length of each line. Recorded survey data as required by the City Engineer; 
6.  Sufficient primary survey control points; 
7.  Ties to and recording references to adjacent record maps and to section corners, quarter section corners and also to section lines and quarter section lines when adjacent or within the map; 
8.  Centerline data and width of all easements to which the division of land is subject. If the easements are not definitely located by record, a statement as to the easement shall appear on the title sheet of the land division map. Distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by an easement shall be so shown as to indicate clearly the actual location. Alignment data alongside lot lines of easements shall be provided when not controlled by paralleling lines or centerline. The easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if already on record, proper reference to the records given. Easements dedicated in land divisions shall be included in the owners Certificate of Dedication. Easements shall be shown on the map by broken lines. 
9.  Clear indication of stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract, data to determine physical description, size, ground position, tag number and record reference of survey markers. Untagged monuments accepted as control shall be tagged or replaced by the surveyor or engineer making the survey; 
10.  No setback lines shall appear on the final map; 
11.  New street names shown on a land division map must be approved by the City Engineer; 
12.  Any required conditions related to geologic hazard. 
(Ord. 547 §9.5, 1983) 
16.36.060 - Parcel maps compiled from recorded data. 
    A parcel map of four or less parcels may be compiled from recorded or filed data, if such data is acceptable to the City Engineer. Parcel maps compiled from record data must be part of a recently recorded tract or parcel map that was not compiled from recorded data. 
(Ord. 547 §9.6, 1983) 
16.36.070 - Filing of final land division maps. 
    After the preliminary final land division map is determined to be correct, the City Engineer shall notify the land divider to prepare and submit the original final map together with all required agreements for improvements and securities and all other required documents as may be necessary for Council consideration of the final map. If the final land division map or documents are not determined complete by the City Engineer, they shall be returned to the land divider for corrections. 
(Ord. 547 §9.7, 1983) 
16.36.080 - Action by the City Engineer. 
    When the final land division map and all agreements, securities and other required documents have been submitted and found to be in correct form, the City Engineer shall, within 20 days thereof, file the final map and documents with the City Council and certify that: 
A.  He has examined the map. 
B.  The land division as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the tentative map and any approved alterations thereof. 
C.  All provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and all City ordinances applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map have been complied with. 
D.  He is satisfied that the map is technically correct. 
E.  In the certificate, the City Engineer shall state the date of approval of the tentative map and the date of expiration. 
(Ord. 547 §9.8, 1983) 
16.36.090 - Action by the City Council. 
    The City Council shall, at the meeting at which it receives the map or, at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title applicable of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder or, if it does not so conform, disapprove the map; provided, however, the final map shall not be disapproved due to technical or inadvertent errors which can easily be corrected and, in the opinion of the City Engineer, do not materially affect the validity of the map. 
(Ord. 547 §9.9, 1983) 
16.36.100 - Survey and monuments. 
A.  At the time of making the survey for a final land division map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform to the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code and also comply with the requirements of Resolution 1980-35 and the City Engineer. 
B.  When five or more lots are shown on the final map, final monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the land divider enters into a secured agreement guaranteeing the setting of the monument. 
C.  When four or less lots are shown on the final map, monuments shall be set prior to the recordation of the final map. 
(Ord. 547 §9.10, 1983) 
16.36.110 - Delivery of final map to the Recorder. 
A.  The final land division map shall be presented by the City Clerk to the Recorder for filing within five days of the action approving the final map by the City Council. 
B.  The land developer shall present to the Recorder evidence that, at the time of the filing of a final land division map, the parties consenting to the filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the real property being divided whose signatures are required, as shown by the records in the office of the Recorder; otherwise, the map shall not be filed. 
C.  The Recorder shall have not more than ten days within which to examine the final land division map and either accept or reject it for filing. 
D.  If the Recorder accepts the map for filing, such acceptance shall be certified on the face thereof. 
E.  Within ten days following the filing of the final subdivision map or parcel map by the County Recorder, the land divider shall make a polyester type film duplicate of the original recorded map and deliver the same to the City Engineer who shall retain custody thereof. 
(Ord. 547 §9.11, 1983) 
16.36.120 - Certificate of compliance-Waiver of final parcel map. 
    When a final parcel map has been waived, upon completion of all requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title and the conditions required for waiver of the final map, the Planning Director shall file a certificate of compliance with the Recorder upon payment of the fee set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. 547 §9.12, 1983) 
Chapter 16.40 - LAND DIVISION DEDICATIONS, IMPROVEMENTS, FEES AND RESERVATIONS 

16.40.010 - Dedications. 
A.  All streets, highways and alleys, and other parcels of land intended for public use including, but not limited to, access road easements required for flood control and utilities intended for public use, shall be offered for dedication to the public by owners certificate as a part of a final land division map. No utility easement or other rights-of-way shall be granted within proposed street dedications subsequent to the date of filing of a preliminary tentative map. Necessary rights-of-way outside of the tract boundary must be processed by separate instruments. 
B.  Whenever a limited access highway is eighty-eight feet or greater in right-of-way width as shown on the circulation element of the general plan of the City or as provided by this title, adjoins or passes through a division of land, access rights to the highway may be required to be offered for dedication to the City. In such event, the note "ACCESS RIGHTS RESTRICTED" shall be shown along the highway right-of-way. Access rights may be restricted when necessary where the ultimate right-of-way width is 88 feet or greater, except for approved access openings. 
(Ord. 547 §10.1, 1983) 
16.40.020 - Land division improvements. 
A.  Improvements installed in land divisions shall be constructed in conformance to the provisions of Resolution No. 1980-35. 
B.  In the absence of a standard for an improvement, the City Engineer may establish a standard in keeping with good construction and engineering practices. 
C.  When asphalt-concrete dikes are permitted and drainage is required to cross at intersecting streets, concrete curb returns and cross-gutters shall be installed. 
D.  Structural roadbed section shall be designed using recognized design methods, employing engineering soils analysis and determination of traffic evaluations. 
E.  The street pattern in the land development shall not landlock adjacent or preclude access to public land. 
F.  When located under the pavement, utility mains and utility services shall be installed before the final street surfacing is installed. 
G.  Asphalt-concrete dikes shall be waived when it is determined that they are unnecessary for drainage purposes. 
(Ord. 547 §10.2, 1983) 
16.40.030 - Improvement plans required. 
A.  All improvements constructed or installed in land divisions shall be in accordance with detailed plans and specifications as approved in writing by the City Engineer prior to commencement of said improvement work. 
B.  All plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer and shall be approved by him before submitting a final land division map to the Council. 
C.  All improvements constructed or installed in land divisions, other than rough grading for physical access, whether such work is required by the City or is done at the option of the land divider, shall be on accordance with plans and specifications as approved by the City Engineer. 
D.  Improvement plans shall be required for all improvements, whether installed before or after recordation of the final map. 
E.  Contractors shall secure an encroachment permit for all work done in connection with land division projects within public right-of-way. 
F.  The improvement plans shall show the location of all existing improvements, gas and any other service facilities. 
G.  Improvements proposed or required on State Highway rights-of-way shall be included in the improvement plans and designed to Department of Transportation standards. Prior to approval by the City Engineer, the land divider's engineer shall acquire the Department of Transportation's approval of such improvements. 
(Ord. 547 §10.3, 1983) 
16.40.040 - Improvement for subdivisions. 
    The minimum improvements which a land divider shall install, or enter into an agreement to install, for subdivisions shall be as set forth in Schedules A and B in Sections 16.40.050 and 16.40.060. 
(Ord. 547 §10.4, 1983) 
16.40.050 - Schedule A subdivision. 
    Any division of land into five or more parcels, where any parcel is less than 18,000 square feet in net area, shall be defined as a Schedule A subdivision. The minimum improvements for a Schedule A subdivision shall be as follows: 
A.  Streets. The minimum improvements for streets are established as follows: 
1.  Arterial Highways. Eighty-six feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 100; 
2.  Major Highways. Seventy-six feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 101; 
3.  Secondary Highways. Sixty-four feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 102; 
4.  Collector Streets. Forty-four feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 103, Section A; 
5.  General Local Streets. Forty feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 104, Section A; 
6.  Short Local Streets. Forty feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 104, Section A; 
7.  Restricted Local Streets. Thirty-two feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 106, Section A; 
8.  Access Road. Twenty-six feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 107; 
9.  Frontage Road. Thirty-six feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 109, Section A; 
10.  Cul-de-sac Streets. These streets shall be designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 800. The various street widths shall be compatible with the adjacent land uses; 
11.  Alleys. Twenty feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance 461, Standard No. 500; 
12.  Part-width Streets. Twenty feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance 461, Standard No. 110, Section A, except when a part-width street serves as an access to the interior subdivision street network, the minimum width shall be one-half of the required improvement, but not less than 28 feet; 
13.  Street Name Signs. Type and placement shall conform with Riverside County Ordinance 461, Standard No. 461, No. 815 or 816; 
14.  Barricades shall be placed at the end of dead-end streets in accordance with Riverside County Ordinance 461, Standard No. 810; 
15.  Sidewalks shall be required to be constructed unless they are determined by the approving body to be unnecessary considering the design of the development. Sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with the Improvement Standards of Riverside County Ordinance 461, Standard Nos. 400 or 401. 
B.  Domestic Water. The minimum requirement for domestic water supply and distribution system is as follows: 
1.  Water Supply. Three hundred gallons per day per single-family lot and 450 gallons per day per lot for all other lots, in all cases deliverable in a four-hour period; 
2.  Piped water systems; 
3.  Service Connections. Single-family residence lot, five-eighths of an inch; multiple-family residence lot; one inch. 
C.  Fire Protection. The minimum requirement for fire protection facilities in residential zones that do not allow multifamily residential uses shall be as follows: 
1.  Type of fire hydrant and connection as approved by the City Fire Department; 
2.  Hydrants located one at each street intersection to conform to City Code Chapters 15.04 and 15.20 and Riverside County Ordinance 546, and not greater than 500 feet apart in any direction; 
3.  Minimum flow of water which a system shall be capable of delivering at any hydrant; 500 gallons per minute at 20 pounds per square inch flowing pressure above the average daily domestic consumption; 
4.  For the purposes of this section, 50 gallons per minute is established as the average daily domestic consumption rate for the area served by one fire hydrant. In zones that allow multifamily residential uses, the minimum fire protection shall be set forth in City Code Chapters 15.04 and 15.20 and Riverside County Ordinance 546. 
D.  Sewage Disposal. The minimum requirement for sewage disposal shall be as follows: Connection to an existing collection system is required. 
E.  Electrical and Communication Facilities. Minimum requirement for electrical and communication facilities shall be as follows: Electrical and communication facilities shall be installed in conformity with the provisions of Section 16.52.010. 
(Ord. 547 §10.5, 1983) 
16.40.060 - Schedule B subdivision. 
    Any division of land into five or more parcels, where any parcel is not less than 18,000 square feet in net area, shall be defined as a Schedule B subdivision. The minimum improvements for a Schedule B subdivision shall be as follows: 
A.  Streets. width of asphalt paving required shall be determined as a part of the approval of the tentative map in accordance with the following factors: 
1.  Design. 
a.  The intensity of the use permitted by the zoning on the property; 
b.  The nature of the developed street improvements in the surrounding area; 
c.  The topography of the parcel and surrounding area; 
d.  Drainage, erosion and similar factors. 
2.  Width. The maximum width of paving shall be as required for Schedule A streets, and the minimum width of paving required shall be as follows: 
a.  Arterial Highway. Forty-four feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 100; 
b.  Major Highways. Forty-four feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 101; 
c.  Secondary Highways. Forty-four feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 102; 
d.  Collector Streets. Thirty-two feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 103, Section B; 
e.  General Local Streets and Short Local Streets. Twenty-six feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 104, Section B; 
f.  Restricted Local Streets. Twenty-six feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 106, Section B; 
g.  Access Roads. Twenty-six feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 107; 
h.  Frontage Roads. Twenty-six feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 109, Section B; 
i.  Cul-de-sac Streets. These streets shall be designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 800; 
j.  Part-width Streets. Twenty feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 110, Section C, except when a part-width street serves as an access to an interior subdivision street network the minimum width shall be one-half of the required improvement, but not less than 28 feet; 
k.  Street Name Signs. Type and placement shall conform with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard Nos. 815 or 8161; 
l.  Barricades shall be placed at end of dead-end streets in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 810. 
B.  Domestic Water. The minimum requirement for a domestic water supply and distribution system is as follows: 
1.  Water Supply. Three hundred gallons per day per single-family lot, and 450 gallons per day per lot for all other lots, in all cases deliverable in a four-hour period; 
2.  Piped water systems; 
3.  Service Connection. Single-family residence lot, five-eighths of an inch multiple-family residence lot, one inch. 
C.  Fire Protection. The minimum requirement for fire protection facilities in residential zones that do not allow multifamily residential uses shall be as follows: 
1.  Type of fire hydrant and connection as approved by the agency providing fire protection; 
2.  Hydrants located one at each street intersection, but not greater than permitted by City Code Chapters 15.04 and 15.20 and Riverside County Ordinance 546, in any direction; 
3.  Minimum flow of water which system shall be capable of delivering at any hydrant; 500 gallons per minute, at 20 pounds per square inch following pressure above the average daily consumption rate; 
4.  For the purpose of this section, 50 gallons per minute is established as the average daily domestic consumption rate for the area served by one fire hydrant in zones that allow multifamily residential uses, the minimum fire protection shall be as set forth in City Code Chapters 15.04 and 15.20 and Riverside County Ordinance 546. 
D.  Sewage Disposal. The minimum requirement for sewage disposal shall be as follows: 
1.  Connection to an existing collection system is required ; or 
2.  If an existing collection system is not available and if it is determined that satisfactory individual disposal systems cannot be proved because of soil conditions, determined by percolation tests in conformity with the standards of the "Ludwig Modification," and finding that the conditions and requirements of the health department and Regional Water Quality Control Board cannot be met, then a package treatment plant and collector system shall be required. 
E.  Fences. Minimum fencing requirements shall be as follows: Six-foot chain-link galvanized wire fences shall be installed along any canal, drain, expressway or other feature deemed to be hazardous. 
F.  Electrical and Communication Facilities. Minimum requirement for electrical and communication facilities shall be as follows: Electrical and communication facilities shall be installed in conformity with the provisions of Section 16.52.010. 
(Ord. 547 §10.6, 1983) 
16.40.070 - Schedule C parcel map division. 
    Any division of land into two or more parcels in commercial or industrial zones, regardless of parcel size, shall be defined as a Schedule C subdivision. The minimum improvements for a Schedule C subdivision shall be as follows: 
A.  Streets. The minimum improvements for streets are established as follows: 
1.  All streets shall be constructed in accordance with Schedule A, except: 
a.  No street shall be less than 64 feet in width, designed and constructed in conformance with Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard No. 102; 
b.  No part-width street shall be less than 32 feet in width; 
c.  Concrete curb and gutter shall be required in all cases. 
2.  Sidewalks shall be required to be constructed unless they are determined by the approving body to be unnecessary considering the design of the development. Sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with the Improvement Standards of Riverside County Ordinance No. 461, Standard Nos. 400 or 401. 
B.  Domestic Water. The minimum requirement for domestic water supply and distribution system is as follows: 
1.  Water Supply. Four hundred fifty gallons per day per lot, and in all cases deliverable in a four-hour period; 
2.  Piped water system; 
3.  Service Connections. Service connections shall be one and one-half inches. 
C.  Fire Protection. The minimum fire protection requirements shall be as provided in City Code Chapters 15.04 and 15.20 and Riverside County Ordinance 546. 
D.  Sewage Disposal. The minimum requirement for sewage disposal shall be as follows: 
1.  Connection to an existing collection system is required; or 
2.  If an existing collection system is not available and if it is determined that satisfactory individual disposal systems cannot be provided because of soil conditions, determined by soil percolation tests in conformity with the standards of the "Ludwig Modification" arid finding that the conditions and requirements of the health department and the Regional Water Quality Control Board cannot be met, a package treatment plant and collector system shall be required. 
E.  Fences. Minimum requirement for fencing shall be as follows: Six-foot chain-link galvanized wire fence shall be installed along any canal, drain, expressway or other feature deemed to be hazardous. 
F.  Electrical and Communication Facilities. The minimum requirements for electrical and communication facilities shall be as follows: Electrical and communication facilities shall be installed in conformity with the provisions of Section 16.52.010. 
(Ord. 547 §10.7, 1983) 
16.40.080 - Schedule D parcel map division. 
    Any division of land into four or less parcels, where any parcel is less than 18,000 square feet in net area, shall be defined as a Schedule D parcel map division. The minimum improvement for a Schedule D parcel map division shall be the same as those required for Schedule A subdivisions in accordance with Section 16.40.050. 
(Ord. 547 §10.8, 1983) 
16.40.090 - Schedule E parcel map division. 
    Any division of land into four or less parcels, where any parcel is not less than 18,000 square feet in net area, shall be defined as a Schedule E parcel map division. The minimum improvements for a Schedule E parcel map division shall be the same as those required for Schedule B subdivisions in accordance with Section 16.40.060. 
(Ord. 547 §10.9, 1983) 
16.40.100 - Drainage fees. 
A.  This section is adopted pursuant to Section 66483, et seq. of the Government Code which provides for the payment of fees for the construction of drainage facilities, as a condition to the division of land. 
B.  Whenever land that is proposed to be divided lies within the boundaries of an area drainage plan, a drainage fee in the amount required by the plan for the area, as adopted or thereafter amended, shall be required as a condition of approval of the division of land in that drainage area. 
C.  The area drainage plan shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 66483 et seq.; shall cover a particular drainage area; shall contain an estimate of the total cost of constructing the drainage facilities required by the plan; and shall include a map of the area that shows the boundaries of the drainage area and the location of the required facilities serving the drainage area. As a part of the adoption of a plan, the Council shall find and determine that the subdivision and development of land within the plan area will require construction of the facilities described in the plan. The Council shall further find and determine that the drainage fees are fairly apportioned within the local drainage area, on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for subdivision or on the need for local drainage facilities created by the proposed subdivision and development of other properties within the adopted drainage area, and may provide for varying fees; provided, however, the fee as to any property proposed for subdivision within a drainage area shall not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the total actual or estimated costs of all facilities within the area which would be assessable on such property if the costs where apportioned uniformly on a per acre basis. 
D.  Drainage fees shall be paid at the time of the filing of the final map or parcel map, or as a condition of the waiver of the filing of a parcel map; provided, however, at the option of the land divider the fee may be paid, in pro rata amounts, at the time of the issuance of grading permits for the approved parcels or at the time of issuance of building permits if no grading permits are issued for the parcels. The amount of the drainage fee required to be paid shall be in the amount that is in effect for the particular area drainage plan at the time of actual payment of the fee. If 'the land divider elects to have payment made at the time of issuance of a grading or building permit, the recorded final map or parcel map or certificate of compliance evidencing the waiver of the filing of a parcel map shall specifically state that payment of a drainage fee is required to be paid prior to issuance of a grading permit or building permit for the parcels that have been created by the land division. In addition, a separate instrument shall be recorded by the land divider in the office of the County Recorder at the time of the filing of the final map or parcel map or certificate of compliance evidencing the waiver of the parcel map, which gives notices that a drainage fee is required to be paid by any person that owns such parcels prior to issuance of a grading or building permit. 
E.  If the drainage fee is paid at the time of the filing of the final map or parcel map or certificate of compliance evidencing the waiver of the parcel map, it shall be paid to the City Engineer. If the drainage fee is paid at the time of issuance of a grading or building permit, it shall be paid to the building director. All fees that are collected shall thereafter be deposited into a local drainage facilities fund maintained under the jurisdiction of the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District. A separate fund shall be established by the district for each adopted local drainage area. Money in such funds shall be expended for construction or reimbursement for construction, including acquisition of right-of-way necessary for construction of the drainage facilities serving the drainage area for which the fees are collected, or to reimburse the district for the cost of engineering and administrative services to design and construct and acquire any necessary right-of-way for the facilities. 
F.  In the discretion of the Council considerations such as dedications of right-of-way, actual construction, or design work by a civil engineer may be accepted in lieu of the payment of drainage fees, upon a determination that the alternative is acceptable and is equal to or greater in value than the required fee. 
G.  Money may be advanced by the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District to design or construct drainage facilities or to acquire necessary right-of-way within an adopted drainage area; therefore, money so advanced may be reimbursed to the district from the fund for the local drainage area in which the facilities are located. 
H.  When required for the implementation of an adopted area plan, an agreement may be entered into between a developer and the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District whereby the developer may advance money for the construction of facilities, or design or construct facilities within a local drainage area; provided, that the sole security to the developer for repayment of money or other consideration advanced shall be money subsequently accruing to the local drainage facilities fund for the drainage area in which the facilities are located. Reimbursement shall be for the amount agreed upon in advance only and shall not include interest or other charges. The agreement shall expire 15 years after the date it was entered into, and any subsequent money paid into the fund shall accrue to the fund without obligation to developers whose agreements have expired. 
I.  The drainage plan area, the required facilities and the drainage fee in an adopted plan may be amended by the Council at any time upon a determination that it is necessary to do so in order to correctly reflect the drainage area, the required facilities or estimated cost of the facilities. 
(Ord. 547 §10.10, 1983) 
16.40.110 - Bridge and major thoroughfare fees. 
A.  Purpose. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 66484 of the Government Code of the State which provides for the payment of fees to defray the actual or estimated costs for the construction of bridges over waterways, railways, freeways and canyons and/or major thoroughfares as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit. 
B.  Major Thoroughfare and Bridge Fees. A subdivider, as a condition of approval of a final map for property within an area of benefit, or a building permit applicant, as a condition of issuance of a building permit for property within an area of benefit, shall pay a fee as hereinafter established to defray the cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways" freeways and canyons, and/or constructing major thoroughfares. No property shall be assessed a fee under this section for both a final map and a building permit. 
C.  Definitions. 
1.  "Area of benefit" means a specified area wherein it has been determined that the real property located therein will benefit from the construction of a bridge and/or major thoroughfare. 
2.  "Bridge facilities" means those locations identified in the transportation element of the general plan of the City (the "general plan") requiring construction of or addition to a bridge spanning a waterway, railway, freeway or canyon that is part of a major thoroughfare. 
3.  "Construction" means and includes formation and preliminary studies, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction. 
4.  "Major thoroughfares" means those roads designated as arterial, major or secondary highways, as defined by Section 16.08.290 and reflected in the circulation element of the general plan, the primary purpose of which is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to or which is part of the State highway system. 
5.  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
D.  General Plan Requirement. The provisions in this section for payment of fees shall apply to a parcel located within the boundaries of the areas of benefit if the bridge and/or major thoroughfare has been included in an element of the general plan adopted by the City Council at least 30 days prior to the filing of a final map or application for a building permit on the parcel location within the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
E.  Major Thoroughfares. Payment of fees shall not be required unless a major thoroughfare is in addition to or a widening or reconstruction of any major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
F.  Bridge Facilities. Payment of fees shall not be required unless any planned bridge facility is a new bridge serving the area or an addition to an existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
G.  Proceedings to Establish. 
1.  Action to establish an area of benefit may be initiated by the City Council upon its own motion or upon the recommendation of the City Manager, or Community Development Director. 
2.  The City Council will set a public hearing for each proposed area benefited. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated costs of construction and the method of fee apportionment, shall be given pursuant to Section 65091 of the Government Code. 
H.  Public Hearing and Protest. 
1.  At the public hearing, the City Council will consider the preliminary report that sets forth the area for inclusion within the area of benefit, designates the major thoroughfares and/or bridge facilities to be constructed, estimates the cost of construction of each improvement and describes the method of fee apportionment within the area of benefit. The Council will also consider testimony from interested persons, written protests and other evidence submitted. Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may, unless a majority written protest is filed and not withdrawn, determine to establish an area of benefit. If established, the City Council shall adopt a resolution describing the boundaries of the area of benefit, setting forth the cost, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment. A certified copy of such resolution shall be recorded with the County Recorder. 
2.  Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit, and shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions thereof. Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this section, the City shall make provisions for payment of the share of improvement cost apportioned to such lands from other sources. The designation of such alternate funding need not be addressed in the resolution establishing the area of benefit. 
3.  Written protests will be received by the City Clerk at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. Each written protest must be filed by a person or entity owning property within the proposed boundaries of the area of benefit and must describe the property with sufficient specificity so that the parcel may be identified. If the person or entity filing the protest is not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owner of the parcel, the protest must contain or be accompanied by documentary evidence establishing ownership. If written protests are filed by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented by the protests to less than one-half of the area to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned and the City Council shall not, for one year from the filing of the written protests, commence or carryon any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this section. Any protest may be withdrawn in writing by the owner making the same, at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. 
4.  If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this section to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the City Council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement so protested against. Such proceedings shall be commenced by a new notice and public hearing as set forth in subsection G of this section. 
5.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City Council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of an improvement or portion of the improvement so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited are in favor of going forward with such improvement or portion thereof. 
I.  Amendments. The resolution establishing an area of benefit may be amended from time to time by the City Council to reflect modifications in either the bridge and/or major thoroughfare facilities to be constructed or the property to be included within the area of benefit due to alterations in land use and to reflect adjustments in the fees schedule necessitated by any such modifications. The amendment(s) shall be adopted in the same manner as the original resolution. 
J.  Periodic Review. The City Council shall review the costs designated for construction of the bridge and/or major thoroughfare facilities from time to time and shall make modifications to such costs and corresponding adjustments to the fees as are necessary to ensure that the bridge and/or major thoroughfare facilities can be constructed from accumulated funds and fees remaining to be collected from the property in the area of benefit. 
K.  Payment of Fees. 
1.  Fees shall be paid prior to the recordation of a final subdivision or parcel map except that fees may be paid as described in subdivision 2 of this subsection. Fees paid shall be based on the fee schedule in effect on date of payment. 
2.  At the option of the subdivider of property within the area of benefit on which a subdivision or parcel map with four lots or less is recorded, the payment of fees may be deferred to the issuance of a building permit for each approved parcel. 
3.  If a parcel or lot has been created prior to the adoption of the resolution establishing the area of benefit, the fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for each approved parcel or lot. 
4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions 1, 2 and 3 of this subsection, payment of fees shall not be required for the following: 
a.  An application for building permit for alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure; 
b.  Accessory buildings and structures, as follows: private garages, barns, children's playhouse or buildings accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings 
c.  Outdoor advertising structures; 
d.  Wells. 
L.  Funds. Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare fund. A fund shall be established for each planned bridge facility project and/or each planned major thoroughfare project. If the benefit area is one in which more than one bridge and/or major thoroughfare is required to be constructed, a separate fund may be established covering all of the bridge projects and/or major thoroughfares in the benefit area. Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the improvement serving the area to be benefited and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the City for the costs of construction of the improvement. 
M.  In-lieu Construction. The City Council may approve the acceptance of considerations in lieu of the payment of fees established in this section. 
N.  Advances. The City Council may approve the advancement of money from the general fund to pay the costs of constructing the major thoroughfare and/or bridge improvements covered in this section and may reimburse the general fund for such advances from the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare funds established pursuant to subsection L of this section. 
O.  Debt Incurred. The City may incur an interest bearing indebtedness for the construction of bridge facilities or major thoroughfares, provided that the sole security for repayment of such indebtedness shall be money in the bridge facility or major thoroughfare funds. 
P.  Reimbursement. If a subdivider, as a condition of approval of a subdivision, is required or desires to construct a bridge and/or major thoroughfare, the City Council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider. Such agreement may provide for payments to the subdivider from the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare fund covering that specific project to reimburse the subdivider for costs not allocated to the subdivider's property in the resolution establishing the area of benefit. If the bridge and/or major thoroughfare fund covers more than one project, reimbursement shall be made on a pro rata basis, reflecting the actual or estimated costs of the projects covered by the fund. 
(Ord. 631 §1, 1986) 
Chapter 16.44 - FLOOD CONTROL AND TRACT DRAINAGE 

16.44.010 - General provisions. 
    Facilities required for the control of tract drainage and floodwaters in Schedules A, B, C, D and E land divisions, set out in Sections 16.40.050 through 16.40.090, are established as follows: 
A.  The minimum design for facilities which control drainage water generated within a land division or floodwater flowing into or crossing a land division shall be based on a storm having a frequency of once in 100 years. Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for the design of drainage facilities which control drainage water generated within a land division shall be submitted for approval to the City Engineer. Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for the design of flood-control facilities to control floodwater flowing into or crossing a land division shall be submitted for approval to the flood-control agency having jurisdiction and to the City Engineer. 
B.  The use of streets for flood-control and drainage purposes may be prohibited by the City Engineer if the use thereof is not in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  When the City Engineer permits the use of streets for flood-control and drainage purposes, the ten-year frequency design discharge shall be contained between the tops of curbs, and the 100-year frequency design discharge shall be contained within the street right-of-way. If either of these conditions is exceeded, additional flood control facilities shall be provided. 
(Ord. 547 §11.1, 1983) 
16.44.020 - Flood control. 
A.  The Flood Control Engineer shall review the hydrologic calculations submitted by the land divider and determine the adequacy of peak discharges of off-site floodwaters impinging upon the land division from which protection must be provided. The land divider may consult and confer with the Flood Control Engineer or his representative as to the adequacy of any flood control facilities proposed. 
B.  Improvement plans for flood-control facilities to control floodwater flowing into or crossing a land division shall be approved by the Flood Control Agency and the City Engineer. 
C.  After receipt of an acceptable tentative map, the Flood Control Engineer will recommend conditions to be imposed. He shall also furnish a flood hazard report to the land divider and such governmental agencies as may require the same. 
(Ord. 547 §11.2, 1983) 
16.44.030 - Tract drainage. 
A.  Improvement plans for the drainage facilities to control drainage water generated within a land division shall be approved by the City Engineer. 
B.  In land division where. lot grading is not proposed, the following criteria are established: 
1.  Where land division streets on sustained gradients cross natural drainage courses, adequate culverts shall be provided to accommodate the 100-year storm with maximum ponding to an elevation of two feet below the road centerline profile grade, provided diversion of ponded water into another drainage area will not result therefrom. 
2.  Runoff in natural drainage courses exceeding the ten-year storm may be permitted to overtop the roadway in dip sections where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, topography, soil conditions, adjacent development and available all-weather routes indicate its feasibility. If permitted, the roadway embankment slopes shall be adequately protected. 
3.  Culverts of adequate size, but not less than eighteen inches in diameter or equal, to prevent the ten year storm from overtopping the roadway shall be provided in dip sections or as approved by the City Engineer. 
4.  Streets crossing improved channels shall be provided with culverts of adequate size to permit passage of the channel design flow or such other type of crossing as approved by the Flood Control Agency and the City Engineer. 
5.  Asphalt concrete for lining of channels shall not be permitted. 
6.  When a land division substantially changes, concentrates or increases the natural flow of surface water onto adjacent property, facilities shall be required to direct the water to an adequate outlet, or the land divider shall obtain a recordable easement or written agreement for drainage purposes across the affected property. 
(Ord. 547 §11.3, 1983) 
Chapter 16.48 - DRY SEWERS 

16.48.010 - Dry sewers. 
    If a land division is filed that proposes a density of two or more lots per acres, and if connection to a wet sewerage system is not required, the installation of a dry sewer system may be required. Installation of the sewer mains, laterals and connections shall be completed prior to the installation of street improvements. 
(Ord. 547 §12.1, 1983) 
Chapter 16.52 - ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

16.52.010 - Installation requirements. 
A.  Electric power, telephone or other communication, street lighting and cable television lines shall be placed underground. 
B.  The owner or land divider is responsible for complying with the requirement of this section and shall make necessary arrangements with the serving agencies for the installation of such facilities. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface mounted transformers, concealed ducts, and pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed aboveground. 
D.  Underground lines shall not be required: 
1.  For any part of a land division as to which an existing overhead line is in a street or easement adjacent to the lot or lots to be served from the line or from one or more additional lines on the same poles; 
2.  In any land division or portion thereof where it is determined that, due to severe soil or topographical problems in the greater portion of the land, underground installation would be unreasonably costly and the use of overhead lines would not be detrimental to other property in the vicinity; 
3.  In any case in which it is determined that the use of overhead facilities is compatible with the surrounding development and is not inconsistent with the purposes of this title, underground lines as to all or a portion of a land division may be waived at the time of the approval of the tentative map. Application shall be made in writing by the land divider at the time of filing of the tentative map, stating fully the facts and grounds upon which the waiver is sought. 
E.  When arrangements are made with the serving agency, a letter stating that arrangements have been made for underground facilities and such other comments the agency may have regarding easements, utility locations and other pertinent matters must be submitted by the agency to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 547 §13.1, 1983) 
Chapter 16.56 - SECURITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS 

16.56.010 - Forms of security. 
    If the improvements are not completed prior to the approval of the final map, the land divider shall enter into an agreement with the City to complete the improvements and in connection therewith shall furnish the City improvement security in the amounts required by Section 16.56.040. Acceptable forms of security shall be limited to the following: 
A.  A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; 
B.  A deposit with the City of cash; 
C.  An irrevocable instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the State or Federal Government pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the agreements are on deposit, guaranteed for payment, and constitute a trust fund which is not subject to levy or attachment by any creditor of the depositor until released by the City; 
D.  An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a financial institution subject to regulation by the State or Federal Government guaranteeing that all or any portion of the funds available pursuant to the letter of credit will be paid upon the written demand of the City Engineer, and that such written demand need not present documentation of any type as a condition of payment, including proof of loss; 
E.  A recorded covenant with the City, if approved by the Planning Commission and City Council, to defer improvements until the City requires them to be completed. 
(Ord. 547 §14.1(A), 1983) 
16.56.020 - Execution requirements-Bonds. 
    The agreement and the improvement security shall be executed only upon forms and terms approved by the Council and shall be checked by the City Engineer. If bonds are to be used they shall substantially be in the form provided for in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 547 §14.1(B), 1983) 
16.56.030 - Period of agreement and security-Additional agreements may be required. 
    The original period of the agreement and security shall be 12 months. If a written request for an extension of time is filed with the City Clerk prior to the expiration of the initial 12-month period, or any granted extension, the Council may grant extensions for additional one-year periods. Such extensions may be granted only at the request of the landowner and after a showing that, if construction of improvements has commenced, reasonable progress is being made toward completion of the required improvements, or, if construction has not been commenced, the additional security has been furnished to cover the increased cost of construction of the improvements. In addition to the above requirements, and as a further condition to granting an extension of time, the Council may require additional agreements or security be furnished as are necessary to guarantee the completion of the improvements. 
(Ord. 547 §14.1(C), 1983) 
16.56.040 - Security to guarantee performance-Amount. 
A.  Security to guarantee the performance of any act or agreement shall be in the following amounts: 
1.  One hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or of the act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement; 
2.  0.50 percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or the performance of the required act, securing payment to the contractor, his subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act; 
3.  Ten percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or the performance of the required act for the guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished. 
B.  As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the face amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City in successfully enforcing any obligation, all to be taxed as costs and included in any judgment. 
(Ord. 547 §14.1(D), 1983) 
16.56.050 - Form of release-Exception. 
A.  The security may be released, in whole or in part, in the following manner: 
1.  The security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the performance of the act and final completion and acceptance of the required work. A maximum of three partial releases of the security may be granted by written order of the City Engineer upon a determination by the City Engineer of the acceptable work that has been completed and the amount of security that is necessary to guarantee the completion of the remaining improvements. Requests for partial releases, setting forth in detail the amount of work completed, shall be made in writing to the City Engineer; 
2.  Security securing the payment to the contractor, his subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, six months after the performance of the act or the completion and acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount not less than the total of all claims on which an action has been filed and notice thereof given in writing to the Council, and, if no such actions have been filed, the security may be released in full; 
3.  The release of such security shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty period, nor to the amount of the security given for such guarantee and warranty period, nor to costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
B.  In any case where the performance of the obligation for which the security is required is subject to the approval of another agency, the security shall not be released until the obligation is performed to the satisfaction of such other agency. The City shall notify the serving agency in writing and such agency shall have two months after completion of the performance of the obligation to register its satisfaction or dissatisfaction. If at the end of that period it has not registered its satisfaction or dissatisfaction, it shall be conclusively deemed that the performance of the obligation was done to its satisfaction. 
(Ord. 547 §14.1(E, F), 1983) 
16.56.060 - Liability upon security. 
    The liability upon the security given for the faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be limited to: 
A.  The performance of the work covered by the agreement between the subdivider and the Council for the performance of the required act; 
B.  The performance of any changes or alterations in such work; provided, that all such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement; 
C.  The guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished in the performance of the agreement or the performance of the act; 
D.  Costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. 547 §14.1(G), 1983) 
16.56.070 - Requirements for cash bond. 
    If the estimated cost of completing the street/drainage improvements, water system improvements, sewer system improvements or the setting of the monuments, is $5,000.00 or less, a cash bond shall be required for that specific improvements. A cash bond shall also be required to guarantee the payment of taxes of $2,500.00, or less, which at the time of filing the map are a lien against the real property, but not yet payable. 
(Ord. 547 §14.1(H), 1983) 
16.56.080 - City Engineer duties. 
    The City Engineer is authorized to release or reduce the security in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 547 §14.1(I), 1983) 
Chapter 16.60 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 

16.60.010 - Reversion. 
    Divided real property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. Reversion to acreage proceedings may be initiated by the City Council on its own motion, or by petition of all owners of record of real property that is proposed to be reverted to acreage. 
(Ord. 547 §15.1, 1983) 
16.60.020 - Procedures for filing. 
    To revert divided lands to acreage, a tentative map shall be filed as follows: 
A.  A tract number shall be obtained from the Road Commissioner upon payment of the fee, set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. 
B.  Fifteen copies of the tentative map shall be filed with the Planning Director, accompanied by the fee as set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. The fee shall be paid by the owners filing the tentative map, or, if the reversion to acreage is initiated by the Council upon request of the owners of the, property, the fee shall 'be paid by the person making the request to the Council. 
C.  The tentative map prepared in the form required by Chapter 16.20 shall show all relevant details of the land division proposed to be reverted, its relationship 'to existing sheets, dedications and adjoining lands, and configurations of the proposed reversion. 
D.  Proof of ownership of the real property proposed to be reverted to acreage shall be submitted with the tentative map. 
(Ord. 547 §15.2, 1983) 
16.60.030 - Review of tentative map. 
    The tentative map shall be distributed by the Planning Director to all interested and affected agencies and utilities. Thereafter, the tentative map shall be considered by the Land Division Committee, which committee shall report and recommend to the advisory agency. 
(Ord. 547 §15.3, 1983) 
16.60.040 - Consideration by the advisory agency. 
    The advisory agency shall consider the report and recommendation of the Land Division Committee on the tentative map, and shall forward a report and recommendation to the Council for approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the proposed reversion to acreage. A copy of the advisory agency report and recommendations shall be mailed to the applicant or the authorized agent. 
(Ord. 547 §15.4, 1983) 
16.60.050 - Consideration by the Council. 
A.  After receipt of the report and recommendations of the advisory agency, the Council shall set the matter for public hearing. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing before the Council, including a general description of the location of the property proposed to be reverted to acreage, shall be given at least ten days before the public hearing by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation that is published and circulated in the City. 
B.  Divided real property may be reverted to acreage only if the Council finds that: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the land division have consented to the reversion, or 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final land division map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later, or 
c.  No lots shown on the final land division map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. 
C.  The following shall be required as conditions to approval of a reversion: 
1.  Dedications necessary for a logical street pattern for access to any lands not proposed for reversion or as may be necessary for drainage or utilities; 
2.  Retention of all previously paid fees; 
3.  Retention of any necessary improvement security or deposit. 
(Ord. 547 §15.5, 1983) 
Chapter 16.61 - MERGER OF CONTIGUOUS PARCELS 

16.61.010 - Authority for merger of contiguous parcels. 
    Notwithstanding Section 16.08.190, except as is otherwise provided for in this Chapter, two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been created under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, or any prior law regulating the division of land, or a City ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, or which were not subject to those provisions at the time of their creation, shall not be deemed merged by virtue of the fact that the contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner, and no further proceeding under the provisions of this Chapter shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing of the contiguous parcels or units, or any of them. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.020 - Owner initiated mergers of contiguous lots or parcels. 
    The owner of any two or more contiguous lots may request a merger of said lots by filing with the Community Development Director an Application for Owner Initiated Merger and Waiver of Parcel Map, on a form provided by the Community Development Department in conformance with Section 16.64.010 of the Beaumont Municipal Code. The Application shall be processed and the request approved, disapproved and/or appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.64 (Lot Line Adjustments) of the Beaumont Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.030 - City initiated mergers of contiguous lots or parcels. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by Government Code Sections 66451.10 et seq., the Community Development Director shall, by taking the steps outlined in Section 16.61.040, initiate the process to merge into a single parcel any two or more contiguous parcels or units of land including those which have been created pursuant to this Ordinance, the Subdivision Map Act or prior law, Municipal, County or State, which are held by the same owner, prior to any land use approval pursuant to Beaumont Municipal Code Chapters 17.70, 17.80 and/or 17.90 or the issuance of any building permits if no land use approval is required, when the following requirements are satisfied: 
A.  Anyone or more of the following conditions apply: 
1.  Anyone of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards set forth in Title 17 for minimum parcel size; 
2.  One or more of the parcels or units is developed or will be developed with a single structure that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit; 
3.  Merger is required by the City as a condition of any land use approval or for the issuance of any permit; 
B.  At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit. 
C.  With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
1.  Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger. 
2.  Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation. 
3.  Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply. 
4.  Does not meet slope stability standards. 
5.  Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability. 
6.  Its development would create health or safety hazards. 
7.  Is inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot Size or density standards. 
D.  The contiguous lots were not created by the recording of a Final Map or Parcel Map approved by the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.040 - Notice of intention to determine status. 
    Prior to recording a notice of merger, the Community Development Director shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to standards specified in the merger ordinance, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for Record with the Riverside County Recorder on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.050 - Request for hearing on determination of status. 
    At any time within 30 days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the Community Development Director a request for a hearing on determination of status. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.060 - Hearing: Time, place, date; notification of owner and procedure. 
A.  Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status from the owner of the affected property pursuant to Section 16.61.050, the Community Development Director shall fix a time, date, and place for a hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission, and shall notify the property owner of that time, date, and place for the hearing by certified mail. 
B.  The hearing shall be conducted not more than 60 days following the Community Development Director's receipt of the property owner's request for the hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the Community Development Director and the property owner. 
C.  At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in Section 16.61.030. 
D.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination within ten days of the hearing. 
E.  A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided for in Section 16.61.030 within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing or within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing before the City Council if the Planning Commission decision is appealed pursuant to Section 16.61.100. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.070 - Failure to request hearing; determination and time of recordation. 
A.  If, within the 30-day period specified in Section 16.61.050, the owner does not file a request for a hearing in accordance with Section 16.61.060, the Planning Commission may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. 
B.  The determination shall appear as an item on the regularly noticed agenda of the Planning Commission without public hearing. 
C.  A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided for in Section 16.61.030 no later than 90 days following the mailing of notice required by Section 16.61.040. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.080 - Determination of non-merger discretionary. 
    A determination of non-merger may be made pursuant to Section 16.61.060 or 16.61.070 whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section 16.61.030. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.090 - Release of notice of intention to determine status. 
    If, in accordance with Section 16.61.060 or 16.61.070, the Planning Commission determines that the Subject property shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in Section 16.61.210 a release of the notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to Section 16.61.040, and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.100 - Appeals. 
    A determination made by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council following procedures outlined in Section 17.70.005(e). A determination on appeal by the City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.150 - Non-applicability. 
    The provisions of this Chapter relating to City initiated mergers shall not apply if one of the following conditions exist: 
A.  On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is enforceably restricted open-space land pursuant to a contract, agreement, scenic restriction, or open-space easement, as defined and set forth in Section 421 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is timberland as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 51104, or is land devoted to an agricultural use as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 51201. 
C.  On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of the site on which an existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or not the extraction is being made pursuant to a use permit issued by the local agency. 
D.  On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of a future commercial mineral extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction has been issued by the local agency. For purposes of paragraphs C and D of this subdivision, "mineral resource extraction" means gas, oil, hydrocarbon, gravel, or sand extraction, geothermal wells, or other similar commercial mining activity. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.200 - Time of determination of ownership. 
    For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner under this Chapter, ownership shall be determined as of the date that the notice of intention to determine status is recorded. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.210 - Notice of merger. 
    A merger of parcels becomes effective when the Community Development Director causes to be filed for Record with the Riverside County Recorder a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.220 - Forms and fees. 
    The Community Development Director is authorized and directed to prepare application and notice forms to implement the procedures of this Chapter and to determine a fee to be paid by the property owner for services rendered by the City in completing the procedures of this Chapter for each merger initiated, prior to initiation of the procedure. The fee may be waived if the City initiates the procedure and there has been no land use approval or building permit requested by the property owner. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
16.61.230 - Conflict with Government Code. 
    This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 3, Article 1.5 (Section 66451.10 et seq.), Section 66499.20-3/4 and Section 66412(d) of the Government Code. Any conflict between this Chapter and said provisions as amended, shall be resolved by conforming the procedures herein to those required by said provisions. 
(Ord. 677 §1, 1989) 
Chapter 16.64 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 

16.64.010 - Submission of application to Planning Director. 
    An application for a lot line adjustment shall be made to the Planning Director and shall be accompanied by the items as follows: 
A.  The application shall be made on a form provided by the Planning Department; 
B.  Copies of the current assessor's map page showing the involved parcels and delineating the proposed adjustment; 
C.  The fee set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office; 
D.  An application for a certificate of compliance as set forth in Section 16.68.020. 
(Ord. 547 §16.1(A), 1983) 
16.64.020 - Review and determination of application. 
    Upon receipt of completed application, the Planning Director shall review the matter and shall then submit the application to the Land Division Committee at one of its regular meetings for its report and recommendations. Within 50 days after receipt of the completed application, the Planning Director shall make a final determination as to whether or not the real property complies with the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, including the following requirements: 
A.  The adjustment involves adjacent parcels; 
B.  No new parcels are created; 
C.  The parcels involved are not reduced below the zoning development standards applicable to the land. 
(Ord. 547 §16.1(B), 1983) 
16.64.030 - Recordation of certificate of compliance. 
    The Planning Director shall cause the certificate of compliance to be recorded following the approval of the lot line adjustment. 
(Ord. 547 §16.1(C), 1983) 
16.64.040 - Appeal-Decision on appeal. 
    The applicant or any interested party may appeal the decision of the Planning Director on the action to the advisory agency within 15 days after the decision. The appeal shall be filed in the Planning Department, stating in writing the basis for the appeal and accompanied by the fee set forth in the ordinance codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office. All appeals shall be heard by the advisory agency on a date within 30 days after the date of the filing of the appeal. This is not a public hearing. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the advisory agency shall render its decision on the appeal within 20 days. 
(Ord. 547 § 16.1(D), 1983) 
Chapter 16.68 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

16.68.010 - Denial of permits. 
    No building permit, grading permit or any other permit or approval necessary to develop real property shall be granted or issued for any parcel of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title that were applicable at the time such division occurred, unless the Planning Director, as provided in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office, finds that development of such real property is not contrary to the public health, welfare or safety. A permit or approval shall be denied whether the applicant was the owner of the real property at the time of the violation or whether the applicant is the current owner of the real property with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of acquisition of the real property. Whenever a permit or approval is sought to develop such real property, the department from which the permit is sought shall notify the applicant that the permit cannot be granted because of the illegal division of land, and the Planning Director for a determination as to whether the development of the property would not be contrary to public health or safety and for the possible issuance of the certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. 547 §18.1, 1983) 
16.68.020 - Certificate of compliance. 
A.  Application. Any owner of real property, including owners denied a permit, may file an application for certificate of compliance. Application for a certificate shall be made to the Planning Director, accompanied by the fees set out in the ordinance, codified in this title, and on file in the City Clerk's Office, as follows: 
1.  A map shall be submitted, drawn on a form provided by the Planning Department. The map shall be legibly drawn, in ink, to an engineer's scale, with the scale shown on the map. It shall show the subject property with dimensions and the gross and net area, and it shall show the location, width and names of all streets and roads adjacent to land providing access to the property. 
2.  The map shall show the location and use of all structures on the property, with the distances from the structures to the parcel boundaries and distances between structures and all existing utilities and easements. 
3.  A small scale vicinity map shall be shown with distances (in feet or tenths of a mile) to the nearest street intersections. 
4.  The map shall show the name, address, telephone number and signature of the current owner of the property. 
5.  The map shall show the current zoning on the property and the current assessor's parcel number. 
6.  The application shall also include: 
a.  A legible copy of the current owner's grant deed or contract of sale; 
b.  A map and copies of deeds of all other property owned by the applicant that is contiguous to the subject real property. 
c.  Documentation of recorded access to the subject property unless abutting a public street. 
d.  A legal description for the subject property to be typed on plain white paper, eight and one-half inches by 11 inches, with one-inch margins at the top, sides and bottom. This legal description shall be reproducible so as to yield a legible copy that can be used as a part of a recorded certificate of compliance. 
e.  A lot book report that shows transactions of the subject property for the previous four years. 
B.  Processing. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Director shall review the matter and shall then submit the application to the Land Division Committee at one of its regular meetings for its report and recommendations. Within 50 days after receipt of the completed application, the Planning Director shall make a final determination as to whether or not the real property complies with the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, or whether the proposed development of the real property can be approved as not contrary to the public health, welfare and safety. 
C.  Issuance. 
1.  If the Planning Director determines that the real property was divided in compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title that were applicable at the time the property was divided, he shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the County Recorder. 
2.  If the Planning Director determines that the property was illegally divided, but that a proposed development may be approved as being not contrary to the public health, welfare or safety, he may issue a certificate of compliance, which certificate may be contingent upon the completion of specified conditions. The Planning Director may impose, as conditions, any requirements that would have been applicable to the division of property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. 
a.  When the Planning Director imposes conditions, he shall file for record with the County Recorder a conditional certificate of compliance. 
b.  The conditions may be fulfilled and implemented by the owner who has applied for the certificate of compliance or any subsequent owner. 
c.  Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for the development or use of the property is issued by the City unless the property is thereafter included as a part of a legal division of the property pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
d.  Upon completion of the conditions, the owner shall notify the Planning Director. If the conditions are satisfactorily completed, the Planning Director shall then issue and record a final certificate of compliance. 
D.  Ineligible. A person that has caused land to be illegally divided shall not be eligible to file for a certificate of compliance for such land, but shall, instead, be required to file an application for a land division pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
E.  Appeal to Planning Commission. The decision of the Planning Director regarding a certificate of compliance may be appealed to the Planning Commission within ten calendar days after the date of the decision by the Planning Director. Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the Planning Director shall set the matter for hearing before the Planning Commission, not less than 15 days nor more than 60 days thereafter, and shall give written notice of the hearing, by mail, to the appellant. The Planning Commission shall render its decision within 30 days following the close of the hearing on the appeal, and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the appellant. 
(Ord. 547 §18.2, 1983) 
16.68.030 - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the Planning Director has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or of this title, he shall cause to be filed for record with the County Recorder notice of intention to record a notice of violation, describing the real property in detail, naming the owners thereof, describing the violation and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence. Upon recording a notice of intention to record a violation, the Planning Director shall mail a copy of such notice, by certified mail, to the owner of such property. The notice shall specify a time, date and place at which the owner may present evidence to the advisory agency why such notice should not be recorded. If, after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, the Planning Director shall file a release of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation with the County Recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the advisory agency determines that the property has, in fact, been illegally divided, or if within 60 days of receipt by the owner of the involved real property of a copy of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation, the owner of the real property fails to inform the advisory agency as to why the involved real property has not been illegally divided, the advisory agency shall record the notice of violation with the County Recorder. The notice of intention to record a notice of violation and the notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. The County Recorder shall index the names of the fee owners in the general index. 
(Ord. 547 §18.3, 1983) 
16.68.040 - Prohibition. 
A.  No person shall offer to sell, or lease, to contract to sell, or lease, to sell or lease, or to finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereof, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final subdivision map is required by this title, except model homes, until such map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this title, has been filed for record by the Recorder. 
B.  No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final parcel map is required by this title, except model homes, until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this title has been filed for record by the Recorder. 
C.  Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final subdivision or parcel map is required by this title, shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation until such map has been filed for record by the Recorder. 
D.  This section does not apply to any parcel or parcel of a division offered for sale, lease, or finance, contracted for sale, lease or finance, sold, leased or financed in compliance with or exempt from this title at the time the land division was established. 
E.  Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, ease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final subdivision map or parcel map, as required under this division. 
F.  Nothing in this section shall in any way modify or affect the provisions of Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 547 §18.4, 1983) 
16.68.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 547 §18.5, 1983) 
16.68.060 - Cumulative penalties. 
    All remedies provided for in this title shall be cumulative and not exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person under this title shall not relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions or removing prohibited buildings, structures or improvements, nor prevent the enforced correction or removal thereof. 
(Ord. 547 §18.6, 1983) 
TITLE 17 - ZONING 
Chapter 17.01 - INTRODUCTION 

17.01.010 - Title and authority. 
    This Title (Title 17) shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Beaumont and may also be referred to hereinafter as the Zoning Ordinance. This Zoning Ordinance was adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the Constitution of the State of California and was prepared in compliance with the requirements of Title 7 of the Government Code. This Zoning Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority vested in the City of Beaumont by the State of California Constitution, the State of California Planning, Zoning, and Development Laws (Government Code Sections 65000 et. seq.), the State of California Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66510 et. seq.), and the State of California Health and Safety Code. The City of Beaumont Zoning Ordinance consists of the following: 
A.  Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance establishes zoning districts (also referred to as zones) that govern the use of land, indicates standards for structures and improvements that are permitted within the various zones, and establishes procedures for the granting of permits and entitlements. 
B.  Zoning Map. The zoning map delineates the boundaries of the zoning districts that are applicable to specific properties within the City. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.01.020 - Purpose and scope. 
    The primary purpose of this Zoning Ordinance is to serve the public's health, safety, and general welfare through the promotion of compatible land uses. Additional objectives of this Zoning Ordinance include the establishment of development standards related to health and safety, the protection and enhancement of the environment, the maintenance of property values, and the enhancement of the City's appearance. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.01.030 - Applicability, interpretation, and severability. 
    All City departments, officials, and public employees vested with the authority to issue permits or licenses, must comply with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. No license or permit for uses or structures that would be in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance shall be issued or otherwise permitted. The following will apply in the interpretation of certain provisions of this Zoning Ordinance: 
A.  Uncertainty in Interpretation. Where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance, or its application to a specific case or situation, the Planning Director is authorized to interpret the intent of the provision in question. Thereafter, the Planning Director's interpretation shall apply in all similar situations, unless modified by the Planning Commission or City Council, on appeal. 
B.  Abrogation of Other Regulations. No provision of this Zoning Ordinance is intended to abrogate or interfere with any deed restriction, covenant, easement, or other legal agreement or any such agreements that are more restrictive than those provisions contained within this Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Preemption. In those instances where this Zoning Ordinance imposes greater restriction than that required by an existing regulation, this Zoning Ordinance will preempt the existing regulation. The following rules that govern the preemption of any existing code(s) and regulation(s), shall apply: 
1.  The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be interpreted to repeal, amend, modify, alter, or change any other code or regulation that was not specifically repealed, amended, modified, altered, or changed. 
2.  Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be interpreted to authorize the use of a lot or parcel in any manner that is in violation of any other applicable statute, code, or regulation. 
3.  Whenever the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are different from the provisions of any other ordinance, regulation, adopted code, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
4.  The rights granted by any permit, license, or other approval under any ordinance repealed by this Zoning Ordinance will be permitted to continue. In the future, to the extent permitted by law, such rights shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this Title. 
D.  Severability of this Zoning Ordinance. This Zoning Ordinance is severable in the event that any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause is found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid. In such instances, the remainder of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be affected. 
E.  Limitations of Land Use. Except as provided in this title, no building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose except as that specifically permitted in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.01.040 - Authentication. 
    This Zoning Ordinance shall take effect within 30 days from its adoption by the City Council. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.01.050 - Reserved. 
Chapter 17.02 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

17.02.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    The purpose of Chapter 17.02 is to outline those activities and/or procedures that will implement this Zoning Ordinance. The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to accomplish the following: 
A.  To identify each reviewing and approval authority within the City of Beaumont along with their powers, duties, and related information; 
B.  To identify the steps necessary to obtain the requisite City approvals related to land use and development; 
C.  To establish and identify the procedures for filing applications for permits and other approvals; and, 
D.  To establish and identify the appeal process. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.020 - Planning Director duties and responsibilities. 
    The Planning Director shall be responsible for the enforcement of the Zoning Code, and shall have the authority to undertake the activities and duties indicated in this section. 
A.  The Planning Director shall administer the Zoning Ordinance; 
B.  The Planning Director shall consider and approve administrative plot plan applications which are in conformance with applicable zoning standards and which do not require a public hearing; 
C.  The Planning Director shall review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission and the City Council on planning applications, land use and planning issues, or other activities as may be directed by the City Council, the Planning Commission, or the City Manager; 
D.  The Planning Director shall assist applicants in the submittal of development applications; and, 
E.  The Planning Director shall review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council on all applications and any attendant approvals and environmental documents. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.030 - Planning Commission duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties of the Planning Commission are outlined in this section. 
A.  The Planning Commission shall instruct the Planning Director to exercise administrative duties where applicable; 
B.  The Planning Commission shall conduct public hearings to consider and make recommendations to the City Council regarding general plan amendments, zone changes, zone variances, and specific plans; 
C.  The Planning Commission shall conduct public hearing to recommend approval (to the City Council) of all the tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps; 
D.  The Planning Commission shall consider the appeals of determinations made by the Planning Director regarding site plan reviews, signage plans, and temporary use permits; and, 
E.  The Planning Commission shall conduct public hearings to approve plot plans, variances and conditional use permits. 
Table 17.02-1 identifies the permits and approvals that may be necessary as required by this Zoning Code, as well as approving authority and appeal body. 
Table 17.02-1
Permit Approval Matrix Application Staff Planning Commission City
Council Conditional Use Permit Review Approval Appeal Final Map Review - Approval General Plan Amendment Review Recommendation Approval Lot Line Adjustment & Parcel Merger Approval Appeal Appeal Administrative Plot Plan Review Approval Appeal Appeal Plot Plan (without EIR) Review Approval Appeal Plot Plan (with EIR) Review Approval Appeal Sign Plans Approval Appeal Appeal Modification of Standards Approval Appeal Appeal Specific Plan Review Recommendation Approval Temporary Use Permit Approval Appeal Appeal Tentative Parcel Map Review Recommendation Approval Tentative Tract Map Review Recommendation Approval Variance Review Approval Appeal Zone Change Review Recommendation Approval Zoning Ordinance Review Recommendation Approval  
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.040 - Application process. 
    Applications for permits, permit modifications, amendments, and other matters pertaining to the Zoning Code, shall be filed with the Planning Department on the appropriate City application form. The following procedures apply to the granting of a development application: 
A.  Submittal Information. All plans, and any other information required by the Planning Department shall be submitted with the application form. Applications shall be completed by the owner(s) of properties, their agents, or other persons who have written authority from the property owner(s) to complete and file the application on the owner's behalf. Any person or authorized representative desiring a permit or approval required by this Title, shall file an application with the Planning Director or the designee on forms provided by the Planning Director. 
B.  Pre-application Meeting. Prior to the filing of an application for any discretionary permit requiring approval by the Planning Commission or City Council, the applicant may request a pre-application conference with the Planning Director or the designee. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to advise the applicant of the development regulations applicable to the property for which the application is being filed and to review any preliminary site plan or other development plans the applicant may have prepared. 
C.  Application is Deemed Completed. No application shall be processed until it is deemed complete by the Planning Director or the designee. No application shall be deemed complete until all required information is provided in the required quantity and format. 
E.  Concurrent Applications. Whenever more than one permit or approval is required for a proposed Project or use, all applications shall be filed and processed concurrently. All such related applications will be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth for the application requiring the highest level of review. 
F.  Application Fees. Each applicant for a land use action authorized by this Zoning Ordinance shall pay those fees and costs as established by resolution of the City Council. 
G.  Re-submittal of Application. Whenever an application or portion of an application has been denied or revoked and the denial or revocation becomes final, no new application for the same or similar request may be accepted within one year of the date of the denial, unless the Planning Director finds that the conditions surrounding the application have sufficiently changed to warrant a new application. Changed conditions shall mean a substantial change in land use on properties in the vicinity, improved infrastructure in the vicinity, altered traffic patterns, or any such similar change resulting in a changed physical environment. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.050 - Public hearings. 
    For applications requiring a public hearing, upon accepting an application as complete, the Planning Director shall establish the time and place of the public hearing consistent with the requirements of this Section. The City Council shall have the authority to change the time or place of a hearing. The hearing body for any given matter shall be determined based upon the nature and type of permit as set forth in this Zoning Ordinance. However, in all cases, the hearing shall be held within 30 days of the date on which the application has been accepted as complete, unless a longer time period is required to accommodate the requisite environmental review under the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.051 - Public hearings, noticing. 
    The procedures for the noticing of public hearings are indicated in this section. 
A.  Newspaper Publication. The notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing, or as prescribed in the California Environmental Quality Act where relevant. The notice shall include the time, place, and identity of the hearing body or officer, the nature of the application, the application number, and the location of the property under consideration. 
B.  Notice to Surrounding Properties. Notice shall be given to all owners of property located within the designated radius of the exterior boundaries of the subject property pursuant to the requirements of the State of California Planning and Zoning Development Law. 
C.  Additional Notice. Additional notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with procedures established by the Planning Commission and as may be required under the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.052 - Public hearing, evidence of noticing. 
    When notice of a public hearing is given, the documentation indicated in this section shall be deemed sufficient to serve as proof that such notice was given. 
A.  Affidavit of Publication Required. When notice is given by publication, an affidavit of publication by the newspaper in which the publication was made is required. 
B.  Affidavit of Mail Delivery Required. When notice is given by mail or other delivery, an affidavit or proof of mailing/delivery must be made, showing, at a minimum, the date or dates of mailing/delivery and the list of persons and groups to which the mailing/delivery was made. 
C.  Failure to Comply. Failure to send notice to any property owner whose address is not on the most recent roll of the Riverside County Assessor shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.053 - Public hearing, procedures. 
    The conduct of the public hearing(s) must include the following elements identified in this section. 
A.  Discretionary Review. At the public hearing, the authorized hearing body shall review the application and any pertinent materials submitted with the application, and any report prepared by the Planning Director or his designee based on City staff's investigation of the application. 
B.  The Applicant's Rights at Public Hearing. During any public hearing, the applicant for the application shall have the right to be represented to provide testimony and to present evidence. 
C.  The Public's Rights at Public Hearing. All other persons shall have the right to comment on any relevant aspect of the application under consideration. 
D.  Discretionary Action. Following the completion of testimony at a public hearing, action shall be taken to approve, conditionally approve, deny, continue, or take under advisement, the subject of the public hearing. 
E.  Continuation of Public Hearing. If the action is taken to continue the item being considered or to take the matter under advisement, before adjournment or recess, the person presiding at the public hearing shall publicly announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued. No further notice shall be required. 
F.  Final Decision. The decision of the hearing body shall be considered final unless a decision is appealed. In all cases, the City Council shall represent the final authority. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.060 - Appeals and revocations. 
    An applicant is afforded the right to appeal and decision made by the Planning Director and/or the Planning Commission. The appeals procedures are indicated in this section. 
A.  Appeal of Planning Director's Decision. Decisions of the Planning Director, authorized by this Zoning Ordinance, may be appealed to the Planning Commission. All such appeals shall be filed in writing with the Secretary of the Planning Commission. 
B.  Appeal of Planning Commission Decision. All actions and decisions of the Planning Commission, authorized by this Zoning Ordinance, may be appealed to the City Council. All such appeals shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk. 
C.  Persons Eligible to File an Appeal. Any person may appeal a decision or action of the Planning Director or Planning Commission, in accordance with the terms of this Zoning Ordinance. 
D.  Time Limit for Filing an Appeal. All appeals must be filed within 15 calendar days of the date of the rendering of the decision. If the 15th day occurs on a holiday or weekend, the appeal period shall be extended to the next City workday. No appeal shall be accepted after the appeal period has expired. 
E.  Appeals Form. All appeals must be submitted in writing on the appropriate form provided by the City. The appeal must specifically state the grounds for the appeal and instances in which the review body erred in reaching the particular determination subject to the appeal. 
F.  Payment of Fees. A fee shall be paid concurrent with filing of the appeal in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of the City Council. 
G.  Scheduling of Public Hearing. Within 15 days upon receipt of an appeal, the Planning Commission Secretary (in the case of an appeal of a Planning Director decision) or the City Clerk (in the case of an appeal of a decision by the Planning Commission) shall set the matter for public hearing. The hearing shall be noticed as provided for in Section 17.42. 
H.  Findings. All actions to affirm, reverse, or modify in whole or part any decision of the Planning Director or Planning Commission shall be made with supporting findings for the affirmation, reversal, or modification. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.061 - Revocations and right of revocation. 
    Upon determination that there has been a violation of the terms or conditions of any permit or approval granted under this Zoning Ordinance; or if a determination is made that a permit or approval was obtained by deception or fraud, or represents a public nuisance; or the use subject to the approval no longer exists; or the permit or approval has not been activated in accordance with the terms of this Title 17, the Planning Director shall have the authority to initiate revocation proceedings. 
A.  Public Hearing Required for Revocation. The Planning Director shall schedule a hearing before the Planning Commission for the purpose of considering revocation of the permit or approval. In the case where the Planning Commission's original action consisted of a recommendation to the City Council, the Planning Commission's action on the revocation shall also consist of a recommendation to the City Council, and the City Council shall have the authority to revoke the permit or approval. 
B.  Written Notice to Permittee. At least 30 days prior to the revocation hearing, the permittee (the owner of the property, use, or business subject to the revocation) subject to the revocation hearing shall be given written notice of the City's intent to conduct the hearing. The notice to the permittee shall be served either in person or by registered mail, return receipt requested. 
C.  Public Notice. At least ten days prior to the revocation hearing, public notice of the hearing shall be given in the same manner as was required for the original permit or approval. 
D.  Evidence in Support of Motion. At the hearing, the Planning Director shall present evidence supporting the motion for the revocation of the permit or approval. The permittee shall be given the opportunity to present reasons why the permit or approval shall not be revoked. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.070 - Plot plans. 
    A plot plan permit shall be required of any party proposing to establish a new land use, or to assume an existing use, consistent with the zoning of the proposed location of the use, prior to the use and occupancy of any property for such land use. The purpose of a plot plan permit is to implement the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and to protect the character and integrity of residential, commercial and industrial areas in the City. Plot plan applications shall be processed by the Planning Director and shall entail a review of the configuration, design, location and impact of the proposed use by comparing the use to established standards and design guidelines in order to determine whether the permit should be approved. The Planning Director is empowered to grant and deny administrative plot plan applications for projects which entail use and occupancy of existing facilities and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of such permits. The Planning Commission is empowered to grant and deny plot plan applications for projects, and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of such permits. 
A.  Providing Proof of Vested Interest. Any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application may initiate an application for a plot plan permit. The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested interest may also initiate an application. The Planning Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to acceptance of any application. 
B.  Type of Plot Plan Application. The Planning Director shall determine the type and scope of application required of any applicant for a proposed use. 
1.  An administrative plot plan application, not requiring a public hearing, shall be required for the following: 
a.  Occupancy or assumption of an existing use or business which conforms to this Zoning Ordinance. 
b.  Site plans for a single family dwelling unit on an existing legal lot and other residential projects with two to four dwelling units on one legal lot. 
c.  Development plans that are exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act. 
d.  Model home complexes and temporary real estate sales offices used exclusively for the first sales of homes. 
2.  A plot plan application, requiring a public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission, shall be required for the following: 
a.  Any use which is subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
b.  Any use which exceeds the limitations applicable to the administrative plot plan application process, as set forth in this Zoning Ordinance (Section 17.02.070(B)1). 
C.  Filing of Application. The application shall be filed pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance (Section 17.02.040). 
D.  Review of Application by Planning Director. The Planning Director or his designee shall investigate the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate. For administrative plot plan applications, the Planning Director shall render a decision in writing without notice or hearing. For plot plan applications, the Planning Director or his designee shall prepare a report outlining facts and a recommendation relating to the application. The report shall be provided to the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing on the application. 
E.  Planning Commission Public Hearing. For plot plans acted upon in accordance with Section 17.02.070(B), a public hearing of the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance (Section 17.02.051). At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and receive evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated and maintained, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in Subsection I of this section (Required Findings). 
F.  Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning Commission shall become effective immediately upon its rendering, unless an appeal is filed pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance (Section 17.02.060 Appeals and Revocations). 
G.  Findings of Approval. The Planning Commission may approve and/or modify a plot plan permit in whole or part, with or without conditions, provided that all of the following findings of fact are made: 
1.  The proposed use is permitted, or is substantially similar to a use permitted, within the subject zone and complies with the intent of all applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance; 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs of the general plan and any applicable specific plans; 
3.  The subject site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of the proposed land use; 
4.  The location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed use is compatible with existing land uses within the general area in which the proposed use is located; 
5.  There are adequate provisions for public access, water, sanitation, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed land use would not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, safety or general welfare; 
6.  The approval of the plot plan permit for the proposed use is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act and there would be no significant adverse impacts upon environmental quality and natural resources that cannot be reasonably mitigated and monitored. 
H.  Imposition of Conditions of Approval. In granting a permit, the Planning Director or Planning Commission may impose such conditions as deemed necessary to ensure that the public health, safety and general welfare are protected and that the proposed use is not a detriment to the community. All conditions shall be binding upon the applicant, heirs, successors, or assignees. 
I.  Plot Plan Time Limits. The grantee of a plot plan permit shall have one year from the effective date of the permit to establish a right to use the permit; otherwise, the plot plan permit shall lapse and become void. For the purposes of this section, such a right shall be established if either: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction commenced and diligently pursued towards completion of the project. 
2.  In the event that no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy and/or business license has been issued for the use. 
J.  Plot Plan Lapse in Time. A plot plan permit subject to lapse may be renewed up to one additional year, provided that the applicant files an application for renewal with the Planning Director prior to the expiration date, and subject to consideration in a public hearing. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.080 - Zone changes. 
    In recognition of that fact that physical, economic, and other conditions in the City may change over time, provisions are hereby made to allow for amendments to the zoning map and Zoning Ordinance text in accordance with the procedures outlined in this Section. All such changes of zone or zoning ordinance text amendments shall be adopted in the manner in which other City ordinances are adopted. 
A.  Providing Proof of Vested Interest. Any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application may initiate applications for a change of zone or zoning ordinance text amendment. The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested interest may also initiate an application. The Planning Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance of any application. 
B.  Zone Changes for Properties Under Multiple Ownership. In the case of a change of zone application, if the property for which the change of zone is proposed is in more than one ownership, all owners or their authorized agents shall be required to sign the application. 
C.  City Council Initiated Zone Change. The City Council may initiate an application to change the boundaries of any zone district or to amend the text of the zoning ordinance. 
D.  Planning Commission Public Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter 17.02 (Sections 17.02.051 to 17.02.053). 
E.  Recommendation of Zone Change by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the proposed application. The Commission's recommendation shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the matter for consideration by the City Council. 
F.  Denial of Zone Change by Planning Commission. Upon receipt of a Planning Commission recommendation for denial of a change of zone, the City Clerk shall place the Commission's recommendation on the City Council agenda as a receive-and-file item. The Commission's decision shall be considered final and no further action by the Council will be required unless an appeal is filed in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance (17.02.060, Appeals), or unless the Council chooses to set the matter for hearing. 
G.  City Council Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution recommendation for approval of a change of zone or zoning ordinance amendment, or denial of a zoning ordinance text amendment, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City. At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Commission's recommendation and receive evidence as to how or why the proposed change of zone or zoning ordinance text amendment is consistent with the objectives of this Zoning Ordinance, the City of Beaumont General Plan, and development policies of the City. The City Council shall act to approve or deny the application by resolution. 
H.  Referral of Matter Back to the Planning Commission. If the Council proposes any substantial modification to the application not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the Council shall refer the matter back to the Commission for consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the Commission to act within 40 days of receiving the Council's request shall provide the Council with authority to act without the Commission's recommendation. 
I.  Approval of Zone Change by City Council. The City Council shall be required to make the following findings of fact before approving a change of zone or zoning ordinance text amendment: 
1.  That the proposed change of zone or zoning ordinance text amendment is consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan; and 
2.  That the proposed change of zone or zoning ordinance text amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties; and 
3.  That the proposed change of zone or zoning ordinance text amendment promotes public health, safety, and general welfare and serves the goals and purposes of this zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.090 - General plan amendments. 
    This Section is established pursuant to Section 65358 of the California Government Code, to allow for the amendment of the City of Beaumont General Plan. 
A.  Providing Proof of Vested Interest. Applications to amend the General Plan text or maps may be initiated by any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application. The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested interest may also initiate an application. The Planning Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to apply, prior to the acceptance of any application. 
B.  General Plan Amendments for Properties Under Multiple Ownership. In the case of a proposed amendment to the General Plan land use policy map, if the property for which the amendment is proposed is in more than one ownership, all owners or their authorized agents shall be required to sign the application. 
C.  City Council Initiated General Plan Amendment. The Planning Director and/or City Council may initiate an application to amend the General Plan. 
D.  Planning Commission Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.02.051. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the proposed General Plan amendment is consistent with the objectives of this Title 17, the balance of the General Plan, and development policies of the City. 
E.  Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act to recommend to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the proposed application. A majority vote of the entire Planning Commission is required to recommend approval or approval with modifications. The Planning Commission's action shall include its recommendation and shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the matter for public hearing before the City Council. 
[F.  Reserved. ] 
G.  City Council Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council as provided for in Section 17.42 (Public Hearings). At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Commission's recommendation and may receive evidence as to how or why the proposed General Plan amendment is consistent with the objectives of this Zoning Ordinance, the balance of the General Plan, and development policies of the City. 
H.  City Council Action. The City Council shall act to approve or deny the application. A majority vote of the entire Council is required to amend the General Plan. The City Council's action to amend the General Plan shall be by formal resolution. 
I.  Referral of General Amendment to the Planning Commission. If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to the application not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Commission for consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 40 days of receiving the City Council's request shall provide the City Council with authority to act without the Planning Commission's recommendation. 
J.  Required Findings. Prior to approving a General Plan amendment, the City Council shall make the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed amendment is in the public interest, and that there will be a community benefit resulting from the amendment; 
2.  That the proposed amendment is consistent with the other goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan; 
3.  That the proposed amendment will not conflict with provisions of the zoning ordinance or subdivision regulations; and 
4.  In the event that the proposed amendment is a change to the land use policy map, that the amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.100 - Conditional use permits. 
    The City recognizes that certain uses, due to the nature of use, intensity, or size, require special review to determine if the use proposed, or the location of that use, is compatible with surrounding uses, or through the imposition of development and use conditions, can be made compatible with surrounding uses. The conditional use permit is provided for this purpose. The Planning Commission is empowered to grant and deny applications for conditional use permits and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of such permit. 
A.  Providing Proof of Vested Interest. Any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application may initiate an application for a conditional use permit. The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested interest may also initiate an application. Planning Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance of any application. 
B.  Scope of Application. Applications for conditional use permits may be submitted only for those uses specified as allowable conditional uses in the applicable zone district. A conditional use permit is not a substitute for a change of zone or zoning ordinance text amendment. 
C.  Filing of Application. The application shall be filed pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance (Section 17.02.040). 
D.  Review of Application by Planning Director. The Planning Director or his designee, shall investigate the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and a recommendation relating to the application. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing on the application. 
E.  Planning Commission Public Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance (Section 17.02.051). At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and receive evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in subsection G of this section (Required Findings). 
F.  Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning Commission shall become effective immediately upon its rendering, unless an appeal is filed pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance (Section 17.02.060 Appeals and Revocations). 
G.  Findings of Approval. The Planning Commission may approve and/or modify a conditional use permit in whole or in part, with or without conditions, provided that all of the following findings of fact are made: 
1.  The proposed use is one conditionally permitted within the subject zone and complies with the intent of all applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance; 
2.  The proposed use would not impair the integrity and character of the zone in which it is to be located; 
3.  The subject site is physically suitable for the type of land use being proposed; 
4.  The proposed use is compatible with the land uses presently on the subject property; 
5.  The proposed use would be compatible with existing and future land uses within the zone and the general area in which the proposed use is to be located; 
6.  There would be adequate provisions for water, sanitation, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed use would not be detrimental to public health and safety; 
7.  There would be adequate provisions for public access to serve the subject proposal; 
8.  The proposed use is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses, and programs of the City of Beaumont General Plan; 
9.  The proposed use would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare; and 
10.  The proposed design and elevations preserve and maximize the image, character, and visual quality of the neighborhood. 
11.  The Planning Commission shall find that the proposed use does not have a disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effect on minority and low-income populations. 
12.  This subsection G shall apply only to the uses identified in Chapter 17.03. This subsection shall not invalidate any conditional use permit for an operating facility, but shall be complied with prior to issuance of a building permit for all projects for which no building permit has been issued upon the effective date of this provision. 
H.  Imposition of Conditions of Approval. The following provisions shall apply with respect to the imposition of conditions of approval: 
1.  In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the public health, safety, and general welfare are protected and that the proposed operation is not a detriment to the community. 
2.  All conditions shall be binding upon the applicant, heirs, successors, or assignees and shall restrict the construction, location, maintenance, and use of all land within the development. 
3.  A deed restriction may be recorded with the County Recorder of Riverside County, as approved by the City Attorney, regarding the conditions of this section and other requirements of the conditional use permit. 
I.  Conditional Use Permit, Attachment, Suspension, and Revocation. A conditional use permit that is valid and in effect and granted pursuant to the provisions of this Title 17 shall be valid only on the property for which it was granted and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the property or any lawfully existing building or structure on the property. The Planning Director shall have the authority to initiate proceedings to suspend or revoke a conditional use permit pursuant to provisions set forth in Section 17.02.61. 
J.  Conditional Use Permit Time Limits. The grantee of a conditional use permit shall have one year from the effective date of the permit to establish a right to use the permit; otherwise, the conditional use permit shall lapse and become void. For the purposes of this section, such a right shall be established if either: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which the conditional use permit was approved; or 
2.  In the event no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure for which the conditional use permit was approved; or 
3.  In the event no building permit or occupancy is required, the site for which the conditional use permit was approved is occupied and used for the permitted purpose; or 
4.  Prior to the date on which the conditional use permit will elapse, the grantee files an application to renew the permit pursuant to subsection K below. 
K.  Conditional Use Permit Lapse in Time. A conditional use permit subject to lapse may be renewed up to an additional one-year period, provided that the application for renewal is filed with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be required. 
L.  Conditional Use Permit Renewal. The Planning Commission may grant or deny an application for renewal of a conditional use permit. As part of its action, the Commission may also modify existing conditions of approval or add new conditions to reflect any change in circumstances related to the conditional use permit and surrounding properties. 
M.  Lapsing in Conditional Use Permit. If any conditional use permit fails to be actively exercised for a continuous 180-day period, the permit shall lapse and become void. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.110 - Variances. 
    The variance procedure is provided pursuant to Section 65906 of the California Government Code to grant relief from zoning provisions when, because of special circumstances applicable to a property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of this zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under the identical zoning classification. 
A.  Limitations in Variances. Variances shall not be granted to authorize a use or activity on a property that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this zoning ordinance governing that property. A variance is not a substitute for a zone change, zone text amendment, or conditional use permit. Financial hardship in and of it does not represent grounds on which to file a variance application to gain relief from zoning provisions. 
B.  Providing Proof of Vested Interest. Any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application may initiate an application for a variance. The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested interest may also initiate an application. The Planning Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance of any application. 
C.  Notice of Public Hearing. An application shall be filed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.02.051. 
D.  Filing of Application. In addition to the application filing requirements established in this Zoning Ordinance, the applicant shall file a statement of the precise nature of the variance requested and the practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship that would result from the strict or literal interpretation of this ordinance, together with any other data pertinent to the application and the making of requisite findings (Section 17.02.040). 
E.  Review of Application by Planning Director. The Planning Director shall investigate the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and a recommendation relating to the application. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing on the application. 
F.  Public Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance (Section 17.02.051). At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and receive evidence concerning the proposed variance and the conditions which make compliance with specific provisions of this ordinance difficult. 
G.  Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning Commission shall become effective immediately upon its rendering, unless an appeal is filed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.02.060 (Appeals and Revocations). 
H.  Findings of Approval. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission must make all of the following findings: 
1.  That the strict or literal interpretation and application of this Zoning Ordinance would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the general purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance, or would deprive applicants of privileges granted to others in similar circumstances; and 
2.  That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved or the intended development of the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same zone; and 
3.  That the granting of such variance will not constitute the granting of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity classified in the same zone; and 
4.  That the granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare nor injurious to property or improvements in the zone or neighborhood in which the property is located; and 
5.  That the granting of such variance will not create any inconsistency with any objective contained in the General Plan. 
I.  Imposition of Conditions of Approval. A variance that is valid and in effect and granted pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be valid only on the property for which it was granted and only for the improvements for which it is granted and further, shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the property or any lawfully existing building or structure on the property. 
J.  Conditions of Approval will be Binding. The Planning Director shall have the authority to initiate proceedings to suspend or revoke a variance pursuant to provisions set forth in Section 17.02.61. 
K.  Time Limits. The grantee of a Variance shall have one year from the effective date of the approval to establish a right to use the approval; otherwise, the variance shall lapse and become void. For the purposes of this section, such a right shall be established if either: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which the variance was approved; or 
2.  In the event no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure for which the variance was approved; or 
3.  In the event no building permit or occupancy is required, the site for which the variance was approved is occupied; or 
4.  Prior to the date on which the variance will elapse, the grantee files an application to renew the permit pursuant to subsection L below. 
L.  A variance subject to lapse may be renewed up to an additional one-year period, provided that the application for renewal is filed with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date. 
M.  The Planning Commission may approve or deny an application for renewal of a variance. As part of its action, the Commission may also modify existing conditions of approval or add new conditions to reflect any change in circumstances related to the variance and surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.120 - Modification of standards. 
    The modification of standards procedure is established to grant minor relief from development standards, under limited circumstances, when the granting of such relief will provide for better design and function of the structure, or addition to a structure, proposed. 
A.  Use of Modification of Standards. An application for the purposes of this Section, a modification of standards application shall be filed whenever any one of the following deviations from the provisions of this Title 17 is proposed: 
1.  A decrease of not more than 20 percent of the minimum required setback area. 
2.  An increase of not more than ten percent of the maximum permitted building height. 
3.  Any deviation in the permitted maximum height or location of a fence or wall. 
4.  An increase of not more than ten percent of the maximum permitted lot coverage. 
5.  Modifications in excess of those cited in subparagraph A through D above shall require a variance. 
B.  Modification of Standards, Initiation. Any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application may initiate an application for a modification of standards. The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested interest may also initiate an application. The Planning Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance of any application. In addition to the application filing requirements, the applicant shall file a statement of the precise nature of the modification of standards requested and reasons for the request. 
C.  Planning Director Investigation. The Planning Director or the designee shall investigate the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and a recommendation relating to the application. The Planning Director may request written statements from adjoining property owners who may be affected by the proposed application. 
D.  Planning Director Action. Based on the investigation undertaken pursuant to C above, the Director or designee shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the modification of standards application. In granting a modification of standards, the Director or designee shall make findings of fact that establish the circumstances appropriate for the approval. Action on a modification of standards application shall be taken within ten days of the date the application is deemed complete. 
E.  Modification of Standards Findings. An application shall not be granted unless all of the following findings can be made: 
1.  A modification is needed to allow property to be used in a more beneficial manner; and 
2.  A modification would not be detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare or to surrounding property owners or the community; and 
3.  The granting the modification would not grant special privileges to the applicant not enjoyed by surrounding property owners; and 
4.  There are physical circumstances due to the shape or condition of the property which would result in hardship under existing regulations; and 
5.  The purpose of modification is not based exclusively on the financial advantage of the owner; and 
6.  The alleged difficulties were not created by the owner; and 
7.  The modification would not diminish property values in the area; 
8.  The modification would not increase traffic or endanger public safety; and, 
9.  The modification would not have detrimental effects on adjoining properties. 
F.  Modification of Standards, Attachment, Revocation, and Suspension. A modification of standards that is valid and in effect and granted pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be valid only on the property for which it was granted and only for the improvements for which it is granted and further, shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the property or any lawfully existing building or structure on the property. The Planning Director shall have the authority to initiate proceedings to suspend or revoke a modification of standards pursuant to provisions set forth in Section 17.02.61. 
G.  Modification of Standards, Time Limits. The grantee of a modification of standards shall have one year from the effective date of the approval to establish a right to use the approval; otherwise, the approval shall lapse and shall become void. For the purposes of this section, such a right shall be established if either: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which the modification of standards was approved; or 
2.  In the event no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure for which the modification of standards was approved; or 
3.  In the event no building permit or occupancy is required, the site for which the modification of standard was approved is occupied; or 
4.  Prior to the date on which the modification of standards will elapse, the grantee files an application to renew the permit pursuant to subsection 5 below. 
5.  A modification of standards approval subject to lapse may be renewed for an additional one-year period, provided that the application for renewal is filed with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date. 
H.  Approval or Denial of Application. The Planning Director may approve or deny an application for renewal of a modification of standards. As part of the action, the Director may also modify existing conditions of approval or add new conditions to reflect any change in circumstances related to the modification of standards and surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.130 - Enforcement. 
    This section outlines the procedures to ensure that the provisions of this Title are enforced. 
A.  Special Prosecutor Responsibilities. The Special Prosecutor, upon the request of the City Council, shall institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce this Zoning Ordinance (Title 17). The Special Prosecutor shall be authorized, in addition to any other remedy provided in this Zoning Ordinance to institute an action for an injunction to restrain or any other appropriate action or proceedings for enforcement. 
B.  Clarification of Ambiguity. If ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this Zoning Ordinance, or if ambiguity exists with respect to matters of height, yard requirements, area requirements, or zone boundaries as set forth herein, it shall be the duty of the Planning Director to ascertain all pertinent facts, and to set forth in writing the findings and the interpretations. The Director can refer the matter to the Planning Commission as a scheduled matter not requiring public hearing, and the findings and interpretations of the Planning Commission shall be set forth in the recorded minutes. Thereafter, such interpretations shall govern. 
C.  Enforcement and Penalty for Violation. The Planning Commission, the Planning Director, the City Attorney, the City Clerk, and all officials charged with the issuance of licenses or permits shall enforce the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Any permit, certificate, or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be void. 
D.  Actions Deemed a Nuisance. Any building or structure erected or maintained, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, subject to abatement pursuant to the City of Beaumont Municipal Code. 
E.  Remedies. All remedies concerning this Zoning Ordinance shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such persons from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions or removing prohibited buildings, structures, or improvements, and shall not prevent the enforced correction or removal thereof. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.02.140 - Reserved. 
Chapter 17.03 - ZONING MAP AND ZONE DISTRICTS 

17.03.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    The purpose of this Chapter 17.03 is to accomplish the following: 
 To implement the Community Development Element of the City of Beaumont General Plan and the Land Use Policy Map; 
 To identify and describe the land use designations delineated on the City of Beaumont Official Zoning Map; 
 To indicate the development standards for each of the Zone Districts; and 
 To identify the range of uses permitted within each Zone District. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.020 - Establishment of zone districts. 
    For the purpose of providing a uniform basis for this Zoning Ordinance, the following zone classifications may be applied to those parcels located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Beaumont: 
Recreation/Conservation Zone (R-C Zone) 
Residential, Rural Zone (R-R Zone) 
Residential, Single Family Zone (R-SF Zone) 
Residential, Multiple-Family Zone (R-MF) 
Commercial, General Zone (C-G Zone) 
Community Commercial Zone (C-C Zone) 
Manufacturing Zone (M Zone) 
Public Facilities Zone (P-F Zone) 
Overlay Zones (O Zone) 
Specific Plan (SP Zone) 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.030 - Zoning map. 
    The location and boundaries of the various zones are delineated on the zoning map of the City of Beaumont. All property within the City, public and private, is assigned a specific Zone designation and its location and extent is noted on the official zoning map. The use of all property must be in accordance with the Zoning designations delineated on the zoning map and pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Code. 
A.  Use of Zoning Map and Classifications. The requirements that are applicable to each Zone classification is specifically set forth in subsequent articles of this ordinance. 
B.  Uncertainty in Cartography. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Cartography. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following street lines, alley lines, or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
2.  Easements and Rights-of-Way. Dedicated streets, alleys, freeways, or railroad rights-of-way shall be deemed to be unclassified. 
3.  Vacated or Abandoned Property. If any public street, alley or other right-of-way is vacated or abandoned, the land formerly in such street, alley or right-of-way shall be included within the Zoning of the adjoining property on each side. 
4.  Amendments to the Official Zoning Map. Changes in boundaries of Zones shall be made by ordinance (as described in Section 17.02). All amendments to the zoning map shall be noted on the Map with the date of the amendment and references to the amending ordinance. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.040 - Recreation/Conservation Zone (R-C Zone). 
    The Recreation/Conservation Zone is intended to include and recognize the flowing uses: water course and watershed areas, public and private park lands, cemeteries, natural resource lands, wildlife preserves, and publicly owned dedicated scenic and open space areas. This Zone is also intended to provide for permanent open space in specific areas by limiting development in areas where natural hazards are present that might endanger the health, safety, and welfare of residents from possible flood, subsidence, erosion, or seismic activity. 
A.  Recreation/Conservation Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-1 of this Section. 
B.  Recreation/Conservation Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-1 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Recreation/Conservation Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Recreation/Conservation Zone (R-C Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. No minimum or maximum lot area standards are applicable to this Zone. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. All yards and other structural standards other than height shall be specified in connection with, and as a part of, the issuance of a plot plan or conditional use permit for structural development. 
3.  Building Height. In the RC Zone the maximum height of any building shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Recreation/Conservation Zone, Off Street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Recreation/Conservation Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Recreation/Conservation Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.050 - Residential, Rural Zone (RR Zone). 
    The Residential, Rural Zone (R-R Zone) is intended to provide for and encourage the development of agriculturally-oriented low density residential development to take advantage of the rural environment. 
A.  Residential, Rural Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. 
B.  Residential, Rural Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Residential, Rural Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Residential, Rural Zone (R-R Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. The Lot sizes shall not be less than 8,000 square feet with a minimum average lot depth of 100 feet, and a minimum lot width of 80 feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. Minimum yard requirements shall be 25 feet for the front yard, ten feet for the side yard, and 20 feet for the rear yard. 
3.  Building Height. In the R-R Zone the maximum height of any building shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Residential, Rural Zone, Off Street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Residential, Rural Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Residential, Rural Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.060 - Residential, Single-Family Zone (R-SF Zone). 
    The Residential, Single-Family Zone (R-SF Zone) is intended to protect established neighborhoods of one-family dwellings and to provide space in suitable locations for additional residential, single-family development. 
A.  Residential, Single-Family Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. 
B.  Residential, Single-Family Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Residential, Single-Family Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Residential, Single-Family Zone (R-SF Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. The minimum lot area for lots within this zone is 7,000 square feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. The following setback requirements are applicable to the Residential, Single-Family Zone (R-SF Zone): 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback is 20 feet for single level structures and 20 feet for two level structures. In no event shall a residence be situated in such a manner as to result in a distance of less than 20 feet between the back of a sidewalk and the face of a garage door. 
b.  Rear Yard Setbacks. The minimum rear yard setback for single level structures is 20 feet except for those interior lots that border on an alley. A minimum rear yard setback of five feet is permitted for an accessory structure used for enclosed parking. The minimum rear yard setback for a two level residential structures is 20 feet. 
c.  Side Yard Setbacks. Interior side yard setbacks shall not be less than five feet on each side except that on interior lots of 70 feet or greater in width, side yard setbacks shall be at least five feet in width on one side and ten feet in width on the other side. Two story residences shall have a ten foot side yard setback regardless of parcel width. Corner lots shall have a street side yard of at least ten feet from each side yard property line. 
d.  Setbacks for Accessory Structures. Accessory structures, including second and guest units (as may be permitted by this Ordinance), detached garages, outbuildings, sheds, gazebos, and patios, shall comply with the front and side setback regulations applicable to the R-SF Zone. Such structures may be located in the rear yard areas subject to the following limitations: 
1.  The height of any accessory structure shall not exceed the height of the principal residence on the site. 
2.  Single-story accessory structures shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the principal residential structure; two-story accessory structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the principal residential structure. 
3.  A minimum rear setback of ten feet shall be maintained for any accessory structure. 
4.  An accessory structure, or the total of all accessory Structures, shall in no event occupy more than 25 percent 
3.  Building Height. In the Residential, Single-Family Zone (R-SF Zone), the maximum height of any building shall not exceed 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less. 
Table 17.03-1
Setback (Yard) Requirements for Residential, Single-Family Zone
(RSF Zone) Yard Single Level Two-Level Front Yard 20 ft. 20 ft. Rear Yard 20 ft. for interior lots 
5 ft. for accessory structures used exclusively for parking 20 ft. Side Yard 5 ft. for interior lots <70 ft. in width 
10 ft. on one side and 5 ft. on the other side for interior lots >70 ft. in width 
10 ft. for corner lots (street side yard) 10 ft.  
D.  Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units are limited to one per single-family residence within a Single-Family Zone. 
1.  Detached Accessory Dwelling Units. Detached accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the main unit or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. The height of the accessory unit shall not exceed the height of the main unit. In addition, the detached accessory dwelling unit must be connected to sewer and shall be provided with individual sewer connections. Detached accessory dwelling units shall be detached from the main unit by a minimum distance of ten feet and shall have a minimum distance of 15 feet from the rear property line. Detached accessory dwelling units may be located in an existing structure, without consideration to setbacks. The detached accessory dwelling unit shall be located in such a fashion so that it is concealed from public view and shall have matching colors and materials as the main unit. The main unit must meet current requirements for parking prior to or in conjunction with the detached accessory dwelling unit approval. 
2.  Attached Accessory Dwelling Units. Attached accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the main unit or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. The height of the attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height of the main unit. Setbacks shall meet the requirements of the zone unless within an existing structure or unless the attached accessory dwelling unit is created from an existing living space in a single-family home. The attached accessory dwelling unit shall be located in such a fashion so that it is concealed from public view (specifically the entrance) and shall have matching colors and materials as the main unit. The main unit must meet current requirements for parking prior to or in conjunction with the attached accessory unit approval. 
3.  Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. Junior accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 500 square feet, shall consist of one bedroom and a limited kitchen, and have access to both interior access to the main unit and an exterior door. A junior accessory dwelling unit is not considered a separate dwelling unit. The height of the junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height of the main unit. Setbacks shall meet the requirements of the zone unless within an existing structure. The junior accessory dwelling unit kitchen may only have a wet bar or efficiency kitchen (a single basin sink with a maximum waste line diameter of 1.5 inches and cooking facility with appliances that can run on standard 120 volt outlets or natural or propane gas). The kitchen may include a small refrigerator (maximum of six cubic feet), microwave, and small cooktop (max two elements). 
The owner must occupy either the main unit or the junior accessory dwelling unit. Owner-occupancy shall not be required if the owner is another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization. 
The junior accessory dwelling unit shall be located in such a fashion so that it is concealed from public view so as not to look like a duplex. The entry to the junior accessory dwelling unit shall face the side- or back-yard area. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall have matching colors and materials as the main unit. The main unit must meet current requirements for parking prior to or in conjunction with the junior accessory dwelling unit approval. 
E.  Residential, Single-Family Zone, Off Street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
F.  Residential, Single-Family Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
G.  Residential, Single-Family Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007; Ord. No. 1017, April 17, 2012; Ord. No. 1080, § 4, 12-20-2016 
17.03.070 - Residential, Multiple-Family Zone (R-MF Zone). 
    The Residential, Multiple-Family Zone is intended to protect established medium density and high-density residential development in the City, and to facilitate further development of this land use type. This includes higher density housing that includes condominiums, town-homes, duplexes, patio apartments, senior housing and supporting ancillary facilities. 
A.  Residential, Multiple-Family Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. 
B.  Residential, Multiple-Family Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Residential, Multiple-Family Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Residential, Multiple-Family Zone (R-MF Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimensions. Lot sizes for the Residential, Multiple-Family Zone (R-MF Zone) shall not be less than 6,000 square feet with an average lot width of 60 feet and a minimum average lot depth of 100 feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. The following setback requirements are applicable to the Residential, Multiple-Family Zone (R-MF Zone): 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback is 25 feet. 
b.  Rear Yard Setbacks. The minimum rear yard setback 15 feet except for interior lots that border on an alley. A minimum rear yard setback of five feet is required for those parcels that have a garage abutting an alley. 
c.  Side Yard Setbacks. Interior side yard setbacks shall not be less than five feet on each side except that on interior lots of 70 feet or greater in width, side yard setbacks shall be at least ten feet in width on one side. Two story residences shall have a 15-foot side yard setback regardless of parcel width. Corner lots shall have a street side yard of at least 20 feet. 
Table 17.03-2
Setback (Yard) Requirements for Residential, Multiple-Family Zone
(RMF Zone) Yard Setback Requirement Two-Level Front Yard 25 ft. 25 ft. Rear Yard 15 ft. for interior lots 
5 ft. for accessory structures used exclusively for parking 20 ft. Side Yard 5 ft. for interior lots 
10 ft. for interior lots >70 ft. in width; 
10 ft. for corner lots 15 ft. 
20 ft. for corner lots  
3.  Building Area. When a single-family unit is constructed within an R-MF Zone, it shall have a minimum floor area of 1,100 square feet. When multiple units are to be constructed within the Residential, Multiple-Family Zone, the following rules shall apply to multiple family developments with two or more units located within a single lot: 
a.  Three bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 1,100 square feet. 
b.  Two-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 800 square feet. 
c.  One-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 600 square feet. 
d.  Studio (living area and bedroom combination) units shall have a minimum floor area of 500 square feet. 
4.  Minimum Distance Between Buildings. No two-story building shall be closer than 20 feet to any other primary building located within the same lot. No one-story building shall be any closer than ten feet to any other primary structure on the same lot. 
5.  Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit and Useable Yard Area (Open Space) Requirements. The minimum building area shall be 1,980 square feet or a maximum of density of 22 units per acre. The area occupied by all structures shall not exceed 70 percent of the lot area. This provision may be modified through the application of the City of Beaumont Affordable Housing Density Bonus (refer herein to Section 17.10). The following minimum useable open space standards are applicable to development within the Residential, Multiple-Family Zone: 
a.  Each Studio unit shall have a minimum of 200 square feet of usable open space. 
b.  Each one-bedroom unit shall have a minimum of 200 square feet of usable open space. 
c.  Each two-bedroom unit shall have a minimum of 300 square feet of usable open space. 
d.  For those units containing more than two-bedrooms, an additional 100 feet of usable open space beyond the two-bedroom requirements, will be required for every additional bedroom. 
e.  The definition of useable open space and the method of computation is provided herein in Section 17.12 (Definitions). 
6.  Building Height. In the Residential, Multiple-Family Zone (R-MF Zone), the maximum height of any building shall not exceed 35 feet. This height requirement may be modified with a density bonus provision (refer to Chapter 17.10). 
D.  Residential, Multiple-Family Zone, Off street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Residential, Multiple-Family Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Residential, Multiple-Family, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
G.  Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units are limited to one per lot with a single-family residence within the Multiple-Family Zone. 
1.  Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit. Detached accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the main unit or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. The height of the detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height of the main unit. In addition, the detached accessory dwelling unit must be connected to sewer and shall be provided with individual sewer connections. Detached accessory units shall be detached from the main unit by a minimum distance of ten feet and shall have a minimum distance of 15 feet from the rear property line. Detached accessory dwelling units may be located in an existing structure, without consideration to setbacks. The detached accessory dwelling unit shall be located in such a fashion so that it is concealed from public view and shall have matching colors and materials as the main unit. The main unit must meet current requirements for parking prior to or in conjunction with the detached accessory dwelling unit approval. 
2.  Attached Accessory Dwelling Units. Attached accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the main unit or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. The height of the attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height of the main unit. Setbacks shall meet the requirements of the zone unless within an existing structure unless the unit is created from an existing living space in a single-family home. The attached accessory dwelling unit shall be located in such a fashion so that it is concealed from public view (specifically the entrance) and shall have matching colors and materials as the main unit. The main unit must meet current requirements for parking prior to or in conjunction with the attached accessory dwelling unit approval. 
3.  Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. Junior accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 500 square feet, consist of one bedroom and a limited kitchen, and have access to both interior access to the main unit and an exterior door. Junior accessory dwelling units are not considered a separate dwelling unit. The height of the junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height of the main unit. Setbacks shall meet the requirements of the zone unless within an existing structure. The junior accessory dwelling unit kitchen may only have a wet bar or efficiency kitchen (a single basin sink with a maximum waste line diameter of 1.5 inches and a cooking facility with appliances that can run on standard 120 volt outlets or natural or propane gas). The kitchen may include a small refrigerator (maximum of six cubic feet), microwave, and small cooktop (maximum of two elements). 
The junior accessory dwelling unit shall be located in such a fashion so that it is concealed from public view so as not to look like a duplex, for example. The entry to the junior accessory dwelling unit shall face the side- or back-yard area. Junior accessory units shall have matching colors and materials as the main unit. Main unit must meet current requirements for parking prior to or in conjunction with the junior accessory dwelling unit approval. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007; Ord. No. 1080, § 5, 12-20-2016 ) 
17.03.080 - Commercial, General Zone (C-G Zone). 
    The Commercial, General Zone (C-G Zone) is intended to permit development that provides for a range of commercial service and retail land uses. This Zone is also intended to serve as one of the base zones for the Overlay Zone Districts that are also provided for in the City's General Plan and this title. 
A.  Commercial, General Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. 
B.  Commercial, General Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Commercial, General Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Commercial, General Zone (CG Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. Lots sizes for the Commercial, General Zone (C-G Zone) shall not be less than 10,000 square feet with an average lot depth of 100 feet and a minimum average lot width of 100 feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. The following setback requirements are applicable to the Commercial, General Zone (C-G Zone) 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback is 25 feet. A minimum of 50 feet should be provided if the parking is provided in the front of the business. 
b.  Rear Yard Setbacks. No setback is required when the parcel is abutting commercial or manufacturing zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot where a building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
c.  Side Yard Setbacks. No setback is required when parcel is abutting commercial or manufacturing zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum side yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot where a building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
3.  Lot Area Requirements. The area occupied by all structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area and the maximum permitted floor area ratio is 1.0. 
4.  Building Height. In the Commercial, General Zone (C-G Zone), the maximum height of any building shall not exceed 50 feet. 
D.  Commercial, General Zone, Off street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Commercial, General Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Commercial, General Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.090 - Community Commercial Zone (CC Zone). 
    The Community Commercial Zone is intended to preserve, and where applicable promote, commercial shopping centers. This Zone specifically applies to those parcels that may contain more than one business or those properties where the floor area of the business exceeds 50,000 square feet. 
A.  Community Commercial Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. 
B.  Community Commercial Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Community Commercial Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Community Commercial Zone (CC Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. Lots sizes for the Community Commercial Zone (C-C Zone) shall not be less than 10,000 square feet with an average lot depth of 100 feet and a minimum average lot depth of 100 feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. The following setback requirements are applicable to the Community Commercial Zone (CC Zone): 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback is 25 feet. There shall be a minimum of 50 feet for the front yard setback if parking is provided in the front of the building. 
b.  Rear Yard Setbacks. No minimum rear yard setback is required except for those parcels that abut residential zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot where a building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
c.  Side Yard Setbacks. No setback is required when parcel is abutting commercial or manufacturing zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum side yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot where a building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
3.  Lot Area Requirements. The area occupied by all structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area and the maximum floor area ratio is 1.0. 
4.  Building Height. In the Community Commercial Zone (CG Zone), the maximum height of any building shall not exceed 50 feet. 
D.  Community Commercial Zone, Off Street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Community Commercial Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Community Commercial Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.095 - Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone (C-M Zone). 
    The Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone (C-M Zone) is intended to permit development that provides for a range of commercial service, retail and light manufacturing land uses. This Zone is also intended to serve as one of the base zones for the Overlay Zone Districts that are also provided for in the City's General Plan and this title. 
A.  Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. 
B.  Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone (CG Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. Lots sizes for the Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone (C-M Zone) shall not be less than 10,000 square feet with an average lot depth of 100 feet and a minimum average lot width of 100 feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. The following setback requirements are applicable to the Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone (C-M Zone) 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback is 25 feet. A minimum of 50 feet should be provided if the parking is provided in the front of the business. 
b.  Rear Yard Setbacks. No setback is required when the parcel is abutting commercial or manufacturing zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot where a building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
c.  Side Yard Setbacks. No setback is required when parcel is abutting commercial or manufacturing zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum side yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot where a building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
3.  Lot Area Requirements. The area occupied by all structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area and the maximum permitted floor area ratio is 1.0. 
4.  Building Height. In the Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone (C-M Zone), the maximum height of any building shall not exceed 50 feet. 
D.  Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone, Off street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 shall apply. 
F.  Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 shall apply. 
(Ord. 1016, May 15, 2012) 
17.03.100 - Manufacturing Zone (M Zone). 
    The Manufacturing Zone is intended to maintain the existing industrial and manufacturing uses and to promote the development of new business parks, light industrial use, manufacturing uses, and warehousing activities in the City. 
A.  Manufacturing Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. 
B.  Manufacturing Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-3 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Manufacturing Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Manufacturing Zone (M Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. No minimum or maximum lot area standards are applicable to this Zone. Within those parcels containing structures, the minimum lot area must be 10,000 square feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. The following setback requirements are applicable to the Manufacturing Zone (M Zone): 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback is 25 feet. There shall be a minimum of 50 feet for the front yard setback if parking is provided in the front of the building. 
b.  Rear Yard Setbacks. No minimum rear yard setback is required except for those parcels that abut residential zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot that exceeds 35 feet. 
c.  Side Yard Setbacks. No setback is required when parcel is abutting commercial or manufacturing zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum side yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot that exceeds 35 feet. 
3.  Building Height. In the Manufacturing Zone, the maximum height of any primary building shall not exceed 50 feet. 
D.  Manufacturing Zone, Off Street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Manufacturing Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Manufacturing Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.110 - Public Facilities Zone (PF Zone). 
    The Public Facilities Zone includes a range of public uses and activities that serve the public good and welfare. These include, but are not limited to, schools, civic buildings, fire stations, and is intended to include and recognize the flowing uses: water course and watershed areas, public and private park lands, cemeteries, natural resource lands, wildlife preserves, and publicly owned dedicated scenic and open space areas. This Zone is also intended to provide for permanent open space in specific areas by limiting development in areas where natural hazards are present that might endanger the health, safety, and welfare of residents from possible flood, subsidence, erosion, or seismic activity. 
A.  Public Facilities Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-1 of this Section. 
B.  Public Facilities Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-1 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Public Facilities Zone, Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to the Public Facilities Zone (P-F Zone): 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. No minimum or maximum lot area standards are applicable to this Zone. Within those parcels containing structures, the minimum lot area must be 10,000 square feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. All yards and other structural standards other than height shall be specified in connection with, and as a part of, the issuance of a plot plan or conditional use permit for development. 
3.  Building Height. In the PF Zone the maximum height of any building shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Public Facilities Zone, Off Street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Public Facilities Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Public Facilities Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.120 - Permitted uses for Base Zone Districts. 
    The permitted uses for the Base Zone Districts (identified herein in Section 17.03.040 through 17.03.110) are listed in Table 17.03-3. 
Table 17.03-3
Permitted Land Uses For Base Zone Districts RC PF RR RSF RMF CG CC M CM Administrative Professional Services Administrative/Professional Offices N N N N N P P P P Advertising Agencies N P N N N P P C P Architectural/Engineering/Design Services N P N N N P P C P Attorney/Legal Services N P N N N P P C P Business Management Services N P N N N P P C P Government Offices P P P P P P P P P Travel Agencies N P N N N P P C P Agricultural Uses Animal Keeping (Commercial Use) N N P C N C C C C Animal Keeping (Accessory Use) N A A A A C C C C Animal Rescue Facilities N N P C N N N C C Apiaries N N P C N N N N N Aviaries N N P N N N N C N Catteries N N P C N C C C C Commercial Growing Establishments N N P N N N N C C Dairies N N P N N N N N N Kennels (all Classes) N N P C N C C C C Produce Stands N N P N N N N N N Stables N N P N N N N N N Alcohol Service and Sales Bars or Cocktail Lounges C N N N N C C C C Liquor Stores N N N N N C C N C Restaurants with Alcoholic Beverage Sales C N N N N C C C C Automotive Services Automobile, Motorcycle, and Marine Craft Sales (New and Used) N N N N N P P C P Automobile Parking Facilities N N N N N P P P P Automobile Rental Agencies N N N N N P P P P Automobile Repair Facilities N N N N N P P P P Automobile Towing and/or Wrecking Facilities N N N N N N N C N Body and Paint Shops N N N N N C C C C Car Wash N N N N N C C C C Gas/Service Stations C N N N N C C C C Limousine Services N N N N N P P P P Towing Services With Indoor Vehicle Service N N N N N C C C C Towing Services With Outdoor Vehicle Storage N N N N N N N C N Truck/Trailer Rentals N N N N N C C P C Communications Facilities Cellular Communication Facilities C N N N N C C C C Cellular-Stealth C N N N N C C C C Cellular-Non-Stealth N N N N N C C C C Radio and Television Broadcasting Studios N N N N N N P P P Recording and Sound Studios N N N N N N P P P Satellite Dishes (Non-Private) N N N N N P P P P Satellite Dishes (Private Use) N N P P P N N C C Ham Radio Antennae (Private Use) N N P P P P P P P Daycare Facilities Commercial Day Care Facilities N N N N N P P C C Educational Establishments Elementary, Junior, and High Schools/Private & Charter N P C C C C C C C Elementary, Junior, and High Schools/Public N P P P P C C C C College or University N P C C C C C C C Tutoring & Testing N P A A A C C C C Vocational and Trade Schools N P C C C C C C C Food and Beverage Sales Bakeries N N N N N P P P P Catering Establishments N N N N N P P P P Convenience Markets N N N N N P P P P Grocery Stores/Supermarkets N N N N N P P N C Grocery Store, Alcohol Sales N N N N N C C N C General Merchandise and Trade Antique Sales N N N N N P P A P Appliance Sales N N N N N P P C P Art Galleries and Supplies N N N N N P P N P Beauty Supplies N N N N N P P N P Books and Magazines N N N N N P P N P Building Materials N N N N N C P P P Building Materials with outdoor sales/storage N N N N N C C P C Camera and Photographic Supplies N N N N N P P N P Candy Stores N N N N N P P N P Cigar/Cigarette Shops N N N N N C C N C Clothing Stores N N N N N P P N P Department Stores N N N N N P P N P Discount Stores N N N N N P P N P Electronic Equipment Sales N N N N N P P C P Equipment Sales and Rentals N N N N N C C P C Florists N N N N N P P N P Freight Forwarding Services N N N N N P P P P Furniture and Home Furnishings N N N N N P P N P Garden Supply N N N N N P P N P Gifts, Crafts, and Novelties N N N N N P P N P Guns and Ammunition N N N N N P P C P Hardware Stores N N N N N P P N P Hobby, Toy and Game Stores N N N N N P P N P Indoor Swap Meets N N N N N N C C C Jewelry Sales and Repair N N N N N P P N P Leather Goods N N N N N P P N P Luggage Sales N N N N N P P N P Office Equipment, Furniture, and Supplies N N N N N P P C P Pet Sales and Supplies N N N N N P P C P Records, Tapes, and Videos N N N N N P P N P Retail, Other Specialty N N N N N P P N P Sporting Goods and Equipment N N N N N P P N P Surplus Stores N N N N N P P C P Thrift and Second-Hand Stores N N N N N C C N C Variety Stores N N N N N P P N P Wholesale Establishments N N N N N P P C C Lodging Bed and Breakfast Facilities C N N N N P P N C Emergency Shelters N N N N N P C C C Hotels and Motels C N N N N P P C C Residence Inns C N N N N P P N C Single-Room Occupant (SRO) Facilities N N N N N C C N C Trailer Parks and Campsites N N N N C N N N N Transitional Housing N N N N C C C N C Manufacturing and Industrial Apparel/Textile Products N N N N N N N P C Assembly Plants N N N N N N N P C Bottling Plants N N N N N N N P C Bulk Postal Service Facilities N N N N N N N P C Chemicals N N N N N N N P C Contract Construction Services N N N N N N N P C Data Services N N N N N N N P C Exterminating Services N N N N N C C P C Feed and Fuel Yards N N N N N N N P N Food and Kindred Products N N N N N N N P C Furniture N N N N N N N P C Lumber/Wood Products N N N N N N N P C Moving and Storage Establishments N N N N N N N P C Metal Salvage Yards N N N N N N N P N Paper Products N N N N N N N P C Petroleum-Related Materials N N N N N N N C N Primary Metal Industries (Electroplating) N N N N N N N C C Printing/Publishing N N N N N N N P C Professional/Scientific/Electronic Products N N N N N N N P C Research Services and Laboratories N N N N N N N P C Retail Sales of Products Manufactured or Stored On-Site N N N N N N N P C Sandblasting and Beadblasting N N N N N C, A C, A C C, A Taxidermy N N N N N N N C C Medical/Health Care Ambulance Services N N N N N P P P P Animal Hospitals/Veterinaries N N N N N P P P P Clinics N N N N N P P C P Convalescent Homes N N C C C P P N P Chemical Dependency Clinics N N N N C C N N C Hospitals N N N N N P P N P Medical/Dental Offices N N N N N P P N P Pharmacies N N N N N P P N P Pharmacies, with drive-through N N N N N C C N C Personal Services Banking, Credit Unions, Financial Services N N N N N P P N P Barbers and Beauty Parlors N N N N N P P N P Cemeteries N C C C C C C C C Check Cashing Services N N N N N P P N P Commercial Pet Grooming Services N N N N N P P C P Dry Cleaners N N N N N P P N P Funeral Parlors, Mortuaries N N N N N C C C C Laundries, Laundromats N N N N N P P C P Locksmith and Key Shops N N N N N P P P P Pawnbrokers N N N N N C C N C Massage Establishment N N N N N C C N N Photocopying and Photo Developing Services N N N N N P P P P Photography Studios N N N N N P P N P Shoe Repair Shops N N N N N P P C P Tailors N N N N N P P C P Tattoo/Body Piercing Services N N N N N C C N C Public and Quasi-Public Uses Community Recreation Centers P P N N N N N N N Cultural Facilities P P N N N N N N N Libraries P P N N N C C N C Museums P P N N N C C N C Parks P P N N N N N N N Public Safety Facilities N P N N N P P P P Senior Citizen Activity Centers N P N N N P P N P Recreation and Entertainment Adult-Oriented Businesses N N N N N N N C N Amusement Parks N N C N N C C C C Athletic Fields N P P P P N N N N Batting Cages N N N N N C C C C Billiard and Pool Halls N N N N N C C N C Bowling Alleys N N N N N P P N P Commercial Athletic Facility N N N N N C C C C Dance Studios N N N N N P P N P Golf Driving Ranges C N N N N N C C C Health Clubs and Gymnasiums N N N N N C C C C Miniature Golf Courses N N C N N C C N C Off-Road Mini-Bike and Motorcross Courses C N C N N N C C C Public Auditorium/Auditoriums N P N N N P P N P Shooting Range (Indoor) N N N N N N N C N Skating Rinks N N N N N N C C C Video Arcades N N N N N C C N C Recycling Collection Facilities N N N N N C C C C Processing Facilities N N N N N C C C C Religious Institutions Churches N C C C C P P C P Monasteries, Convents, or Similar Religious Use N C C C C P P C P Repair Services Electrical and Household Appliances Repair N N N N N P P P P Furniture Refinishing N N N N N P P P P Furniture Reupholstering N N N N N C C P P Lawnmower Repair/Sales Shops N N N N N P P P P Machine Shops N N N N N C C P C Welding Shops N N N N N C, A C, A P C, A Residential Uses Accessory Guest Houses N N P P P N N N N Accessory Rental Units ("Granny Flats") N N P P P N N N N Boarding or Rooming Houses N N C C C N N N N Caretaker's Unit N N P N P P* N C C Congregate Care Facilities N N N N C C C N C Day Care Centers, Small Family-1 to 8 Children N N P P P N N N N Day Care Centers, Large Family-7 to 14 Children N N C C C C N N N Duplexes N N N N P N N N N Group or Community Care Facilities-6 or fewer persons) N N P P P N N N N Group or Community Care Facilities-7 or more persons) N N C C C N N N N Home Occupation Businesses N N P P P N N N N Mobile Home Parks N N N N C N N N N Mobile Home or Manufactured Housing Units Single Lot N N P P P N N N N Multiple-Family, Apartment & Condominiums N N N N P P* N N N Planned Residential Developments N N P P P N N N N Senior Housing Developments N N P P P C N N N Single-Family Dwellings N N P P P N N N N Restaurant Delicatessens N N N N N P P P P Fast-Food Restaurants-Without Drive-Thru N N N N N P P N P Fast-Food Restaurants-With Drive-Thru N N N N N C C N C Sit-Down Restaurants C N N N N P P N P Sit Down Restaurant with live Entertainment C N N N N C C N C Restaurant, serving alcohol C N N N N C C N C Service Organizations Philanthropic and Charitable Institutions N N N N N P P C P Service Organizations N N N N N P P C P Temporary Uses Street/Craft Fairs and Farmers' Markets N C N N N C C N C Temporary Structures (Subdivision sales Office) C N P P P P P P P Christmas Tree/Pumpkin Lots, and Similar, Not Exceeding 30 Days C C C C C C C C C Outdoor Displays N N N N N C C C C Parking Lot Sales N C N N N C C C C Amusement Enterprises N C N N N C C C C Transportation Facilities Bus Passenger Terminals N N N N N C C C C Charter Bus Companies N N N N N C C C C Motor Vehicle Transportation (Taxi/Shuttle) N N N N N C C C C Truck Stops and Terminals N N N N N C C C C Utilities Public Utility/Service Structures N P N N N N N P C Sewage Disposal Facilities/Waste Transfer N P N N N N N P C Utility Company Offices N N N N N P P P P Water Storage, Distribution, and Collection Facilities N P N N N N N N N Public Storage Facilities N N N N N C C C C  
N = Not Permitted 
P = Permitted 
C = Conditionally Permitted 
A = Permitted as an Accessory Use 
A* = Permitted as an Accessory Use in Assembly Buildings 
*Only allowed for Properties on Sixth Street 
(Ord. No. 1016, May 15, 2012; Ord. No. 1025, § 1, 9-18-2012 ; Ord. No. 1074, § 4, 7-5-2016 ; Ord. No. 1106, § 4, 5-7-2019 ) 
17.03.130 - Overlay Zone (O Zone). 
    The Overlay Zone refers to specific areas of the City where special development standards are applicable. The purpose of this Zone District is to implement the City of Beaumont General Plan that established the following overlay zones: 
    The Sixth Street Overlay applies to areas with a base underlying zoning of C-G (Commercial General), located on either side of Sixth Street between California Avenue and Highland Springs Avenue. This overlay provides for the development of mixed uses (residential and/or commercial), with a required minimum lot area of one acre, within the area included in this Zone District. For all mixed use projects (combination of residential and commercial), 50 percent of the lot area shall be devoted to housing, at a permitted density range of 20-24 units per acre. Live/work units shall be permitted and encouraged on both sides of the north-south avenues north of Fifth Street between California Avenue and Michigan Avenue. 
A.  Sixth Street Overlay Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted for this Overlay Zone are indicated in Table 17.03-4. 
B.  Sixth Street Overlay Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted for this Overlay Zone are indicated in Table 17.03-4. 
C.  Sixth Street Overlay Zone, Development Standards. The Development Standards for this Overlay Zone shall be the those applicable to the underlying Zoning, with regard to commercial projects, and shall be determined through plot plan review for mixed use projects. 
D.  Sixth Street Overlay Zone, Off-Street Parking. Automobile parking shall be provided as specified in Section 17.05. 
E.  Sixth Street Overlay Zone, Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as specified in Section 17.06. 
F.  Sixth Street Overlay Zone, Signs. Signage shall be governed by Section 17.07. 
    Beaumont Avenue Overlay applies to a number of parcels located along that segment of Beaumont Avenue located between 6th Street (on the south) and Oak Valley Parkway (on the north). The purpose of this Overlay Zone is to facilitate the corridor's transition to a mixed-use district containing professional office, service, and limited commercial activities in conjunction with residential uses. 
A.  Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted for this Overlay Zone are indicated in Table 17.03-4. 
B.  Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-4. 
C.  Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone, Development Standards. The following development standards for this Overlay Zone shall apply: 
1.  Lot Area and Dimension. Lots sizes for the Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone shall not be less than 10,000 square feet with an average lot depth of 100 feet and a minimum average lot depth of 100 feet. 
2.  Setbacks and Yards. The following setback requirements are applicable to the Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone: 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback is 25 feet. There shall be a minimum of 50 feet for the front yard setback if parking is provided in the front of the building. 
b.  Rear Yard Setbacks. No minimum rear yard setback is required except for those parcels that abut residential zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot where a building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
c.  Side Yard Setbacks. No setback is required when parcel is abutting commercial or manufacturing zones. For those parcels that abut residential zones, the minimum side yard setback is 20 feet plus an additional two feet for every foot where a building exceeds 35 feet in height. 
3.  Building Height. In the Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone, the maximum height of any building shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser. 
D.  Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone, Off Street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Beaumont Avenue Overlay Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
    Urban Village Specific Plan Overlay applies to a specific area of the City situated between the I-10 and the SR-60 Freeway corridors. Within this area, a variety of specialized land uses that capitalize on the area's unique location are contemplated. These uses include a regional commercial center, higher density residential development, and abundant open space and recreational amenities. In conjunction with policies and programs outlined in the Housing Element, a minimum of 90 acres within the Specific Plan area shall be reserved for housing development with a minimum density of 20 units per acre, and a minimum of 21 acres shall be reserved for housing development with a density range of 12-20 units per acre. This area will be developed in phases as development proceeds within the larger West Beaumont Planning Area. A specific plan of land use will be required before any new development can take place within the area designated with the Urban Village Specific Plan Overlay. 
A.  Urban Village Specific Plan Overlay Zone, Permitted Uses. The uses permitted for this Overlay Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-1 of this Section. 
B.  Urban Village Specific Plan Overlay Zone, Conditional Uses. The uses conditionally permitted under this Zone District are identified in Table 17.03-1 of this Section. Such uses require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Urban Village Specific Plan Overlay Zone, Development Standards. The development standards for this Overlay Zone are governed by the Urban Village Specific Plan. 
D.  Public Facilities Zone, Off Street Parking. Automobile storage space shall be provided as indicated herein in Section 17.05. 
E.  Public Facilities Zone, Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 17.06 of this ordinance shall apply. 
F.  Public Facilities Zone, Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007; Ord. 989, 03/01/11; Ord. 990, 03/01/2011) 
17.03.140 - Specific Plan Zone (SP Zone). 
    The Specific Plan zoning designation applies to those areas of the City that have an adopted Specific Plan as well as those areas where a Specific Plan will be required at which time a development concept is proposed. Those Specific Plans that were adopted prior to the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance or the currently adopted General Plan have been incorporated herein by reference. Any future Specific Plan or Specific Plan Amendment must be consistent with the adopted General Plan. 
    Specific plans and amendments thereto, shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Title and of Section 65450 et seq. of the Government Code, as now written or hereafter amended. All uses established pursuant to an applicable specific plan shall be subject to all of the conditions and restrictions set forth in the specific plan, regardless of the requirement of the underlying zone, including, but not limited to, density and intensity of use, setbacks, heights, area and open space. 
A.  Request for Specific Plan. The owner of real property, or a person authorized by the owner, shall have the right to request that the City consider a specific plan of land use or an amendment to an adopted specific plan for the real property. The right to request consideration of a specific plan does not imply that the plan will be approved. Whenever any State law, the City General Plan, or any ordinance requires the adoption of a specific plan as a condition to the approval of a project, an application for a specific plan shall be made pursuant to this Section. 
B.  Environmental Review. A proposal to adopt or amend a specific plan shall not be considered at a public hearing until all procedures required by the City of Beaumont Rules Implementing the California Environmental Quality Act to hear a matter has been completed. 
C.  Applications for Specific Plans. Applications shall be made to the Planning Director, on the forms provided by the Planning Department, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in the Fee Ordinance. The application shall supply all required information, which may include part or all of the following depending on the nature of the Plan, and shall be in the form of a text and accompanying maps, plans, and exhibits. 
D.  Content of Specific Plans. The scope and content of a Specific Plan prepared for the City shall comply with State of California Planning Zoning and Development laws governing their preparation. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.03.150 - Permitted uses for Overlay Zone Districts. 
    The permitted uses for the Beaumont Avenue, 6th Street, and Urban Village Overlay Zones are listed in Table 17.03-4. 
Table 17.03-4
Permitted Land Uses For Overlay Zone Districts 6th St.
Overlay Beaumont
Ave.
Overlay Urban
Village
Overlay Administrative Professional Services Administrative/Professional Offices P P P Advertising Agencies P P P Architectural/Engineering/Design Services P P P Attorney/Legal Services P P P Business Management Services P P P Government Offices P P P Travel Agencies P P P Alcohol Service and Sales Bars or Cocktail Lounges C C C Liquor Stores C C C Restaurants with Alcoholic Beverage Sales C C C Automotive Services Automobile, Motorcycle, and Marine Craft Sales (New and Used) P N C Automobile Parking Facilities P C N Automobile Rental Agencies P C N Automobile Repair Facilities C N N Body and Paint Shops C N N Car Wash C N C Gas/Service Stations C N C Limousine Services P C N Towing Services-With Indoor Vehicle Service C N N Truck/Trailer Rentals C N N Communications Facilities Cellular Communication Facilities (stealth) C C C Radio and Television Broadcasting Studios P C P Recording and Sound Studios P C P Satellite Dishes (Non-Private) P P P Satellite Dishes (Private Use) P P P Ham Radio Antennae (Private Use) P P P Daycare Facilities Commercial Day Care Facilities C C C Educational Establishments Elementary, Junior, and High Schools/Private & Charter C C C Elementary, Junior, and High Schools/Public C C C College or University C C C Tutoring & Testing Facility C C C Vocational and Trade Schools C C C Food and Beverage Sales Bakeries P P P Catering Establishments P P P Convenience Markets P P P Grocery Stores/Supermarkets P N P General Merchandise and Trade Appliances P P P Art Galleries and Supplies P P P Beauty Supplies P P P Books and Magazines P P P Building Materials P N N Building Materials with outdoor sales/storage C N N Camera and Photographic Supplies P P P Candy Stores P P P Cigar/Cigarette Shops C C C Clothing Stores P C P Department Stores P C P Discount Stores P N P Electronic Equipment P C P Equipment Sales and Rentals (indoor) C N N Florists P P P Freight Forwarding Services P N P Furniture and Home Furnishings P N P Garden Supply P C P Gifts, Crafts, and Novelties P P P Guns and Ammunition P P P Hardware Stores P C P Hobby, Toy and Game Stores P P P Indoor Swap Meets C N N Jewelry Sales and Repair P P P Leather Goods P C P Luggage Sales P C P Office Equipment, Furniture, and Supplies P N P Pet Sales and Supplies P P P Records, Tapes, and Videos P P P Retail, Other Specialty P P P Sporting Goods and Equipment P C P Surplus Stores C N N Thrift and Second-Hand Stores C N N Variety Stores C N C Wholesale Establishments P N P Lodging Bed and Breakfast Facilities P C P Hotels and Motels P N P Residence Inns P N P Single-Room Occupant (SRO) Facilities C C N Transitional Housing C C N Medical/Health Care Ambulance Services C C N Animal Hospitals/Veterinaries P N P Clinics P P P Convalescent Homes C C C Chemical Dependency Clinics C N C Hospitals C N C Medical/Dental Offices P P P Pharmacies P N P Pharmacies, with drive-through P N P Personal Services Banking, Credit Unions, Financial Services P P P Barbers and Beauty Parlors P P P Cemeteries N N N Check Cashing Services P N N Commercial Pet Grooming Services P P P Dry Cleaners P P P Funeral Parlors, Mortuaries P C P Laundries, Laundromats P P P Locksmith and Key Shops P P P Massage Establishments C C C Pawnbrokers C N N Photocopying and Photo Developing Services P P P Photography Studios P P P Shoe Repair Shops P P P Tailors P P P Tattoo/Body Piercing Services C N C Public and Quasi-Public Uses Community Recreation Centers P P P Cultural Facilities P P P Libraries P P P Museums P P P Parks P P P Public Safety Facilities P P P Senior Citizen Activity Centers P P P Recreation and Entertainment Amusement Parks C N P Athletic Fields N N P Batting Cages C C P Billiard and Pool Halls C C C Bowling Alleys P N P Commercial Athletic Facility C C C Dance, Martial Arts, and Fitness Classes 
(Not open Gym) C C C Golf Driving Ranges N N C Health Clubs and Fitness Gyms C C C Miniature Golf Courses N N P Public Auditorium/Auditoriums P N P Skating Rinks C N P Video Arcades C N C Religious Institutions Churches P P P Monasteries, Convents, or Similar Religious Quarters P P P Repair Services Electrical and Household Appliances Repair P N N Furniture Refinishing P N N Furniture Reupholstering P 1 N N Lawnmower Repair/Sales Shops P 1 N N Machine Shops C 1 N N Welding Shops C 1 N N Residential Uses Accessory Guest Houses P C P Accessory Rental Units ("Granny Flats") P C P Boarding or Rooming Houses P C P Caretaker's Unit P C P Congregate Care Facilities P C P Day Care Centers, Small Family-1 to 8 Children P P P Day Care Centers, Large Family-7 to 14 Children C C C Duplexes P N P Group or Community Care Facilities-6 or fewer persons) P P P Group or Community Care Facilities-7 or more persons) C C C Home Occupation Businesses P P C Mobile Home Parks N N N Mobile Home or Manufactured Housing Units Single Lot C N P Multiple-Family, Apartments & Condominiums P N P Planned Residential Developments P N P Senior Housing Developments P C P Single-Family Dwellings P C P Restaurant Delicatessens P P P Fast-Food Restaurants-Without Drive-Thru P A P Fast-Food Restaurants-With Drive-Thru P N P Sit-Down Restaurants P P P Sit-Down Restaurant with Live Entertainment C C C Restaurants that serve alcohol C C C Service Organizations Philanthropic and Charitable Institutions P P P Service Organizations P P P Temporary Uses Street/Craft Fairs and Farmers' Markets P P P Temporary Structures Such as Subdivision Sales Offices P P P Seasonal Outdoor Sales (<30 days) P P P Outdoor Displays P P P Parking Lot Sales P P P Amusement Enterprises P C P Transportation Facilities Bus Passenger Terminals P N P Charter Bus Companies C N C Motor Vehicle Transportation (Taxi/Shuttle) P N N Truck Stops and Terminals C N N  
N = Not Permitted 
P = Permitted 
C = Conditionally Permitted 
A = Permitted as an Accessory Use 
A* = Permitted as an Accessory Use in Assembly Buildings 
1 Uses are permitted in the western portion of the 6th Street Overlay. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007; Ord. 1007, 12-20-2011; ; Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 9-18-2012 ; Ord. No. 1074, §§ 5, 6, 7-5-2016 ; Ord. No. 1100, §§ 4, 5, 5-15-2018 ; Ord. No. 1106, § 5, 5-7-2019 ) 
17.03.160 - Mineral Resources Overlay Zone. 
    This Section indicates the land use and development requirements for the Mineral Resource Overlay Zone. The Mineral Resource Overlay Zone is intended to facilitate mining and quarry activities within the properties subject to the land use regulations of the City of Beaumont. 
A.  Permitted Uses. In addition to such other uses as may be permitted under any other zoning classifications applicable to such property, with respect to any area designated by ordinance of the City Council or duly adopted zoning map as "Mineral Resources Overlay Zone" (each, a "Mineral Resources Overlay Zone"), the following uses (the "Permitted Uses") are permitted in conformance with the development and performance standards of Section 17.03.160.C provided that the operator thereof holds a permit to conduct surface mining operations, issued pursuant to Section 17.03.160 which has not been revoked or suspended: 
1.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, beneficiating, concentrating, processing, and stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, decomposed granite, clay gypsum, limestone, metallic ores, and similar materials, the reclamation of the resulting excavations and the manufacturing of cement. 
2.  Rock crushing plants, aggregate washing, screening and drying facilities and equipment, and concrete batching plants. 
B.  Accessory Uses Permitted. The land and improvements related to the Permitted Uses thereon (the "premises") in the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone may be used for the following uses (the "accessory uses") provided such uses are established on the premises, are incidental to, and do not substantially alter the character of any permitted use, including but not limited to: 
1.  Retail and wholesale distribution of materials produced on the site. 
2.  Storage of trucks and excavating vehicles. 
3.  Storage of materials and machinery used in the operation. 
4.  Scales and weighing equipment. 
5.  Offices and maintenance shop structures, including use of mobile homes. 
6.  Residences and mobile homes for caretakers or watchmen and their families provided no compensation is received for the use of any such residence, mobile home or mobile home space. 
7.  Maximum of two on-site signs, each not over 1,000 square feet in area, advertising the products being produced on the site. 
C.  Development Standards. Premises in the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone used for any mining and quarry operations, rock crushing and aggregate dryers shall be subject to the following standards. 
1.  Noise Suppression. All equipment and premises employed in conjunction with any of the Permitted Uses in the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone shall be constructed, operated and maintained so as to suppress noise and vibrations in accordance with the City of Beaumont's general land use standards for noise. 
2.  Roads and Driveways. All roads and driveways shall be kept wetted while being used or shall be treated with oil, asphaltic concrete or concrete, or other palliative to prevent the emission of dust. 
3.  Access Roads. All private access roads leading off any paved public street onto property used for any purpose permitted in Section 17.51.01(a) or (b) shall be paved to a minimum width of 24 feet with asphaltic concrete or equal, not less than three inches in thickness with adequate compacted base material for not less than the first 100 feet of said access road. 
4.  Air and Water Pollution. All operations shall be conducted in compliance with the requirements of the City of Beaumont relating to air and water pollution as well as those of County, regional and State agencies having jurisdiction thereof. 
5.  Slopes of Excavations. No production from an open pit quarry shall be permitted which creates an average slope steeper than one foot horizontal to one foot vertical; provided however, that a steeper slope may be permitted where the soil content or material is such that a vertical-cut excavation is safe in the opinion of the Division of Industrial Safety, Department of Industrial Relations of the State of California. 
6.  Landscaping and Fencing. Excavation operations which are located at any time within 500 feet of at least ten buildings or mobile homes used or designed for dwelling purposes, shall be screened to a height of at least six feet by either landscaping, berms, walls or solid fencing and the outer boundaries of the area being excavated shall be enclosed with a six foot high chain link fence, including all necessary gates, except where such a fence would be impracticable as in the bed or flood channel of a wash or watercourse. 
7.  Hours of Operation. All uses shall confine operations on the property, other than maintenance, to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any day, except those operations that are located not less than 300 feet from the outer boundary of such property. 
8.  Insurance. Before commencing operation in any quarry, the owner or operator shall show continuing evidence of comprehensive general liability insurance against liability in tort in the amount of $50,000,000.00 arising from the production activities, or operations incident thereto, conducted or carried on under or by virtue of any law or ordinance. Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect during the period of such operations. 
9.  Ponding. Where practicable, all excavation operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent unnecessary ponding or accumulation of storm or drainage water. 
10.  Rehabilitation. All property partially or totally depleted of its mineral resources as a result of a use permitted by Section 17.03.160.A and B shall be rehabilitated in accordance with a mining reclamation plan which has been approved pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.03.160.H. 
D.  Permits for Surface Mining Operations. The City Council of the City of Beaumont hereby declares its purpose and intent is to regulate all surface mining operations in the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone to ensure that: 
1.  The reclamation of mined lands will be carried out in such a way that the continued mining of minerals will be permitted; and 
2.  The adverse effects of surface mining operations will be prevented or minimized and that mined lands will be reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land use; and 
3.  The production and conservation of minerals will be encouraged while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment, and the residual hazards to the public health and safety will be eliminated. 
E.  Permit Requirement. No person, firm, corporation or private association shall conduct surface mining operations in the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone without first obtaining a conditional use permit from the City of Beaumont to do so. 
F.  Application. Every application for permit for surface mining operations shall be made in writing to the Planning Director on the forms provided by the Planning Department and shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant. 
2.  Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the premises involved or that the applicant has written permission of the owner to make such application. 
3.  A mining plan, a reclamation plan and proposed financial assurances in draft form including an estimate of reclamation costs; shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee of as established by City Council Resolution; and shall be filed with the Planning Department. The application shall provide all information and data required by Sections 2772 and 2773 of the Public Resources Code. No application shall be accepted as completed for filing and the time limitations for processing a permit shall not begin to run until all procedures under the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA") and the all City of Beaumont rules relating to the implementation of CEQA have been completed. 
4.  The Planning Director shall notify the Director of the Department of Conservation of the filing of each application for a permit within the time period required by Section 2774(e) of the Public Resources Code and shall submit each proposed mining and reclamation plan and proposed financial assurances in draft form including an estimate of reclamation costs or modification to an approved reclamation plan to the Director of the Department of Conservation for review and comment. 
5.  Such additional information as shall be required by the application form or Planning Director. 
G.  Mining Plan. The mining plan shall, to the extent practicable, contain at least the following: 
1.  Indicate the progression of all operations of the facility indicating time frames for each phase and the estimated life of the operation; 
2.  Show the location of equipment, offices, stockpiles, settling ponds, interim drainage, machinery and waste dumps, parking, and areas to be mined; 
3.  Indicate the progression of stripping and excavating through the use of cross sections, elevations and topographic maps; 
4.  Indicate the time lag between mining and reclamation and equipment sitting and removal and/or relocation; 
5.  Discuss the method of handling simultaneous excavation and reclamation if applicable; 
6.  Show the location of all streams, roads, railroads, sewage disposal systems, water wells, and utility facilities within 500 feet of the site and the location of all proposed access roads to be constructed in conducting the surface mining operation, and 
7.  Indicate the type of and amount of mineral commodities to be removed, the amount of mining waste to be retained on the site and the amount of mining waste to be disposed off-site including the method and location of disposal of said mining waste. 
H.  Reclamation Plan. The reclamation plan shall, in addition to all other requirements: 
1.  Indicate the methods to be used to reclaim the land including a detailed schedule of the sequence and timing of all stages of the reclamation. 
2.  Describe the physical condition of the site upon the completion of all reclamation including the proposed uses or potential uses of the reclaimed site. 
3.  Contain a map that will delineate through the use of cross sections and elevations the physical characteristics of the land upon the conclusion of reclamation. A topographic map shall also be provided with the location of the reclaimed land clearly indicated on said map. 
4.  Describe the manner in which derelict machinery, mining waste and scraps will be removed from the reclaimed site and how contaminants will be controlled. 
5.  Describe the methods to be used to ensure that the site will contain stable waste piles and slopes. 
6.  Describe how reclamation of this site may affect the future use of the area for mining purposes. 
7.  Show that the proposed site in its final form shall be, to the extent reasonable and practical, revegetated for soil stabilization, free of drainage and erosion problems, coordinated with present and anticipated future land use, and compatible with the topography and general environment of surrounding property. 
I.  Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held on the application for a permit for surface mining operations in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.02.050 of the City of Beaumont Municipal Code and all of the procedural requirements and rights of appeal as set forth therein shall govern the hearing. 
J.  Conditions. A permit for surface mining operations shall not be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community. Any permit that is granted shall be subject to such conditions as shall be necessary to protect the health, safety or general welfare of the community. 
K.  Use of Permit. Any permit that is granted shall be used within one year from the date thereof, or within such additional time as may be set in the conditions of approval, which shall not exceed a total of three years; otherwise, the permit shall be null and void. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a permit is required to be used within less than three years, the permittee may, prior to its expiration, request an extension of time in which to use the permit. A request for extension of time shall be made to the Planning Commission, on forms provided by the Planning Department and shall be filed with the Planning Director, accompanied by a fee as established by City Council Resolution. Within 30 days following the filing of a request for an extension, the Planning Director shall review the application, make a recommendation thereon, and shall place the matter on the regular agenda of the Planning Commission. An extension of time may be granted by the Planning Commission upon a determination that valid reason exists for permittee not to use the permit within the required period of time. If an extension is granted, the total time allowed for use of the permit shall not exceed a period of three years, calculated from the effective date of the issuance of the permit. The term "use" shall mean the commencement of the surface mining operation that is authorized. The effective date of a permit shall be determined pursuant to the City of Beaumont Municipal Code. 
L.  Revocation of Permit. Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked upon the findings and procedure contained in this Subsection. A public hearing to consider the granting suspension or revocation of a permit; an operator's financial capability of performing reclamation; or abandonment of a surface mining operation without commencing reclamation shall be in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  Notice of the time, date and place of the public hearing, including a general description of the area and mining operation being considered, shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing by all of the following procedures: 
a.  . Mailing to all owners of real property which is located within 600 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed project, as such owners are shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
b.  Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Beaumont. 
c.  The Planning Director may require additional notice be given by posting in conspicuous places close to the property affected and may require notification to property owners along proposed local transportation routes. 
2.  At the public hearing the Planning Commission shall hear relevant testimony from interested persons and, within a reasonable time after the close of the hearing, make its decision; provided, however, that an application for a permit shall not be granted unless that permit is expressly subject to such conditions as are necessary to protect the health, safety or general welfare of the community. The decision of the Planning Commission and the reasons for the decision shall be reduced to writing and shall be filed by the Planning Director with the City Clerk, together with a report of the proceedings, not more than 15 days after the decision. A copy of the notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to any person who has made a written request for a copy of the decision. If the Planning Commission is unable to make a decision, that fact shall be filed with the City Clerk in the same manner for reporting decisions and shall be considered as notice of denial of the application. The City Clerk shall place the notice of the decision on the next agenda of the City Council of the City of Beaumont held five or more days after the City Clerk receives the notice from the Planning Director. 
3.  The decision of the Planning Commission is considered final and no action by the City Council of the City of Beaumont is required unless, within ten days after the notice of decision appears on the City Council's agenda, the applicant or an interested person files an appeal, accompanied by a filing fee as established by City Council Resolution, with the City Clerk or unless the City Council assumes jurisdiction by ordering the matter set for public hearing. If a timely appeal is filed or the City Council assumes jurisdiction, the City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing before the City Council not less than 13 or more than 60 days thereafter, and shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing in the same manner as notice was given of the hearing before the Planning Commission. 
4.  At the hearing before the City Council, the City Council shall hear the matter de novo; however, the documents and the minutes of the hearing before the Planning Commission shall be a part of the City Council's record at its hearing on the matter. The City Council shall hear relevant testimony from interested persons and, within a reasonable time after the close of the hearing, make its decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the decision of the Planning Commission. 
M.  Annual Inspections and Reports. As a condition of each permit, annual inspections and reports of mining and reclamation activities shall be required of the operator as follows: 
1.  Concurrently with submission of the operator's report submitted pursuant to Section 2207 of the Public Resources Code, the Building Director shall cause an inspection to be conducted within six months of receipt of said operator's report to determine whether the surface mining operation is in compliance with the approved mining plan, the approved reclamation plan, the approved financial assurances, any permit conditions of approval and in the case of an idle mine, the approved interim management plan. Said inspection may be conducted under the supervision of a qualified, State-registered civil engineer, State-licensed landscape architect, State-registered geologist, or State-registered forester. All inspections shall be conducted using a form approved by the State Mining and Geology Board. After completion of the inspection, the Building Director shall notify the Director of the Department of Conservation that the inspection has been conducted in accordance with Section 2774(b) of the Public Resources Code. A copy of the notice and any supporting documentation shall also be provided to the operator. 
2.  Each operator shall apply for a Special Inspection Permit from the Building Director at least once in each year, provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to require more than one inspection per year per permit. An application for a special inspection permit shall be submitted and the special inspection permit fee as set forth in the Uniform Building Code shall be paid concurrently with the operator's report submitted pursuant to Section 2207 of the Public Resources Code by July 1st of each year. 
N.  Financial Assurances. As a condition of each permit, financial assurances to ensure reclamation is performed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan shall be required of the operator as follows: 
1.  Prior to the commencement of the surface mining operation, the operator shall post with the Building Director a financial assurance. The financial assurance shall be (a) a bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; (b) an irrevocable letter of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government; (c) a cash deposit to be deposited into a trust fund; or (d) any other financial assurance specified by the State Mining and Geology Board pursuant to Section 2773.1(e) of the Public Resources Code. The amount of the financial assurance shall be adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the surface mining operation's approved reclamation plan and shall be adjusted annually to account for new lands disturbed, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. Said adjustment shall be based upon an independent estimate derived from a survey by a qualified professional paid for by the operator. In addition, all financial assurances shall be made payable to the City of Beaumont and the Department of Conservation and shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is completed. 
2.  If the Planning Commission, following a public hearing, determines that the permittee is financially incapable of performing reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan or has abandoned its surface mining operation without commencing reclamation, the Building Director shall: 
a.  Notify the operator by personal service or certified mail that the City of Beaumont intends to take appropriate action to realize upon the financial assurance and specify the reasons for so doing. 
b.  Allow the operator 60 days after notification to commence or cause the commencement of reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan and require that reclamation be completed within the time limits specified in the approved reclamation plan or some other time mutually agreed upon by the Building Director and the operator. 
c.  Proceed to take appropriate action to realize upon the financial assurance if the operator does not substantially comply with the provisions of paragraph b of this Subsection. 
d.  Use the proceeds of the financial assurance to conduct and complete reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. The operator shall be responsible for the costs of conducting and completing reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan which are in excess of the proceeds from the financial assurance. 
3.  Upon completion of reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the financial assurance shall be released. Written notification of the release shall be provided to the operator and Director of the Department of Conservation. 
O.  Effect of Noncompliance. If after, conducting the annual inspection required by Section 17.03.160.M or otherwise confirmed by an inspection of the mining operation, the Building Director finds that the surface mining operation is not in compliance with the approved mining plan, the approved reclamation plan, any permit conditions imposed by the City of Beaumont, the provisions of this ordinance, or the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, the Building Director may notify the operator and the owner of the subject property of that violation by personal service or certified mail. If the violation continues beyond 30 days after the date of issuance of the Building Director's notice of violation, the Building Director may notify the Planning Director of that fact. Thereupon, the Planning Director may issue an order by personal service or certified mail requiring compliance or, if the operator does not have an approved reclamation plan, to cease all further mining activities. Said order shall specify which aspects of the surface mine's activities or operations are inconsistent with the approved mining plan, approved reclamation plan, permit conditions, the provisions of the Mining Resources Overlay Zone, or the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975; shall specify a time for compliance which the Planning Director determines is reasonable, given the seriousness of the violation and any good faith efforts to comply with applicable requirements; shall set a date for a public hearing before the Planning Commission no sooner than 30 days after the date of issuance of the order; and shall not take effect until the operator has been provided a public hearing concerning the violation. 
1.  At the hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether or not the operator is complying with the approved mining plan, the approved reclamation plan, the permit conditions or the provisions of the Mining Resources Overlay Zone and may affirm, modify or set aside the order issued by the Planning Director. 
2.  The Planning Commission may also revoke or suspend the operator's permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 17.03.160.L. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
3.  Any operator who fails to comply with an order issued by the Planning Director after the order's effective date, or who fails to submit a report to the Director of the Department of Conservation or the City of Beaumont as required by Section 2207 of the Public Resources Code, shall be subject to an order by the Planning Director imposing an administrative penalty of not more than $5,000.00 per day, assessed from the original date of the Building Director's notice of violation or noncompliance with Section 2207. In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the Planning Director shall take into consideration the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation or violations, any prior history of violations, the degree of culpability, economic savings, if any resulting from the violation, and any other matters justice may require. An order imposing an administrative penalty shall become effective upon issuance and payment shall be made to the City of Beaumont within 30 days, unless the operator petitions the City Council for review of the order. Said order shall be served by personal service or by certified mail upon the operator. 
4.  If the operator petitions the City Council for review of the order imposing an administrative penalty, the operator shall be notified by personal service or certified mail as to whether the City Council will review the order and if so when the matter has been set for public hearing. The City Council may affirm, modify, or set aside, in whole or in part, by its own order, any order of the Planning Director imposing an administrative penalty. Any order of the City Council shall become effective upon issuance thereof and shall be served by personal service or certified mail upon the operator. Payment of any administrative penalty specified in the City Council's order shall be made to the City of Beaumont within 30 days of service of the order. 
P.  Modification to Permits and Reclamation Plans. A request for approval of a modification to an approved surface mining permit or reclamation plan shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section. A modification under this section means a request for a revised permit or a determination of substantial conformance as further defined herein. 
1.  Applications for substantial conformance or a revised permit shall be filed in writing with the Planning Director and shall include the following: 
a.  All information required under this ordinance for the filing of a new application for the permit or reclamation plan sought to be modified, unless the requirement is waived by the Planning Director. 
b.  A statement explaining the proposed modification and the reason the modification has been requested. 
c.  If the application requires a public hearing, a list of names and addresses of all owners of real property located within 600 feet of the exterior boundaries of the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone to be considered and such additional names and addresses required in order to conform with the notification requirements for processing a new surface mining permit or reclamation plan, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and any update issued by the County Assessor. 
d.  Such additional information as shall be required by the Planning Director. 
2.  Substantial conformance means a request for a nonsubstantial modification of an approved permit or reclamation plan which does not change the original approval or the effect of the approval on surrounding property. Substantial Conformance may include, but is not limited to, modifications for upgrading facilities, modifications for compliance with the requirements of other public agencies, modifications necessary to comply with final conditions of approval or modifications to lighting, parking, fencing or landscaping requirements provided said modifications as determined by the Planning Director will have no adverse effect upon public health, safety or welfare. 
3.  Revised permit means a modification of a permit or reclamation plan which does not change the basic concept or use allowed by the original approval. A revised permit may include, but is not limited to, a significant increase in plant capacity, changes resulting in significant adverse effects, expansion in the permitted mining area, changes to the original conditions of approval including extensions to the overall life of the permitted use, and changes in the intensity of use as determined by the Planning Director. 
4.  Actions on applications for substantial conformance or revised permits shall be in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  Substantial Conformance. The Planning Director shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove an application for substantial conformance within 30 days after accepting a completed application and give notice by mail of the decision, including any additional conditions of approval, to the applicant and any other person who has filed a written request for notice. The Planning Director's determination shall be based upon the standards of this section and those standards set forth in this ordinance for the approval of an original application. An application for substantial conformance shall not require a public hearing. 
b.  Revised Permit. An application for a revised permit shall be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved in accordance with the procedures for processing an original permit or reclamation plan, including any requirements for public hearing, notice of hearing, and all rights of appeal. A revised permit shall be subject to the development standards applicable to a new surface mining permit or reclamation plan. 
5.  The approval of an application for substantial conformance or revised permit shall be valid until the expiration of the original permit, unless an extension of time has been granted by an approved revised permit. 
6.  Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, an application for substantial conformance may be approved only if the proposed modification is exempt from the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
Q.  Interim Management Plan. Within 90 days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, as defined in Section 2727.1 of the Public Resources Code, the operator shall file an application for an interim management plan with the Planning Director in accordance with the provisions of the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone. Said application shall include: 
1.  All information required under this ordinance for the filing of a new application for a permit, unless the requirement is waived by the Planning Director. 
2.  A statement explaining that the surface mining operation is idle as defined in Section 2727.1 of the Public Resources Code. 
3.  An interim management plan which includes measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in accordance with the approved mining plan, the approved reclamation plan and the permit conditions. 
4.  A filing fee for review of the interim management plan which shall be the same amount as the filing fees for a reclamation plan. 
5.  Such additional information as shall be required by the Planning Director. 
6.  Within 60 days of the receipt of a completed application for an interim management plan, the Planning Director shall review and approve the application provided the interim management plan complies with the requirements specified in subsection a. and give notice by mail of the approval to the operator and any other person who has filed a written request for notice. Otherwise, the Planning Director shall notify the operator in writing of any deficiencies in the plan. The operator shall have 30 days, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the Planning Director, to submit a revised plan. The Planning Director shall approve or deny approval of the revised interim management plan within 60 days of receipt. If the Planning Director denies approval of the revised interim management plan, the operator may appeal that action to the City Council, which shall schedule a public hearing within 45 days of the filing of the appeal, or any longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the City Council. An application for an interim management plan shall not require a public hearing. 
7.  The interim management plan may remain in effect for a period not to exceed five years, at which time the Planning Director shall do one of the following: 
a.  Renew approval of the interim management plan for another period not to exceed five years, if the Planning Director finds that the operator has fully complied with the provisions of the interim management plan. 
b.  Require the operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan. 
c.  The determination by the Planning Director to extend the term of the interim management plan or to require reclamation shall not require a public hearing. If the surface mining operation is still idle after expiration of its interim management plan, the surface mining operation shall commence reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan. 
9.  Any financial assurances required in conjunction with approval of the permit shall remain in effect during the period the surface mining operation is idle and until such time as reclamation is completed. 
10.  Unless review of an interim management plan is pending before the Planning Director, or an appeal is pending before the City Council, a surface mining operation which remains idle for over one year after becoming idle as defined in Section 2727.1 of the Public Resources Code, without obtaining approval of an interim management plan, shall be considered abandoned and the operator shall commence and complete reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. 
R.  Successors Bound. Whenever any surface mining operation or portion of an operation subject to this ordinance is sold, assigned, conveyed, exchanged, or otherwise transferred, the successor in interest shall be bound by the provisions of the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone and shall notify the Planning Department and Department of Building and Safety in writing of such transfer of ownership. Any existing financial assurances shall remain in force and shall not be released until new financial assurances are secured from the new successor in interest and approved in accordance with Section 2770 of the Public Resource Code and Section 17.03.160. 
S.  Remedies. The procedures, remedies and penalties for violation of the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone and for recovery of costs related to enforcement are provided for in Ordinance No. 725, which is incorporated herein by this reference. 
T.  Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of the Mineral Resources Overlay Zone, it being expressly declared that this ordinance and each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase thereof would have been adopted, irrespective of the fact that one or more other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
Chapter 17.04 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

17.04.010 - Intent and purpose. 
    The performance standards identified in this section regulate the use of a building or land area. These performance standards were established to minimize potential risk to the public from hazards and to prevent the creation of nuisances and other conditions that are potentially harmful or discomforting. An additional purpose of these standards is to protect the environment, improve the appearance of the community, and to deter those conditions that may lead to blight. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.04.020 - Applicability. 
    Site planning and general development standards shall apply to all new construction, renovation, and alteration of existing uses or structures in all zone districts and land uses. 
A.  General Provision. No building or land shall be used or constructed if it creates a dangerous, noxious, fire, explosive, or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor, or air pollution; glare; or liquid or solid wastes in amounts that adversely affect surrounding areas. 
B.  Applicability. The standards contained in this Chapter 17.03 shall be applied in addition to the development standards contained in this Title 17 for any given zone. 
C.  Interpretation. Whenever the performance and development standards are different, the more stringent standard shall govern. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.04.030 - Property maintenance. 
    The following standards are established to regulate the maintenance of all properties, land uses, and structures in the City of Beaumont: 
A.  Abandoned Vehicles. Abandoned and inoperable automobiles and recreational vehicles shall not be kept on the driveways or in the yard areas of private property for more than seven days. 
B.  Refuse and Debris. Debris, rubbish, and trash, including but not limited to discarded old furniture, appliances, boxes, toys, etc.; discarded building materials; and equipment and materials shall not be visible from public rights-of-way at any time and shall not be kept in the yard areas for more than seven days. 
C.  Dilapidated Structures. Structurally unsafe buildings, including but not limited to those with known fire hazards; faulty weather protection broken roofs; windows and doors; partially constructed structures when construction has ceased; unoccupied buildings that are left open; hazardous fences or walls; abandoned signs; and damaged buildings shall be demolished, removed, or fenced to prevent public access. 
D.  Trash Receptacles. Trash receptacles shall not be stored in any front yard with any residential zone. 
E.  Landscaping. The landscaping of all properties must be maintained and watered. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.04.040 - Hazardous materials. 
    The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the California Department of Health Services (DHS) identify hazardous materials and prescribe handling, use, and disposal practices. In order to protect the health and welfare of those persons living, working, or visiting the City of Beaumont, the use, storage, manufacture, or disposal of hazardous materials shall be regulated and monitored according to standards established by these agencies and as outlined in this Section. 
A.  Land Use and Structures Using Hazardous Materials. A risk management and prevention program in accordance with the California Health and Safety Code, together with an inventory statement that is in accordance with federal, state, and local laws shall be prepared for all structures and land uses using materials identified as hazardous by the State of California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal EPA) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
B.  Use of Flammable Materials. The use and storage of flammable or explosive materials shall comply with all applicable ordinances. No open burning is permitted unless a written permit for such activity has been issued by the appropriate agency that is responsible for issuing permits and approvals. 
C.  Water Contamination. No liquid or solid waste or similar material that contaminates the water supply, or interferes with the bacterial processes in sewage treatment or otherwise causes the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be discharged into the public sewer or private disposal system, except in accordance with the applicable requirements of the EPA. 
D.  Radiation Exposure. No activity shall be permitted if it emits dangerous levels of radioactivity at any time. The term dangerous levels correspond to the applicable Federal and/or State standards for exposure. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.04.050 - Air quality. 
    The California Air Resources Board and the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) are the agencies responsible for the implementation of the Clean Air Act at the local level. In order to protect the health and welfare of those persons living, working, or visiting the City of Beaumont, the following performance standards with respect to air quality are outlined in this Section. 
A.  Smoke and Particulates. No smoke of any type shall be emitted from a source in excess of SCAQMD standards. No elements of dust, fly ash, vapors, fumes, gases or other forms of air pollution shall be permitted in excess of the standards set by the SCAQMD or that can cause damage to human health, animals, vegetation, or that can cause excessive soiling at any location. 
B.  Permits. Before a building or occupancy permit is issued by the City, the applicant shall be required to show proof that he has secured the necessary permits from the SCAQMD or that the project is exempt from SCAQMD regulations as of the date of filing of the City application. 
C.  Enforcement and Standards. In enforcing these regulations, the City shall use the same point of measurement as utilized by the SCAQMD. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.04.060 - Odors. 
    In order to protect the well being of the community and to eliminate the blighting influences of odors, the following performance standards with respect to the generation of odors are outlined in this Section. 
A.  Odor Generating Activities. Any process that creates or emits any odors, gases, or other odorous matter shall comply with the standards set by the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). 
B.  Quantified Standard. No odors, gases, and odorous matter shall be emitted in quantities to be detectable when diluted in a ratio of one volume diluted air to four volumes clean air at the point of greatest concentration. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.04.070 - Light and glare. 
    Outdoor lighting, light trespass, and illumination requirements indicated in the City of Beaumont Outdoor Lighting Ordinance (Chapter 8.50) shall apply to all development in the City. The Outdoor Lighting Ordinance is incorporated into this Zoning Ordinance by reference. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.04.080 - Purpose. 
    State law requires that the City is required to divert recyclable solid waste from landfills, or pay substantial fines and penalties for failing to do so. Many solid waste and trash container enclosures constructed before the enactment of this Ordinance are not adequate to provide for the separation of household refuse and recyclable materials, including glass, plastics and paper. 
(Ord. 971, 10-5-2010) 
17.04.081 - Applicability. 
    Sections 17.04.082 through 17.04.084, inclusive, shall apply to the construction of, and additions or tenant improvements to, any residential, commercial or industrial structure, except single-family, detached residences. 
17.04.082 - Enclosure plans and specifications. 
    The applicant for any applicable development activity shall, as a condition of approval, submit for review and approval site plans and profiles of enclosures sufficient in number to serve the development. Such plans shall include the following information: 
A.  Trash and Recycling Containers: Trash and recycling containers shall be shown on the site plan at grade; 
B.  Enclosure Accessibility: Enclosures shall be accessible to solid waste and recycle collection vehicles. The site plan shall include a design for truck turn around movements, ingress and egress, and "keep clear" areas; 
C.  Adequate Capacity: Adequate capacity for trash and recycling shall be provided, based upon the volume and tonnage expected to be generated by the proposed development, as estimated by the City; 
D.  Sizing: Enclosures shall be sized to provide for both trash and recycling receptacles placed in a manner that will allow free access to either by collection trucks; 
E.  Design: The design shall conform to the City's standard specifications, although alternative designs may be approved at the discretion of the Planning Director; 
F.  Signs: Signs shall be permanently placed on enclosure walls and on trash and recycling containers to distinguish them. General instructions about how the recycle shall be posted, which shall include a prohibition against the disposal of oil, grease and hazardous waste. The signs shall include the name and phone number of the person responsible for the maintenance of the enclosure. 
17.04.083 - Inclusion of recycling receptacles in building design. 
    Office, commercial and retail, industrial and large-scale residential development projects shall include appropriately-sized receptacles for recyclable materials adjacent to trash containers in all common areas. Signs shall be posted to instruct users as to the proper separation of trash and recyclable materials. 
17.04.084 - Waiver of parking requirements for existing development. 
    In order to encourage recycling, the Planning Director shall have the authority to reduce the number of required motor vehicle parking spaces provided for existing land uses in order to accommodate enclosures or recycling receptacles, provided that the enclosures meet the design specifications in Section 17.04.082. If there is insufficient space to construct a combined trash and recycling enclosure, the Planning Director shall have the authority to permit recycling receptacles to be located adjacent to existing trash receptacles. 
17.04.090 - Street improvement standards. 
    In order to promote the development of a comprehensive circulation and roadway network in the City, the following performance standards with respect to the street improvements are outlined in this Section. 
A.  Street Dedications and Improvements. All streets shall be dedicated and improved to the width established in the Circulation Element of the City of Beaumont General Plan. 
1.  Street improvements shall include curb and gutter, sidewalks, storm drains, landscaped parkway. 
2.  Street dedication shall include a corner cut-off area at intersections. 
3.  Whenever uncertainty exists regarding the need for street dedication and improvement, the Director of Public Works or his designee shall determine the need for dedication or improvement based upon studies and analysis and information contained in any applicable plans. 
B.  Street Dedications Standards. To mitigate potential problems associated with project generated traffic and circulation, dedication of street right-of-way and construction of street and related improvements may be required as a condition of approval of permits issued in compliance with this title. The following standards shall govern any street dedication or improvement: 
1.  No new construction or renovation shall be granted utility connections and a certificate of occupancy until one-half of the street along the entire length of the lot frontage is dedicated and improved according to City standards. For development of a portion of a lot, dedication and improvement shall apply only to abutting streets of that portion of the lot. A bond may be placed in lieu of improvements until the Director of Public Works deems it practical to construct the improvements. 
2.  The maximum area of land required for dedication shall not exceed 25 percent of the total lot area. 
3.  Additional street improvements shall not be required when the abutting street is already improved according to City standards. 
4.  A deed granting an easement for a public street shall be submitted to the City Engineer before approval of any permit is issued. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.04.100 - Utilities. 
    The following performance standards with respect to the provision of utilities and infrastructure are outlined in this Section to ensure the service demands of existing and future development are met. 
A.  Provision of Utility Connections. The developer or owner of a property shall be responsible for utility service connections, in cooperation with the utility company. 
B.  Under-grounding of Utility Lines. In order to protect the public safety and improve the appearance and functioning of the community, all electrical distribution lines of 16 kilovolts or less, telephone, cable television, and similar wires that provide customer services shall be installed underground, except for: 
1.  Utility poles within six feet of the rear lot line used for terminating underground facilities. 
2.  Temporary utilities while construction is ongoing. 
3.  Risers and poles as provided by developer or owner. 
4.  Meter boxes, terminal boxes, and similar equipment. 
5.  Transformers, except that all transformers shall be located in vaults. 
6.  Infill development in R-SF Zones where existing overhead lines serve the area, subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development. 
C.  Electrical Disturbance. No activity shall be permitted if it causes electrical disturbance that affects the operation of equipment located beyond the property line. Radio, television, and microwave transmitters shall be suitably wired, shielded, and controlled so that they do not emit electrical waves or impulses that may affect other electronic devices or equipment. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
Chapter 17.05 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS 

17.05.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    The purpose of the this section is to ensure that all land use and development in the City of Beaumont have sufficient parking in order to prevent or alleviate congestion. Parking and loading areas shall be provided in accordance with this section when a building or structure is constructed or a new use is established. Additional off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with this section if an existing building is altered, or dwelling units, apartments or guest rooms are added, or a use is intensified by the addition of floor space or seating capacity, or there is a change of use, at the time of such alteration, addition, intensification or change of use. The number of parking spaces and loading berths shall be in proportion to the need for such facilities created by the particular type of use. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be laid out in a manner that will protect the public safety and ensure their usefulness. Provide adequate off-street parking facilities, loading areas, and vehicle movement area associated with a use. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.05.020 - Applicability. 
    The minimum standards of this Chapter 17.05 shall apply to all new construction, expansion, renovation, conversion, and alteration of existing uses or structures in all zone districts. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided at the time of commencement of the use of the land or construction of the building, or at the time of renovation, conversion, alteration, or expansion by adding floor area, dwelling units, rooms, beds, or seats to a structure or to changes in occupancy or the enlargement of a commercial or industrial building. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.05.030 - General provisions. 
    This Section outlines the general requirements for parking in the City of Beaumont. The following parking regulations will be applicable to all development in the City. 
A.  Maintenance of Parking Areas. All covered or uncovered off-street parking and loading facilities required by Chapter 17.05 shall be permanently reserved for parking and loading purposes. All parking facilities, including but not limited to curbs, directional markings, handicapped symbols, landscaping, pavement, signs, striping and wheel stops, etc., shall be permanently maintained by the property owner/tenant in good repair, free of litter and debris, potholes, obstructions and stored material. 
B.  Restrictions Regarding Use of Parking Areas. Required parking spaces and areas shall not be used for the sale or display of goods and services, nor for the sale, display, repair or dismantling of motor vehicles, nor for the storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, unless otherwise permitted by subsection C below. 
C.  Truck Parking Prohibited in Residential Zones. The parking of commercial vehicles weighing 6,000 pounds or more shall be prohibited in all residential zones (R-SF and R-MF). This restriction shall apply to both on-street and off-street parking. 
D.  Temporary Parking. Parking areas in any zone may be used for temporary, special events with authorization from the owner or operator of the parking area and the Planning Director. The Planning Director may impose conditions to mitigate any adverse effect on surrounding properties. Provisions outlined in 17.03 (Temporary Use Permits and Special Events) shall govern the procedures and conditions for the application and approval of a temporary use/special event permit. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.05.040 - Parking requirements for land uses. 
    Each land use shall provide the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by this section, except where a greater number of spaces are required through conditional use permit conditions of approval. 
A.  Off-street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking and loading spaces with adequate ingress and egress must be provided for any new structure and for any new use established; for any addition to or enlargement of an existing structure or use; or for any change in the occupancy of any structure or the manner in which any use is conducted that would result in additional parking or loading spaces to be required. For any addition or any enlargement of an existing structure or use, or for any change of occupancy or manner of operation that would increase the number of parking or loading spaces required, the additional parking or loading shall be required only for such addition, enlargement, or change and not for the entire structure or use. Table 17.05-1 specifies the number of off-street parking spaces required for permitted land uses. 
Table 17.05-1
Off Street Parking Requirements Land Use Parking Required Compact/Truck Parking Residential Single-Family Residential Units 2 enclosed spaces/unit (accessory units that are rentals must provide 2 spaces, of which one shall be enclosed) Not Applicable Attached Single Family and Duplex Units 2 enclosed spaces/unit Not Applicable Multi-Family (efficiency/1-bedroom units) 1.25 spaces per unit (spaces may be uncovered) Not Applicable Multiple-Family (2 or more bedrooms/unit) 2.5 spaces per unit. (at least 1 space must be covered) Not Applicable Motels/Boarding Houses 1 space for each sleeping unit. 1 space per guest room or unit; plus other spaces as required for auxiliary uses such as banquet facilities, bars, and restaurants Not Applicable Commercial Assembly Use 1 space per 4 permanent seats. Where temporary seats are used, 1 space per 20 sf of assembly area. Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Banks/Financial Institutions 1 space per 200 sf gross floor area Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Bars and Nightclubs 1 space per 75 sf gross floor area; plus 1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Churches and Other Religious Institutions 1 space per 3 fixed seats. Where no fixed seats are provided, 1 per 20 square feet of assembly area. Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Cinema 1 space per 3 seats. Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Compact: Not permitted. Day Care  Day care center 1 space for every 7 children Compact: Not permitted. Gasoline Service Stations 1 space per 200 sf gross floor area; plus 1 space per service, bay; plus any additional spaces, required for accessory uses such as retail or food service Compact: Not permitted, Truck: 1 space per vehicle operated from site. Retail Uses 1 space per 200 sf gross floor Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Truck: As required for service and delivery vehicles. Professional Offices, other than medical 1 space per 200 sf gross floor area Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Truck: 1 space per vehicle operated from site. Medical and Dental Offices 1 space per 250 sf gross floor area Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Restaurants, Fast Food 1 1 space for every 100 sf of gross floor area, but not less than 10 spaces Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Restaurants, Sit-Down 1 space for every 100 sf of gross floor area, but not less than 10 spaces Compact: Maximum 25% where 20+ spaces are provided. Trade or business school 1 space per 50 sf of gross classroom area Manufacturing General Manufacturing 1 space per 500 sf gross floor area. Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Truck: 1 space per vehicle operated from site. Office, accessory to manufacturing use 1 space per 250 sf gross floor area of office space. Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Trucking and Truck Terminals 1 space per 1,000 sf gross floor area within any building. Truck: Per loading requirements. Warehousing 1 space per 1,000 sf gross floor area. Compact: Maximum 10% where 20+ spaces are provided. Truck: 1 space per vehicle operated from site.  
1 Minimum standard vehicle stacking capacity in a drive-through lane is eight vehicles. 
Fractional Spaces. All fractional spaces shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number. 
Combined Uses. When two or more uses are combined on a given site, the required parking shall be calculated as the combined total required for each individual use. Where two or more uses exist within a single building, parking shall be calculated based on the percentage of floor area devoted to each use. 
Compact and Handicap Parking. The calculation of the number of compact and handicap parking spaces to be provided shall be based on the total number of spaces required. Handicapped (accessible) parking shall comply with standards set forth in Chapter 11 of the Uniform Building Code. 
B.  Unspecified Land Use. If a land use is not specifically listed in Table 17.05-1, the Planning Director shall decide which standard most closely reflects the demand for parking that will be generated by the proposed project. For uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be the same as for similar-mentioned uses and the Planning Director shall determine in writing the parking requirements for the proposed project. In the event the determination of the Planning Director shall be deemed unsatisfactory or unreasonable, the applicant may present the matter to the Planning Commission in writing for posting on the agenda of a regularly scheduled Commission meeting, for determination. 
C.  Reduction of Spaces. No reduction of required parking spaces shall be allowed, except through approval of a variance in accordance with the provisions of this Title 17.05. 
(Ord. 979, 12/07/2010) 
17.05.050 - Access requirements. 
    Driveways providing ingress and egress to off-street parking spaces shall be designed, constructed and maintained as follows. 
A.  General Requirements. All lots shall have adequate vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or service road to permit unimpeded movement of goods and people. Visibility on streets and intersections shall not be blocked by signs, trees, hedges, fences, walls, or structures. Directional signs and graphics may be used to promote public safety and convenience. 
B.  Driveways. The following requirements are applicable to driveways: 
1.  Driveways shall not be located where they would impede traffic on streets or through intersections. 
2.  Driveways and aisles shall be maintained unobstructed at all times. 
3.  The minimum driveway width shall be 12 feet per lane for a one-way driveway and 25 feet for a two-way driveway. 
C.  Aprons. Each garage shall have an adequate paved area in front of the garage (apron) for maneuvering. The minimum paved apron width shall be 24 feet. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.05.060 - Parking facility standards and dimensions. 
    Off-street parking areas shall be provided on the subject site, outside of any public right-of-way, in compliance with this section. 
A.  Parking Stall Design. Parking facilities shall be designed to conform to the following minimum guidelines and standards: 
1.  Parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use to which they serve, unless remote parking is permitted by the Planning Director pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.05.80 (Remote Parking). 
2.  Access to parking stalls shall not be taken directly from a public or private street or alley. 
3.  The entrance to a private garage or carport shall be located a minimum of 24 feet from the street which the garage or driveway faces. 
4.  A 15-foot vertical clearance shall be maintained over all parking areas, driveways, and access points. 
5.  Driveways serving a parking area with 20 or more spaces shall be designed with either one-way circulation or a double driveway system. 
6.  No parking area shall be designed so that vehicles back into a street, except for single-family dwelling units. 
7.  No parking space shall be located within 20 feet of the access driveway, except within the R-SF and R-MF zones. 
8.  All carpooling parking spaces and bicycle racks shall be located near the main entrance of the facility they are intended to serve. 
B.  Parking Space Dimensions. Table 17.05-2 identifies the minimum required dimensions for parking stalls and aisles for standard, compact, and truck parking spaces. No more than a six-inch vehicle overhang into a landscaped area is permitted only when curb stops are not provided. 
Table 17.05-2
Parking Space Dimensions Type of Parking Angle Stall
Depth
(Y) Drive
Aisle
Width Stall
Width
(X) Section
Width Standard Parking Spaces 0° 9 feet 10 feet 24 feet 28 feet 45° 19 feet (a) 14 feet 12 feet 9 inches 52 feet (b) 90° 19 feet 26 feet 9 feet 64 feet Compact Parking Spaces 0° 9 feet 10 feet 20 feet 25 feet 45° 16 feet 14 feet 8 feet 43 feet 90° 16 feet 26 feet 8 feet 64 feet Truck Parking Spaces 0° 12 feet 24 feet 50 feet 52 feet 45° 44 feet 32 feet 17 feet 120 feet 50° 50 feet 46 feet 14 feet 145 feet 90° 50 feet 60 feet 12 feet 160 feet  
Notes: 
(a) 15'-10" for overlapped or herringbone layout 
(b) 45'-9" for overlapped or herringbone layout 
C.  Emergency Access. Dedicated fire lanes to serve as access for fire vehicles and emergency apparatus from a public street shall be provided as set forth below and shall be posted as a fire lane: 
1.  If any structure is 50 feet from a right-of-way and more than 30 feet high; or 
2.  If any structure is 150 feet from a right-of-way and 30 feet high or less; or 
3.  If the structure or use is commonly associated with a fire or explosion hazard; or 
4.  If the structure or use attracts a large congregation of people, as determined by the Fire Department. 
5.  Fire lanes must be at least 25 feet wide. An alley can serve as a fire lane if it meets the requirements. Likewise, an appropriately designed buffer strip unobstructed by landscaping or structures, can serve as a fire lane. 
6.  Projects with other characteristics, such as distance from the nearest fire hydrant, site design, etc., which inhibit fire control may require provision of a fire lane at the discretion of the Planning Director. 
7.  Alternative means of fire control may be provided, subject to the approval of the Fire Department. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.05.070 - Parking required improvements. 
    Off-street parking areas shall be improved in compliance with this section. 
A.  Covering Materials. All parking spaces, maneuvering areas, turnarounds, and driveways shall be paved with asphaltic concrete or Portland cement in accordance with standards set by the City Engineer/Director of Public Works. 
B.  Parking Stall Designations. All parking spaces except those in garages or carports shall be marked with paint or other distinguishable material. Compact and handicap parking spaces shall be identified to preclude use by other vehicles. 
C.  Directional Signage. Directional signs shall mark one-way entrances and aisles and shall be visible to drivers of vehicles using the facility. 
D.  Wheel Stops. Bumper guards and wheel stops shall be provided as needed to protect buildings, structures, landscaping, and other vehicles. 
E.  Parking Area Lighting. The lighting of parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the standards for light and glare in Section 17.05.080 of this Title. 
F.  Buffers. Parking areas provided for commercial and industrial uses shall be separated from any adjoining residential zone, church, school, or park by a six foot high masonry wall. 
G.  Headlight Glare. Where parking for any non-residential use is provided on any area of a lot whereby parking spaces or vehicle maneuvering areas will result in vehicle lights shining onto a public street, a wall or dense planting of shrubs or similar landscape material shall be provided as a buffer between the parking/maneuvering area and the street. The height of the wall or landscaping shall not be lower than three feet. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.05.080 - Shared and remote parking. 
    Certain types of developments or combinations of land use within a specific development may be eligible for a parking reduction if it can be demonstrated that such development may benefit from shared-parking. This section indicates the procedures applicable to development applications requesting either shared-parking or remote parking. 
A.  Special Study Required for Shared Parking. Two or more uses may share parking facilities, subject to the approval of the Planning Director and the provisions of this section. A parking demand analysis for the uses proposed to share parking facilities shall be prepared. The parking demand analysis shall be prepared by a registered traffic engineer. When such analysis demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Director, that the uses have different peak parking requirements, then the parking space requirement may be reduced by the Director. In no event, however, shall the parking requirement be reduced below the highest peak parking requirement of the use demanding the most parking. 
B.  Conditions and Requirements for Shared Parking. The following conditions must apply for shared parking to be permitted. 
1.  The uses sharing the parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or contiguous lots. 
2.  A legal agreement shall be signed by all parties sharing parking facilities. Such agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney and Planning Director, shall be recorded with the County Recorder's Office, and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of any property subject to the agreement or any lawfully existing building or structure on said properties. 
3.  Shared parking arrangements must be authorized by any discretionary permit issued for the use for which the parking is provided. Where no discretionary permit is required, such shared parking arrangements shall meet all other requirements of this Subsection B. 
C.  Remote Parking. The following conditions must apply for remote parking. 
1.  Remote parking may be permitted for multi-family structures and commercial and industrial uses, provided such parking facilities are located no more than 300 feet from the use they are intended to serve. 
2.  A covenant for use of the lot for parking shall be required between the owner of the lot supporting the proposed use and the owner of the lot to be used for remote parking. The covenant for remote parking shall be prepared by the City and recorded with the County Recorder of the County. The covenant may not be revoked, modified, or canceled without the consent of the City. 
3.  Such agreements for remote parking shall be authorized by any required discretionary permit issued for the proposed multi-family structure or commercial or industrial use. 
4.  Where no other application is involved, a conditional use permit shall be required to authorize remote parking. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
Chapter 17.06 - LANDSCAPING STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 16, 2016 , amended Ch. 17.06 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.06, §§ 17.06.010-17.06.110, pertained to landscape requirements, and derived from Ord. 963, adopted Nov. 17, 2009. 

17.06.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum landscape standards to enhance the appearance of developments, provide shade, reduce heat and glare, control soil erosion, conserve water, ensure the ongoing maintenance of landscape areas, and ensure that landscape installations do not create hazards for motorists or pedestrians. All landscaping shall be planted and maintained according to Chapter 17.06.030 (Water-Efficient Landscape), and the landscape installation and maintenance guidelines in such a manner to maximize the growth, health, and longevity of the plantings. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.020 - Applicability. 
    The regulations of this chapter apply to new and existing development, as follows. Deviations from the development standards of this article may be allowed on a case-by-case basis by the designated approving authority through site plan and architectural review. 
A.  New Projects. New commercial, industrial, mixed-use, multifamily residential and single-family residential projects shall be reviewed by the designated approving authority to ensure landscaping is provided in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  Existing Development with New Construction. Where an existing nonresidential, mixed-use, multifamily residential and/or single-family residential project requests an amendment that increases the building square footage by ten percent or more, the designated approving authority shall evaluate the existing landscape to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Existing Development. Where an existing nonresidential, mixed-use, multifamily residential and/or single family project wants to make changes to existing landscape areas. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.030 - Water efficient landscape requirements. 
A.  Intent: 
1.  Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention; 
2.  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining, and managing water efficient landscapes in new and rehabilitated projects; 
3.  To reduce the water demands from landscapes without a decline in landscape quality or quantity; 
4.  To retain flexibility and encourage creativity through appropriate design; 
5.  To assure the attainment of water efficient landscape goals by requiring that landscapes serviced by potable water not exceed a maximum water demand of 50 percent or 0.50 of its reference evapotranspiration (ETo); 
6.  To assure the attainment of water efficient landscape goals by requiring that landscapes serviced entirely by recycled water not exceed a maximum water demand of 70 percent or 0.70 of its reference evapotranspiration (ETo); 
7.  To eliminate water waste from overspray and/or runoff; 
8.  To achieve water conservation by raising the public awareness of the need to conserve water through education and motivation to embrace an effective water demand management program; 
9.  To implement the requirements of the California Water Conservation in Landscaping Act 2006 and the California Code of Regulations Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7; 
10.  To promote water conservation within new residential subdivision landscapes by prohibiting the use of natural turfgrass lawns within the front yards of new homes and promoting low water use plants and inert materials for a sustainable and marketable landscape design; and 
11.  To prohibit the new installation of natural turfgrass within medians and parkways within and along county maintained roads. 
B.  Definitions. The terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth below: 
    "Backfilling" means to refill an excavation, usually with excavated material. 
    "Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
    "Check valve" or "anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head or other location in the irrigation system to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from the sprinkler heads or other irrigation device when the system is off. 
    "Distribution uniformity" or "DU" means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water distributed over an area, typically expressed in a percentage and converted to decimal form for water use calculations. 
    "Emitter tubing" or "sub-surface emitter dripline" means the application of irrigation water with a matched precipitation rate at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines containing factory installed low volume drip emitters equally spaced to apply small volumes of water when installed per manufactures recommendations at or near the root zone of plants. The DU of this type of irrigation generally does not exceed 80 percent when plant spacing is random as each emitter is not dedicated to an individual plant but installed in a grid fashion. The DU of this type of irrigation generally does not exceed 85 percent when plant spacing is densely grouped in a triangular or rectangular spacing as each emitter is not dedicated to an individual plant but installed in a grid fashion. 
    "Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed a significant root growth into the site. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
    "Estimated annual water use" or "EAWU" means estimated total water use per year as calculated by the formula contained in Section 17.06.030 D.b.13 
    "Functional turf" means the turf areas to be publicly and privately accessible and dedicated as active play and recreation areas such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses; where turf provides a playing field or where turf is needed for high foot traffic activities. 
    "Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
    "Invasive species" are non-indigenous species (e.g. non-native plants or animals) that adversely affect the habitats they invade economically, environmentally, or ecologically. Lists of invasive species are included within the Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan and the Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan. Said lists are hereby incorporated by reference. 
    "Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license or is registered to practice landscape architecture in the State of California. 
    "Landscaped area" or "LA" means all of the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings, structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or impervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open space and existing native vegetation). 
    "Local water purveyor" means any entity, including a public agency or private water company that provides retail water service to customers in the unincorporated area of Riverside County. 
    "Maximum applied water allowance" or "MAWA" means the upper limit of annual applied water allowed for the established landscaped area as calculated by the formula contained in Section 17.06.030 D.b.13.a. 
    "Mulch" means a layer of material applied to the surface of an area of soil on the ground to prevent excessive evaporation or erosion, to enrich the soil, inhibit/discourage weed growth, increase the rate of saturation, and reduce fluctuation in soil temperature. Mulch may be organic (such as bark mulch, wood chips) or inert (decomposed granite, gravel). 
    "Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems" means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., impulse sprinklers, spray heads and rotors, etc.). 
    "Point source drip" or "point to point drip" means the application type of irrigation water with a matched precipitation rate at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines with a dedicated field-installed low volume emitter or emitters at each specific plant. The DU of this type of irrigation generally does not exceed 90 percent. 
    "Potable water" means water that must meet Federal and State safe drinking water standards and is safe for human consumption and contact. 
    "Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. Reference evapotranspiration numbers shall be taken from the most current Evapotranspiration Zones Map developed by the California Department of Water Resources. For geographic areas not covered by the evapotranspiration zones map, data from nearby areas shall be used. 
    "Rehabilitated landscapes" means any re-landscaping of a project that requires a discretionary permit. 
    "Special landscape area" means an area of the landscape dedicated to edible plants, and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, where turf provides a playing field or where turf is needed for high traffic activities. Cemeteries shall also be considered as special landscape areas. These areas shall be allowed 1.0 ETo. 
    "Temporarily irrigated" means irrigation for the purposes of establishing plants, or irrigation which will not continue after plant establishment. Temporary irrigation is for a period of six months or less. 
    "Turf" or "turfgrass" or "lawn" means species of warm or cool season grasses that form a dense thick mat of roots. Mowing creates a dense even surface and increases the need for water regardless of season. Turf or turfgrass or lawn does not include artificial turf. 
    "Water-intensive landscaping" means a landscape with a WUCOLS IV plant factor of 0.61 or greater, and categorized as high or between high and moderate. 
    "WUCOLS" means the publication entitled "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species IV" by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR) Water Use Efficiency Program, California Center for Urban Horticulture (CCUH), University of California Davis, and University of California Cooperative Extension (2014 or most current WUCOLS version). 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  The water-efficient landscape requirements contained in this chapter shall be applicable to all rehabilitated landscapes associated with residential uses (including single family and multi-family units/projects) with a total landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet which require a discretionary permit and/or approval; all new landscapes associated with residential uses (including single family and multi-family projects) which require a discretionary permit and/or approval; and all new and rehabilitated landscapes associated with commercial or industrial uses which require a discretionary permit and/or approval. 
2.  In the event covenants, conditions and restrictions are required for any permit subject to this chapter, a condition shall be incorporated into any project approval prohibiting the use of water-intensive landscaping and requiring the use of low water use landscaping pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in connection with common area/open space landscaping. Additionally, such a condition shall require the covenants, conditions and restrictions to incorporate provisions concerning landscape irrigation system management and maintenance. This chapter shall not be construed as requiring landscaping of common areas or open space that is intended to remain natural. Covenants, conditions and restrictions shall not prohibit use of low-water use plants or the replacement of turf with less water intensive plant species. 
3.  Recognizing the special landscape needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated landscapes within a cemetery are subject only to the provisions set forth in Sections 17.06.030E.1 and 17.06.030E.2 of this chapter. 
4.  The following uses and/or projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
a.  Registered local, state or federal historical sites; 
b.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system and have an establishment period of less than five years; 
c.  Mined land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; and 
d.  Botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
5.  If the local water purveyor has stricter requirements than called for in this ordinance, the project applicant is responsible for contacting the water purveyor to determine what the requirements are and for designing the plans to those requirements. The county will work with the project applicant to implement the water purveyor requirements. 
D.  Landscape Documentation Requirements. An applicant proposing any new or rehabilitated landscape for a project subject to the requirements of section C of this chapter shall prepare and submit a construction document package (CDs) to the planning director including the following: 
1.  All project information; 
2.  A planting plan; 
3.  An irrigation design plan; 
4.  A soil management plan; and 
5.  A grading design plan. 
The "Riverside County Guide to California Friendly Landscaping" (Landscaping Guide) as may be periodically amended by the planning director is hereby incorporated by reference to assist in designing, constructing, and maintaining a water efficient landscape and efficient irrigation system. 
It is recommended that an applicant proposing any new or rehabilitated landscape that is designated for recycled water use consult with the appropriate local water purveyor early in the development review process to ensure that future recycled water facilities meet the projected demand and that the aforementioned plans when submitted comply with the applicable standards, approvals, and implementation requirements of this chapter, the local water purveyor, and any applicable maintenance entity. 
Water systems for common open space areas shall use non-potable water if approved facilities are made available by the local water purveyor. Provisions for a non-potable water system shall be provided within the irrigation design plan. Water systems designed to utilize non-potable water shall be designed to meet all applicable standards of the appropriate regional water quality control board and the Riverside County Health Department. 
a.  Project information located on cover sheet: 
1.  Date; 
2.  Name of applicant and contact information; 
3.  Name of project owner and contact information; 
4.  Project address including parcel and lot numbers; 
5.  Total landscape area in square feet; 
6.  Project type (e.g. new or rehabilitated; residential, commercial, or industrial); 
7.  Water supply (e.g. potable, well, recycled; use of recycled water is encouraged); 
8.  Applicant's signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.06 and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package." 
9.  Landscape Architect's information, stamp, and signature; and 
10.  Status of plans, e.g. "plan check set", "bid set", "construction set". 
b.  Planting plan requirements: 
1.  New natural turfgrass lawns are effectively prohibited within the front yard for any new residential subdivisions. New natural turfgrass within medians and parkways within and along county maintained roads are effectively prohibited. 
2.  Plant types shall be grouped together in regards to their water, soil, sun, and shade requirements and in relationship to the buildings. Plants with different water needs shall be irrigated separately. Plants with the following classifications shall be grouped accordingly: high and moderate, moderate and low, low and very low. Deviation from these groupings shall not be permitted. 
3.  Trees for shade shall be provided for residential, commercial, and industrial buildings, parking lots and open space areas. These trees can be deciduous or evergreen and are to be incorporated to provide natural cooling opportunities for the purpose of energy and water conservation. 
4.  Plants shall be placed in a manner considerate of solar orientation to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain. 
5.  Plant selection for projects in high fire hazard areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required pursuant to Public Resources Code section 4291 and Riverside County Ordinance No. 695. Fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches shall be avoided. 
6.  Invasive species of plants shall be avoided especially near parks, buffers, greenbelts, water bodies, conservation areas/reserves and other open space areas because of their potential to cause harm to environmentally sensitive areas. 
7.  All exposed surfaces of non-turf areas within the developed landscape area shall be mulched with a minimum three-inch layer of material, except in areas with groundcover planted from flats where mulch depth shall be one and one-half inches. 
8.  Mulching products used on slopes shall aid in slope stability. 
9.  Turf areas shall be used in response to functional needs as defined and in compliance with the water budget. 
10.  Decorative water features shall use re-circulating water systems. 
11.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as the source for irrigation and decorative water features. 
12.  Planting plans shall identify and site the following: 
a.  New and existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, and turf areas within the proposed landscaped area; 
b.  A planting legend indicating all plant species by botanical name and common name, spacing, and quantities of each type of plant by container size; 
c.  Designation of hydrozones; 
d.  Area, in square feet, devoted to landscaping and a breakdown of the total area by landscape hydrozones; 
e.  Property lines, streets, and street names; 
f.  Building locations, driveways, sidewalks, retaining walls, and other hardscape features; 
g.  Appropriate scale and north arrow; 
h.  Any special landscape areas; 
i.  Type of mulch and application depth; 
j.  Type and surface area of water features; 
k.  Type and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices; 
l.  Planting specifications and details, including the recommendations from the soils analysis, if applicable. 
13.  Planting plans shall be prepared and have accurate and complete water budget calculations using one MAWA for the entire project and one EAWU formula for each hydrozone: 
a.  Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA): Planting Plans shall be prepared using the following Water Budget: Formula for projects serviced by potable water sources and required not to exceed 50 percent or 0.50 ETo: 
MAWA (in gallons) = (ETo)(0.62)[0.5 × LA+0.5 × SLA] 
Formula for projects serviced entirely by recycled water sources and required not to exceed 70% or 0.70 ETo: 
MAWA (in gallons) = (ETo)(0.62)[0.7 × LA+0.3 × SLA] 
Where: 
ETo is reference evapotranspiration, local to the project; 
SLA is the amount of special landscape area in square feet; 
LA is total landscape area (including the SLA) in square feet; and 
For the purposes of determining the MAWA, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.71. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed an average irrigation efficiency of 0.71. 
b.  Estimated annual water use (EAWU): EAWU for a given hydrozone is calculated as follows: 
EAWU (in gallons) = (ETo)(0.62)[((PF × HA)/IE) + SLA] 
Where: 
ETo is reference evapotranspiration; 
PF is Plant Factor; 
HA is hydrozone area in square feet; 
IE is irrigation efficiency (minimum 0.71); 
SLA is the amount of special landscape area in square feet; 
c.  Landscaping plans shall provide EAWU (in the same units as the MAWA) for the sum of all valve circuits in the irrigation hydrozone. The sum of all EAWU hydrozone calculations shall not exceed the MAWA for the project; 
d.  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor for low water use plants range from 0 to 0.39, for moderate water use plants range from 0.4 to 0.6, and for high water use plants range from 0.61 to 1.0. 
e.  The plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor, or the factor of the higher water using plant used. 
f.  The surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation and temporarily irrigated areas in the low water use hydrozone. 
g.  Landscape concept plans not for construction shall be required to provide a complete and accurate MAWA calculation only. 
14.  Planting plans and irrigation design plans (17.06.030 D.c.) shall be drawn at the same size and scale. 
15.  The planting plan and irrigation design plans (17.06.030 D.c.) including landscape concept plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect licensed or registered by the State of California. 
c.  Irrigation design plan requirements: 
1.  New natural turfgrass lawns are effectively prohibited within the front yard for any new residential subdivisions. New natural turfgrass within medians and parkways within and along county maintained roads is effectively prohibited. 
2.  Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed an average irrigation efficiency of 0.71. 
3.  All irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent runoff, over-spray, low head drainage, and other similar conditions where water flows off-site on to adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures. Irrigation systems shall be designed, constructed, managed, and maintained to achieve as high an overall efficiency as possible. The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
4.  Landscaped areas shall be provided with a smart irrigation controller which automatically adjusts the frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in response to real time weather conditions unless the use of the property would otherwise prohibit use of a timer. The planting areas shall be grouped in relation to moisture control zones based on similarity of water requirements (e.g., turf separate from shrub and groundcover, full sun exposure areas separate from shade areas, top of slope separate from toe of slope). Additional water conservation technology may be required, where necessary, at the discretion of the planning director. 
5.  Water systems for common open space areas shall use non-potable water, if approved facilities are made available by the water purveyor. Provisions for the conversion to a non-potable water system shall be provided within the landscape plan. Water systems designed to utilize non-potable water shall be designed to meet all applicable standards of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board and the Riverside County Health Department. 
6.  Separate valves shall be provided for separate water use planting areas, so that plants with similar water needs are irrigated by the same irrigation valve. Trees should be placed on separate irrigation valves from other plants (hydrozoned) with either bubblers or drip emitters. All installations shall rely on highly efficient state of the art irrigation systems to eliminate runoff and maximize irrigation efficiency as required by the Landscaping Guide. 
7.  Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at the installation. 
8.  The capacity of the irrigation system shall not exceed: 
a.  The capacity required for peak water demand based on water budget calculations within the required water window; 
b.  Meter capacity; or 
c.  Backflow preventer type and device capacity; 
d.  A velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) materials and seven feet per second for copper and brass materials. 
9.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer. 
10.  Within inert mulched planting areas, the use of point source drip irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. In 3" organic mulched planting areas where slopes are less steep than 4:1, the use of Emitter Tubing irrigation or point source drip irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. Low water use plants that require overhead spray may be exempted from this requirement but shall be grouped, spaced and hydrozoned independently on overhead spray. In 3" organic mulched planting areas where slopes are steeper than 4:1, the use of low volume irrigation or point source drip irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. Drip irrigation shall be installed under the mulch. If grading conditions require increased stability not obtainable through low volume drip methods then overhead irrigation will be permitted with proper justification at the discretion of the planning director. 
11.  Slopes greater than or equal to 4:1 shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation required to be submitted pursuant to this chapter, and if there is a clear demonstration that no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
12.  Long-narrow, or irregularly shaped landscaped areas including functional turf areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or low-volume irrigation technology. 
13.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any non-permeable surface including DG walking trails or paths. There are no restrictions on the irrigation system type if the landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing or if no overspray and runoff occurs. 
14.  For the purpose of design, overhead irrigation shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. (nine-hour water window), no more than six days a week. 
15.  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with the following: 
a.  A smart irrigation controller as defined in Section 17.06.030 D.c.4 of this chapter; 
b.  A rain sensing device to prevent irrigation during rainy weather; 
c.  Anti-drain check valves installed at strategic points to minimize or prevent low-head drainage; 
d.  A manual shut-off valve shall be required as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency or routine repair; 
e.  A mainline pressure regulator when the static water pressure is 15 percent above the recommended operating pressure of the irrigation system; 
f.  Pressure regulation within each valve circuit to establish optimal operating pressure per manufacturers' recommendations; 
g.  Backflow prevention devices within a lockable cage or enclosure or other anchoring device to prevent theft; and 
h.  Risers shall not be used in high traffic areas. 
16.  Dedicated landscape meters shall be required for all projects greater than 2,500 square feet except single-family residences. 
17.  Irrigation design plans shall identity and site the following: 
a.  Hydrozones: 
1)  Each hydrozone shall be designated by number, letter or other designation; 
2)  A hydrozone information table shall be prepared for each hydrozone; 
3)  Each hydrozone shall be identified by a low, medium, or high priority designation in the event of a drought or water budgeting event as determined by the local water purveyor. 
b.  The areas irrigated by each valve; 
c.  Irrigation point of connection (POC) to the water system; 
d.  Static water pressure at POC; 
e.  Location and size of water meter(s), service laterals, and backflow preventers; 
f.  Location, size, and type of all components of the irrigation system, including automatic controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads and nozzles, pressure regulator, drip and low volume irrigation equipment; 
g.  Total flow rate (gallons per minute), and design operating pressure (psi) for each overhead spray and bubbler circuit, and total flow rate (gallons per hour) and psi for each drip and low volume irrigation circuit; 
h.  Precipitation rate (inches per hour) for each irrigation circuit; 
i.  Irrigation legend with the manufacturer name, model number, and general description for all specified equipment, separate symbols for all irrigation equipment with different spray patterns, spray radius, and precipitation rate; 
j.  Irrigation system details and specifications for assembly and installation; and 
k.  Recommended irrigation schedule for each month, including number of irrigation days per week, number of start times (cycles) per day, minutes of run time per cycle, and estimated amount of applied irrigation water, expressed in gallons per month and gallons per year, for the established landscape. 
18.  For each valve, two irrigation schedules shall be prepared, one for the initial establishment period of six months and one for the established landscape, which incorporate the specific water needs of the plants and functional turf throughout the calendar year. 
19.  The planting plans (Section 17.06.030 D.b.) and irrigation design plans shall be drawn at the same size and scale. 
20.  The planting plan (Section 17.06.030 D.b.) and Irrigation design plans including landscape concept plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect licensed or registered by the State of California. 
d.  Soil management plan requirements: 
1.  After mass grading, the project applicant shall: 
a.  Perform a preliminary site inspection; 
b.  Determine the appropriate level of soil sampling and sampling method needed to obtain representative soil sample(s), typically one test per every 25,000 square feet of landscaped area; 
c.  Conduct a soil probe test to determine if the soil in the landscape area has sufficient depth to support the intended plants; and 
d.  Obtain appropriate soil sample(s). 
2.  The project applicant shall submit soil sample(s) to a laboratory for analysis and recommendation. The soil analysis may include: 
a.  Soil texture; 
b.  Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate tables; 
c.  pH; 
d.  Total soluble salts; 
e.  Sodium; and 
f.  Soil analysis recommendations. 
3.  The project applicant shall prepare documentation describing the following: 
a.  Soil type; 
b.  Identification of limiting soil characteristics; 
c.  Identification of planned soil management actions to remediate limiting soil characteristics; and 
d.  Submit the soil analysis report and documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the county pursuant to the requirements of Section 17.06.030 F.3. 
e.  Grading design plan requirements: 
1.  The landscape documentation submitted shall include rough/precise grade elevations prepared for the project by a licensed civil engineer. 
E.  Landscape Irrigation and Maintenance. This section shall apply to all projects subject to the provisions of this chapter as set forth in Section 17.06.030 C. 
1.  Two irrigation schedules shall be prepared, one for the initial establishment period of six months and one for the established landscape, which incorporate the specific water needs of the plants and turf throughout the calendar year. The irrigation schedule shall take into account the particular characteristics of the soil; shall be continuously available on site to those responsible for the landscape maintenance; and shall contain specifics as to optimum run time and frequency of watering, and irrigation hours per day. The schedule currently in effect shall be posted at the controller. 
2.  A regular maintenance schedule and certificate of completion shall be submitted to the planning director, property owner, and water purveyor. A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection, adjustments, and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas and removing any obstruction to irrigation devices. Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the original equipment manufacturers installed components or equivalent/improved quality components. 
3.  All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter. 
4.  Information shall be provided to owners of new, single family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes. 
F.  Compliance/Plan Submittal Process. Prior to issuance of a building permit for the project, the project applicant shall: 
1.  Submit all landscape documents for review and approval by the planning director. The planting plan, irrigation design plan, and soils management plan shall be reviewed by a licensed or registered landscape architect to ensure that all components of the plans adhere to the requirements of this chapter. The licensed or registered landscape architect shall sign the plans verifying that the plans comply with this chapter. Any plans submitted without the signature of a licensed or registered landscape architect shall not be accepted for review. 
2.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final inspection for the project, a regular maintenance schedule and a certificate of completion shall be submitted to the planning director certifying that the landscaping has been completed in accordance with the approved planting, irrigation design, soil management, and grading design plans for the project. The certificate of completion shall be signed by a licensed or registered landscape architect and shall indicate: 
a.  Date; 
b.  Project information: Project name; project applicant name, telephone and mailing address; project address and location; and property owner name and mailing address; 
c.  Prior to backfilling, evidence that the party responsible for irrigation installation conducted a preliminary field inspection of the irrigation system (evidence of field inspection shall be attached); 
d.  The landscaping has been installed in conformance with the approved planting and irrigation design plans; 
e.  Irrigation audit report performed by a certified irrigation auditor after project installation (audit report shall be attached); 
f.  The smart irrigation controller has been programmed appropriately according to the parameters of each valve circuit; 
g.  The irrigation system has been adjusted to maximize irrigation efficiency and eliminate overspray and runoff; 
h.  A copy of the approved landscape documentation (Section 17.06.030 D), the irrigation schedule (Section 17.06.030 E.1) and the maintenance schedule (Section 17.06.030 E.2.) has been given to the property owner and local water purveyor; and 
i.  Verification that the maintenance schedule has been provided to the planning director. 
3.  At a minimum, all landscape irrigation audits shall comply with the "Irrigation Association Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor (CLIA) Training Manual" (3rd Edition, 2013 or most current) and shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. Any landscape irrigation auditor performing audits shall maintain a current certification as a CLIA from the Irrigation Association (IA). 
4.  The planning director or his/her designee shall have the right to enter upon the project site at any time before, during, and after installation of the landscaping, to conduct inspections for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
5.  The planning director shall have the discretion to interpret and determine suitable compliance based upon the intent of the chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.040 - Landscape requirement for nonresidential uses. 
A.  Commercial Use Landscaping Requirements. Commercial Landscaping Requirements identifies the minimum required depth of landscaped areas adjacent to residential districts and public rights-of-way and the minimum required coverage of landscaping for commercial districts and specific commercial uses. 
1.  Landscape Depths Required: 
a.  Property Lines Adjacent to Residential Districts: Five feet. 
b.  Required Setback Adjacent to Public Rights-of-Way: Ten feet. 
2.  This area shall be landscaped with plant materials. 
3.  Landscaping in these areas shall consist of an effective combination of street trees, trees, ground cover and shrubbery and may include such items as sidewalks, access driveways, flagpoles, fountains, and other similar appurtenances. 
4.  Landscaping shall be developed as usable landscaped open space and outdoor living and recreation area with an adequate irrigation system. 
5.  Area shall be landscaped with plant materials designed to provide beautification and screening. 
B.  Commercial Use Landscape Provisions. 
1.  All non-paved areas shall be landscaped and maintained to control dust. 
2.  Wherever off-street parking areas are situated across the street from property in a residential zone, a masonry wall or berm three feet in height shall be erected within the required landscape area, outside of the public right-of-way to adequately screen the residential properties. 
3.  An automatic irrigation system shall be provided for all landscaped areas. 
4.  Landscaping within required setback adjacent to the public right-of-way shall be provided and maintained in perpetuity subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A distinct demarcation between asphalt paving and landscaped area shall be provided. 
5.  No other usage or storage is permitted within required landscaped area. 
C.  Industrial Use Landscape Provisions. 
1.  The required front yard and required side yard on the street side of a corner lot, except for the area occupied by necessary driveways and walkways, shall be landscaped with trees and other plant materials. 
2.  Landscaping within required setback adjacent to the public right-of-way shall be provided and maintained, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A distinct demarcation between asphalt paving and landscaped area shall be provided. 
b.  At least one-third of the total landscaped area shall be provided by trees, shrubs, and other plant material. 
3.  An automatic irrigation system for the landscaped area shall be provided. 
4.  No other usage or storage is permitted within the required landscaped area. 
D.  Landscaping Used for Screening. This section indicates the requirements with respect to the landscaping of buffers. 
1.  Landscaped Buffers for Industrial Uses. A landscaped buffer shall be provided along the boundary of all industrially zoned property where it abuts a residential or commercial zone. 
2.  Walls. Where a berm is provided, a three to six foot high masonry wall is allowed at the setback line with a berm to add to its height. 
E.  Parking Lot Landscaping Standards. 
1.  Landscaping Requirements. 
a.  A minimum of 15 percent of the total off-street open parking area shall be landscaped with a mixture of trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, hedges, flowers, bark, chips, decorating cinders, gravel, and similar material. A minimum of one-third of the required landscaping shall be distributed within the interior of the parking facility and the remaining two-thirds of the required landscaping shall be provided as peripheral planting on the exterior edges of the parking area. 
b.  All planter beds and tree planters shall be bordered by a concrete curb not less than 6 inches in height adjacent to the parking surface. 
c.  All applicants creating new or rehabilitating parking lots shall provide a landscape plan for review and approval by the City of Beaumont for said parking lots. The landscape plan shall incorporate water-conserving plant material and irrigation technology. 
d.  All landscape areas shall be well maintained in perpetuity. 
2.  Screening Requirements. 
a.  All off-street parking areas shall be screened to minimize the visual impact on adjacent streets and properties. No parking space shall be located within six feet of a street property line or back of sidewalk. Any open areas in the interiors shall be landscaped with appropriate plant materials. 
b.  Open parking facility or a loading area shall be screened from a residential district adjoining or directly across a street or alley. Screening shall be six feet in height, except that screening to protect properties across a street may not be less than four feet in height. 
Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements Exhibit

F.  Tree Requirements. 
1.  The intent of this code is to improve and maximize the landscaping within the off-street open parking areas to provide 30 percent or more of shade coverage in ten years. In order to achieve this coverage, the applicant shall plant single-trunk, low-branching trees in windy areas, and design, where possible, north/south-oriented parking areas to provide maximum shade. Landscaping shall be provided and maintained to the extent that at least one medium- or large-scale tree is planted for every six parking stalls. A diversity of tree species is required. 
2.  The minimum size tree planted shall be no less than a 24-inch box tree. 
3.  Low water use and native plant materials shall be encouraged and used to the greatest extent possible. 
4.  Problematic trees having shallow or invasive roots or having brittle or weak branching structure shall be prohibited. 
5.  Where trees already exist, the parking lot shall be designed to make the best use of this existing growth and shade wherever it is reasonably possible. 
G.  Landscape Maintenance Requirements. 
1.  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to: proper pruning, watering, and fertilization of plants; periodic replacement of decomposed granite; irrigation system repairs and adjustments; removal, adjustment, and/or replacement of tree stakes; and weed removal. All missing, dead, dying, or significantly injured tree(s) must be replaced. Unless otherwise approved, a replacement tree(s) shall be the same size and type as removed. The minimum size replacement tree(s) allowed shall be no less than a 24-inch boxed tree. 
2.  All significantly injured, decayed or dead trees, and trees found to be significantly damaged by improper pruning shall be removed and replaced by the landowner. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.050 - Parking lot landscape requirements. 
A.  Parking lot dividers, islands, planters, and planting areas shall be a minimum of five feet wide and ten feet long except that all new or retrofitted tree planters shall be a minimum of nine feet by seven feet, measured to the inside perimeter of the planter, and shall have no less than 48 square feet of permeable soil planting area. 
Parking Lot Requirements Exhibit

B.  Parking lot tree irrigation requirements. Automatic irrigation systems within parking lots shall be installed. Trees shall be irrigated with drip emitters, bubbler heads, or subterranean low-volume drip system. Trees shall be irrigated separately from shrubs and ground covers. 
C.  Parking lot tree maintenance and installation requirements. All plants and irrigation systems shall be installed according to approved plans. The owner shall guarantee the quality of work, health, and condition of plants and installation of materials including but not limited to plant types, size, spacing, and irrigation systems. Prior to final acceptance of the project, the City shall inspect and verify that the installation is in compliance with the approved plans and specifications. All corrections, adjustments, and/or replacement of landscape elements shall be done prior to final approval by the City. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.060 - Landscape requirements for multiple-family uses. 
A.  For small multiple-family residential properties with four units or less shall meet the same requirements as single family uses (Section 17.06.080). 
B.  For large multiple-family residential properties the intent of coverage for commercial properties. Projects shall meet the parking lot landscaping standards and the usable yard area requirements for the Multiple-Family Zone (Section 17.03.070). 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.070 - Landscape requirements for mixed uses. 
A.  For mixed use properties shall prepare detailed planting plan for the approval of the Planning Commission. The plan shall take into account the landscape requirement for the different types of uses of the property. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.080 - Landscape requirements for single family residential uses. 
A.  For single family residential properties no more than 50 percent of the front yard and street side yard area shall be non-pervious surface (e.g., used as a driveway). Deviations from these standards may be allowed through site plan and architectural review for small-lot single-family developments at the time of master home plan review where these standards preclude the maximum lot coverage from being achieved. 
B.  Remaining unpaved portion of the setback areas shall be landscaped, irrigated, and maintained. At least one-third of the landscaped area shall be provided by trees, shrubs, and other plant material. All other areas shall have wood chips, decorative rock, decomposed granite or other as approved by the Planning dept. All landscaping shall be maintained per the Beaumont Municipal Code and/or as often as necessary to prevent a nuisance. No junk, debris, or other similar materials shall be stored in the landscaped areas. 
C.  Landscaping shall be designed to prevent irrigation water from flowing over paved surfaces. Techniques include: 
1.  Off-setting any turf areas from driveways and sidewalks a minimum of 24 inches to prevent overspray from sprinklers. 
2.  Using a subterranean irrigation system (versus spray irrigation) or drip irrigation system. 
3.  Other water conservation techniques. 
D.  A minimum of two 24-inch box shade trees are required within the front yard setback of all single-family residences. 
Front Yard Coverage Exhibit

( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.090 - Slopes. 
A.  Cut and fill slopes equal to or greater than three feet in vertical height shall be planted with ground cover and shall be provided with an in-ground irrigation system to protect the slope from erosion and instability. 
B.  Cut and fill slopes exceeding ten feet in vertical height shall be planted with approved trees and shrubs in addition to ground cover to protect the slope from erosion and instability. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.100 - Maintenance. 
A.  Property owners shall maintain the planting strip abutting each property regardless of whether the property is developed or not. 
B.  Any tree, shrub, or part thereof on private property that overhangs any street or alley so that it endangers life, safety, or public property shall be removed, trimmed, or cut off within ten days of written notice from the City. 
C.  Occupants of a property abutting a public street or alley shall keep private trees from overhanging into the public right-of-way. Trees shall be trimmed to maintain a minimum clearance of ten feet above the sidewalk, 14 feet above a curb, 171/2 feet at center in residential areas, and 171/2 feet above the curb at bus stops. 
D.  Front and side yards shall not be used for off-street parking of vehicles or loading spaces. 
E.  The property owner shall permanently and continuously maintain all landscaping in a neat, clean, and healthy condition, including removal of litter, proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeds, fertilizing, and watering; and replacement of diseased and/or dead plants. 
F.  Front, side, and rear yards shall not be used for off-street parking of vehicles or loading spaces unless on an approved surface. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.110 - Street trees. 
    This section applies to street trees located within the public right-of-way. 
A.  Permitted Plantings. Only trees approved by the Planning Director shall be planted along a public street, alley, parking strip, public right-of-way, or parkway. 
B.  Responsibility for Maintenance. Owners of a property fronting a public street or alley shall be responsible for the adequate watering of all street trees abutting that property and shall bear the cost of replacement of any street tree that dies. 
C.  Alteration or Removal. No person shall plant, trim, or remove any tree or shrub on any, public street or right-of-way without approval of a permit by the Planning Department. Public utility companies and agencies shall be permitted to trim Trees to ensure the safe operation of their businesses. 
D.  Prohibitions. The following acts in planting strips or parkway areas are prohibited: 
1.  Construction of a tree well with diameter less than four feet or otherwise filling the ground area around a tree so as to shut off light, air, or water from the roots. 
2.  Piling of any, building material, equipment, or other substance around any tree so as to cause injury. 
3.  Pouring of any deleterious matter on or around any tree or on the ground or on any lawn in such a manner as to damage the tree. 
4.  Cutting, breaking, defacing or damaging a tree in any manner whatsoever. 
5.  Placing or allowing to remain in any parkway area any vegetation (other than an approved tree) or structure exceeding 18 inches in height. 
6.  Posting or affixing to any City tree any bill, poster, picture, placard, announcement, notice, advertisement, or sign. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.120 - Artificial turf/grass. 
    This section sets forth the requirements with respect to the use of artificial turf/grass in landscape areas and may be used to meet the requirements for plant material. 
A.  Artificial turf/grass shall be allowed in all landscape areas subject to the following standards: 
1.  Artificial turf/grass shall be aesthetically similar to natural turf. 
2.  Artificial turf/grass shall be maintained to the standards and aesthetics consistent to the time at which it was approved and installed. 
3.  Artificial turf/grass shall have an artificial turf fiber blend that reduces heat absorption, has appropriate ultraviolet protection, and has a flammability rating that meets Fire Department Standards. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
17.06.130 - Landscape water use efficiency enforcement. 
A.  The City of Beaumont will rely on water purveyors to enforce landscape water use efficiency requirements. The City of Beaumont shall coordinate with local water purveyors and identify programs that enhance and encourage landscape water use efficiency such as: 
1.  Tiered water rate structure, or 
2.  Allocation-based conservation water pricing structure, or 
3.  A rate structure at least as effective as the above options, or 
4.  Irrigation audits and/or irrigation surveys, or 
5.  Penalties for water waste. 
( Ord. No. 1069, § 4(Exh. A), 1-16-2016 ) 
Chapter 17.07 - SIGNS 

17.07.010 - Purpose, needs, and goal interest served. 
    It is the purpose of this Chapter to make the City attractive to residents, visitors and commercial, industrial and professional businesses while maintaining economic stability and vitality through an attractive signing program. 
A.  Recognition of Needs; Goals. The City recognizes the need for signs as a means to identify businesses and other necessary and beneficial activities within the community. The City finds that signing is an important design element of the physical environment. Provisions consistent with the goals and objectives of the community are necessary to ensure that the special character and image the community is striving for can be attained while serving business and other needs in the community. The City is striving to provide an economically stable and visually attractive community through high quality site planning, building designs, landscaping and signing. As a planned architectural feature, a sign can be pleasing and can harmonize with the physical character of its environment. Proper controls can achieve this goal and will make the City a more attractive place to live, work and shop. 
B.  Interests Served. The City enacts this chapter to serve many important governmental, City and community interests, which include but are not limited to: community aesthetics and the promotion of the visual appeal of the City, promotion of economic activity, the promotion of safety for motorists and pedestrians. 
C.  Authority. The City enacts this Chapter pursuant to the authority granted by the State Legislature and codified as Government Code section 65850. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.020 - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this section chapter are: 
1.  To allow for signage which is effective to direct persons to various activities and enterprises, in order to provide for public convenience; 
2.  To provide a reasonable system of controls for signs, to ensure the development of a high quality visual and functional environment; 
3.  To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance; 
4.  To encourage a desirable urban character which has a minimum of overhead clutter; 
5.  To enhance the economic value of the community and each area thereof by reasonably limiting the size, number, location, design and illumination of signs; 
6.  To encourage signs which are compatible with on-site and adjacent land uses; 
7.  To help facilitate the establishment of identifiable special areas and enclaves in the community and to enhance important historic elements in such areas; 
8.  To preclude potential traffic and safety hazards through good signing; 
9.  To protect the general public health, safety and welfare of the community; 
10  To regulate signs in a manner consistent with the General Plan; and, 
11.  To regulate signs in a manner consistent with the free speech rights guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and the liberty of speech and related provisions of the California Constitution. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.030 - Basic policies. 
    The policies stated in this section apply to all signs within the regulatory scope of this Chapter, and to all provisions of this Chapter, notwithstanding any more specific provisions to the contrary. 
A.  Enforcement Authority. The Director of Planning is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The Director may designate one or more representatives of the department to implement the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Permits When Required. No sign may be constructed, mounted, or displayed in the City unless the same is duly permitted pursuant to this Chapter, or is exempt from permitting, either pursuant to this Chapter or by other applicable law. In addition to the requirements of this Chapter, all signs constructed, mounted or displayed within the City must also satisfy all applicable safety codes (building, electrical, plumbing, grading, etc.) and all applicable requirements of other bodies of law. 
C.  Message Neutrality. It is the City's policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner, which is content neutral as to noncommercial signs and viewpoint neutral as to commercial signs. 
D.  Message Substitution Policy. Subject to the landowner's consent, any noncommercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly permitted or allowed noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this Chapter. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or any favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel; it does not allow the substitution of an offsite commercial message in place of an onsite commercial message, and it does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted. 
E.  Regulatory Interpretations. All regulatory interpretations of this Chapter are to be exercised in light of the City's message neutrality policy and message substitution policy. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this Chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a "structure" as defined in the California Building Code, then the Director shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this Chapter. 
F.  Rules for Non-Communicative Aspects of Signs. All rules and regulations concerning the non-communicative aspects of signs, such as location, size, height, illumination, spacing, orientation, etc., stand enforceable independently of any permit or approval process. 
G.  Billboard Policy. The City Council finds that the City already has a sufficient number of billboards to satisfy the community's needs for offsite commercial messages, and that any new or additional billboards, which by their very nature cause serious esthetic harm, would negatively impact the appearance of the City. For these reasons, the City completely prohibits the construction, erection or use of any billboards, other than those which legally exist in the City, or for which a valid permit has been issued and has not expired, as of the date on which this provision is first adopted. This prohibition shall also apply to alterations, enlargements or conversions to digital displays (including changeable image displays that use light emitting diodes or functionally equivalent technologies) of legally existing billboards. The City adopts this policy pursuant to California Government Code section 65850, and California Business and Professions Code sections 5354(a) and 5408.3 (both effective January 1, 2003). No permit shall be issued for any billboard which violates this policy, and the City will take immediate abatement action against any billboard constructed, maintained, altered, enlarged or converted in violation of this policy. The City Council affirmatively declares that it would have adopted this billboard policy even if it were the only provision in this Chapter. The City Council intends for this billboard policy to be severable and separately enforceable even if other provision(s) of this Chapter may be declared, by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable. This provision does not prohibit agreements to relocate presently existing, legal billboards, as encouraged by California Business and Professions Code section 5412. 
H.  Mixed or Multiple Use Zones. In any zone where both residential and non-residential uses are allowed, whether such zones are now existing or created in the future, the signage rights and responsibilities applicable to any particular use shall be determined as follows: residential uses shall be treated as if they were located in the residential use where that type of use would be allowed as a matter of right, and nonresidential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where that particular use would be allowed, either as a matter of right or subject to a conditional use permit or similar discretionary process. 
I.  Owner's Consent. No sign may be displayed without the consent of the legal owner of the property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. For purposes of this policy, "owner" means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to possession, control or use of the property. 
J.  Legal Nature of Signage Rights and Duties. As to all signs attached to property, real or personal, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from this Chapter attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. This provision does not modify or affect the law of fixtures, sign-related provisions in private leases regarding signs (so long as they are not in conflict with this Chapter), or the ownership of sign structures. 
K.  Preservation of Existing Rights and Duties. This Chapter does not abrogate any easements, covenants, or other existing agreements that are more restrictive than the provisions of this Chapter. 
L.  Sign Programs. Sign programs for specific developments, as well as special sign districts or special sign overlay zones, or in specific plans of land uses, when approved as required by applicable law, may modify the rules stated herein as to sign size, height, illumination, spacing, orientation or other non-communicative aspects of signs, but may not override or modify any of these basic policies. All the provisions of this section shall automatically apply to and be deemed a part of any sign program approved after the date on which this provision is initially adopted. 
M  Severance. If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion or provision of this Chapter is held invalid or, unconstitutional, or unenforceable, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or provision of this Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid portion. In adopting this Chapter, the City Council affirmatively declares that it would have approved and adopted the Chapter even without any portion, which may be held invalid or unenforceable. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007; Ord. 967, 4-20-10) 
17.07.040 - Categorization of signs. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, signs within the City shall be classified in one or more of the following categories: 
A.  Animated Sign. A sign designed to attract attention through movement or the semblance of movement of the whole or any part including, but not limited to, signs which swing, twirl, move back and forth or up and down; or signs which change color or shades of color or any other method or device which suggests movement. 
B.  Announcement or Bulletin Board Sign. Signs, permanent in character, designed and constructed to accept changeable copy, handbills, posters and other temporary materials of a similar nature. 
C.  Awning Sign. A sign painted or printed on the exterior surface of and awning. An alternative to a wall sign, permitted as same. 
D.  Banner. A fabric or fabric-like material on which an advertising message is painted or otherwise affixed. 
E.  Billboard. A permanent structure sign used for the display of offsite commercial messages. 
F.  Construction Sign. A sign mounted on the site of a construction or remodeling project, for which a building permit is required and has been issued, displayed during the time period beginning with the issuance of the building permit and ending with the earliest of any of the following: expiration of the building permit, issuance of a certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion, final inspection, or the functional equivalent of any of them. 
G.  Directional Sign. A sign that provides directional information for drivers, pedestrians, and travelers. 
H.  Electronic Message Sign. A sign with the capability of presenting variable message displays by projecting an electronically controlled light pattern against a contrasting background and which can be programmed to change the message display periodically. 
I.  Flag. A device, generally made of fabric or flexible materials, (usually cloth, paper or plastic), which displays visual colors, images, or symbols, typically those of governments, religions, causes, or organizations., or specific business activities. 
J.  Flashing Signs. Lighted signs which disappear and reappear at periodic intervals, or are intermittently on and off, and which are placed so as to attract vehicular traffic with emphasis on the recurrence of lights. This definition includes beacons, searchlights, and klieg lights only when they are used for commercial purposes. 
K.  Monument Sign. A sign with an overall height of six feet or less, standing directly on the ground or on a base where the supporting poles or structures, if any, are covered from public view. 
L.  Nameplate. Signs identifying the occupant of the premises, the business and/or address. 
M.  Off-site sign. A sign which advertises or informs in any manner businesses, services, goods, persons or events at some location other than that upon which the sign is located. The onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial messages. 
N.  Painted sign. A sign painted or mounted on the exterior surface of a building or structure. 
O.  Pennant. A display device, usually triangular in shape and made of flexible materials, such as cloth, paper or plastic, used primarily to attract attention of passersby. 
P.  Pole or Pylon Sign. A sign with an overall height exceeding six feet and supported by one or more poles or pylons attached directly into or upon the ground. 
Q.  Portable Sign. A sign designed and constructed so as to be easily moved. Such signs are usually not to a building or anchored to the ground. Common types include "A" frame signs, sandwich board signs, and sidewalk signs. 
R.  Poster Sign. Any sign attached to the ground in a manner approved by the building official, which may be visible from adjacent streets or highways. 
S.  Projecting Sign. A sign which is suspended from or supported by a building or wall and which projects outward from such building or wall a distance of 12 inches or more. Contrast: wall sign. 
T.  Real Estate Sign. A sign which displays information regarding an economic exchange of which land or improvements thereon is the subject. Such signs are usually temporary in physical structure and display messages such as "for sale," "for rent," etc. A sign which announces vacancies at hotels, motels, and other places of short-term accommodation are not within this definition. 
U.  Revolving Sign. A sign or a portion thereof, which rotates or revolves. 
V.  Roof Sign. A sign supported by or attached to or projecting through the roof of a building or structure, or projecting above the eave line or parapet wall of the building or structure. 
W.  Temporary Sign. A sign which, by virtue of its lightweight or flimsy construction, is not suitable for long term display. Common temporary signs include banners, pennant valances, streamers, advertising balloon, inflated or air activated advertising devices, search lights, beacons, moving stuffed animals, or advertising displays constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, plastic, paper, cardboard, wallboard, wood or other light or similar materials used for advertising purposes attached to or pinned on or from any structure, staff, pole, line, framing, vehicle or other object. 
X.  Under Canopy Sign. A sign attached to the underside of a projecting canopy perpendicular to the building frontage, commonly used for identifying the land use at that location. 
Y.  Vehicle Signs. Signs on or affixed to trucks, vans, automobiles, trailers, or other vehicles which advertise or provide direction to a use or activity not related to its lawful making of deliveries or sales of merchandise or rendering of service from such vehicles. 
Z.  Wall Sign. A sign which is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or structure, the exposed face of which is in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of the wall 
AA.  Window Sign. A sign painted, attached, glued or otherwise affixed to a window, which is easily visible from the exterior of the building. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.050 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings stated in this section. 
A.  Administrator. Same as Director. 
B.  Advertising Structure. A structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed for advertising purposes. 
C.  Area of Sign. The area of a sign shall include the entire area within a series of rectangles (maximum four per visual plane) whose outermost borders are defined by the outermost extent of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, character or separate sign surface. When letters comprising a sign message are placed on a background or field which is different in color or materials from the architectural features of the building on which the sign is mounted, the sign area shall be calculated as the entire area comprising the overall sign feature. In the case of a two-sided sign, the area shall be computed as including only the maximum single display surface which is visible from any ground position at one time. The supports or uprights on which any sign is supported should not be included in determining the sign area unless such supports or uprights are designed in such a manner as to form an integral background of the sign. In the case of any cylindrical or spherical sign, the total area shall be computed on the total area of the surface of the sign. 
D.  Awning. Either a fabric covered appendage or a temporary collapsible shelter of noncombustible materials supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and used to create shade. Such a device is considered a sign only when it is also used to display an image or message. 
E.  Canopy. A fixed overhead shelter used as a roof, which may or may not be attached to a building. Such a device is also a sign only when it is also used to display an image or message. 
F.  Changeable Copy. Sign display copy, which may be changed without altering the physical structure or mounting device of the sign itself. 
G.  Commercial Complex. Any group of three or more commercial uses on a parcel or combination of contiguous parcels which are generally served either by common access or common parking, or a large single commercial use occupying at least two and one-half acres with a minimum of 200 feet of street frontage. 
H.  Commercial message. A message displayed on a sign that primarily concerns business, commercial or economic interests, or which proposes an economic transaction. Commercial messages may be onsite or offsite; however, the onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial messages. 
I.  Development. A building wherein two or more separate independently owned or operated establishments are located. 
J.  Director. The City's Planning Director. 
K.  Establishment. Any non-residential use of land involving permanent structures or buildings. 
L.  Face of Building. The wall of a building, excluding any appurtenances, such as projecting fins, columns, pilasters, canopies, marquees, showcases of decorations, but including any required parapet wall. 
M.  Frontage. The length of a lot along a street or other principal public thoroughfare, but not including such length along an alley, railroad or freeway. 
N.  Frontage of the Parcel. On a lot with more than one frontage on a public street, the front footage of the parcel shall be determined by the measurement of the larger or largest frontage on a public street. 
O.  Height of a sign. The distance from the average ground level immediately surrounding the base of the sign to the top of its highest element, including any structural or architectural element. Landscape mounding shall not be used to artificially alter the height of a sign. 
P.  Hospital or Medical Center Complex. Any group of medical or hospital buildings under single ownership on a parcel or combination of parcels that contain a minimum of 20 acres or more. 
Q.  Industrial Complex. Any group of three or more industrial uses on a parcel or combination of parcels which are generally served either by common access or common parking, or single industrial use occupying at least 100,000 square feet of floor area. 
R.  Landscaped Planter. An area specifically designated for plant materials that may be at, below or above grade. 
S.  Line of Sight. The point of visibility from the street to an object, e.g., sign. The longer the line of sight, the further the sign is visible from the street. 
T.  Luminous sign. A sign that emits light. 
U.  Mansard Roof. A sloped, decorative roof element attached to the face of a building wall. 
V.  Noncommercial message. A message or image displayed on a sign which concerns matters not included within the definition of commercial message. Noncommercial messages typically consist of expressions on the topics of politics, religion, philosophy, morals, and public controversies. The onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial messages. 
W.  Off-site or off-premises sign. A sign whose message does not pertain or relate to the premises upon which the sign structure is mounted or constructed. The onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial messages. 
X.  On-site or on-premise. As pertaining to signs, a message which concerns or relates to the same premises as that upon which the sign is mounted or displayed. The onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial messages. 
Y.  Office Complex. Any group of three or more office uses on a parcel or combination of parcels that are generally served either by common access or common parking. 
Z.  Primary Street Frontage. The street frontage from which the majority of the pedestrian or vehicular traffic is drawn or toward which the building or buildings are oriented for primary visual impact. Each commercial complex or shopping center shall be allowed to designate only one primary street frontage. Where no single street frontage can be identified as the primary street frontage, or in cases of dispute as to which street frontage is the primary street frontage, the Planning Director shall designate the primary street frontage in conjunction with the review of proposed signs. 
AA.  Secondary Street Frontage. A street frontage other than a primary street frontage. 
BB.  Shopping Center. Same as commercial complex. 
CC.  Sign. Any device, fixture, placard or structure, including its component parts, which draws attention to an object, product, place, activity, opinion, person, institution, organization, or place of business, or which identifies or promotes the interests of any person and which is to be viewed from any public street, road, highway, right-of-way or parking area. However, the following are not within the definition of "sign" for regulatory purposes of this Chapter: 
a.  Interior signs: Signs or other visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof, provided the building or enclosed structure is otherwise legal; 
b.  Architectural features: Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts); 
c.  Symbols embedded in architecture: Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal; 
d.  Personal appearance: Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, costumes (but not including commercial mascots); 
e.  Manufacturers' marks: Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale; 
f.  Fireworks, etc.: the legal use of fireworks, candles and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this Chapter; 
g.  Mass transit signage: Advertisements or banners mounted on trains or duly licensed mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the City; 
h.  Certain insignia on vehicles and vessels: On street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel; 
i.  Gravestones or grave markers. 
j.  Newsracks and newsstands. 
DD.  Sign Structure. The supports, uprights, bracings, guy rods, cables and other structural framework of a sign or outdoor display. 
EE.  Window Area. The total area of a window upon which signs, images or messages may be mounted. A group of window panes or panels can be considered one window if they are adjoining on the building face and are less than six inches apart. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.060 - Administration, permits, and appeals. 
A.  Sign Permit Required. A sign permit shall be required prior to the placing, erecting, moving or reconstructing of any sign in the City, unless the subject sign is expressly exempted from the permit requirement by this Chapter or other applicable law. Signs requiring a permit shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
B.  Permit-Method of Application. An application for a sign permit shall be made on forms as prescribed by the Director. Such an application shall be filed with the Planning Department. The application shall be accompanied by any fees or bonds as specified by City Council resolution. 
C.  Permit Application-Contents. A sign permit application shall contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and address of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. Three copies of the plans, fully dimensioned, shall be filed with the application, including: 
1.  Plot plan, fully dimensioned, showing location of all buildings and improvements and the location of each proposed sign together with the location, size and height of all existing signs on the premises/site. The street frontage shall be clearly indicated on the plan. 
2.  Elevation plan, fully dimensioned, showing height and size of each proposed sign, colors, method of illumination and materials of construction, and if a wall sign, the exact location on the face of the building. 
3.  Structural details and circulations prepared and signed by an engineer or architect registered in the State. Such details shall be required when the area of the sign exceeds five square feet and the height of the sign exceeds six feet. 
4.  A statement by the owner of the proposed sign as to whether the sign is to display commercial or noncommercial messages, or both, and whether the display face will be permanent, changeable, or a permanent structure with changeable elements. If the proposed sign is to be used to display commercial messages, then the applicant shall also state whether the message is to be onsite or offsite. 
D.  Purpose and Method of Review. The purpose of a permit is to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. After receipt of a complete sign application, the Director shall render a decision to approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the sign request within 15 working days. Unless the applicant waives time, failure of the Director to issue a written decision within 15 working days shall constitute denial of the application. Such a review shall ensure that any sign proposal is in conformance with this Chapter and is consistent with its intent and purpose. In the event that the application is approved with modifications or conditions, those requirements shall not be based upon the proposed message content, sign copy, or design of the visual display of the sign. 
E.  Appeals. All sign permit applications shall be initially reviewed by the Director. When the Director issues a decision on a sign permit application, or when the time for doing so has expired without a written decision, then the applicant or any concerned person may appeal first to the Planning Commission and then to the City Council. Appeal is effected by filing a written notice thereof with the City Clerk, and paying the applicable appeal fee as set by Resolution of the City Council. In each case, written notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within ten days of when the decision was delivered or sent to applicant and all known concerned persons, or the last day on which a decision should have been timely rendered. In each case, the appellate body must conduct a hearing and consider evidence, and render a written decision within 30 days. In the cases of appeal to the Planning Commission and the City Council, the hearing must follow normal procedures for agendizing and giving public notice. Unless time is waived by the applicant, any permit or approval on which the City does not render a definite decision within the required time shall be deemed denied, and the time for appeal or filing judicial review shall commence on the last date on which the City could have issued a decision. 
F.  Judicial Review. Following final decision by the City Council, any concerned person may seek judicial review of the final decision on a sign permit application pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. 
G.  Multiple Sign Applications. When an application proposes two or more signs, the application may be granted either in whole or in part, with separate decisions as to each proposed sign. When an application is denied in whole or in part, the Director's written notice of determination shall specify the grounds for such denial. 
H.  Revocation or Cancellation. The Director shall revoke any approval upon refusal of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this Chapter and/or the terms or conditions of any permit, after written notice of noncompliance and at least 15 days opportunity to cure. 
I.  Permits Issued in Error. Any approval or permit issued in error may be summarily revoked at any time before substantial work in reliance upon the permit has been accomplished, by the City upon written notice to the holder of the reason for the revocation. 
J.  Interpretation of Provisions. Whenever the application of this Chapter is uncertain, the Director may refer the matter to the Planning Commission for determination. All interpretations are to be made in light of the Basic Policies section of this Chapter. 
K.  Variances. Applications for a variance from the terms of this Chapter shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission according to the variance procedures set forth in the Zoning Ordinance; however, variances shall be considered without reference to the proposed content, copy, or message of the proposed sign (other than the onsite/offsite distinction for commercial messages). 
L.  Uniform Sign Program. All applications for approval of signs in a shopping center, commercial, industrial or office complex, a group of three or more businesses on a parcel or project site or for commercial recreation uses shall be submitted in the form of Uniform Sign Program accompanied by sketches and drawings to scale and dimensions showing details of construction, including connections and electrical plans, if any, and shall delineate the typical size, shape, design, material, coloring, lettering, lighting and position of the signage in relationship to the building form or place where it will be displayed. Scaled sketches of existing signs on the premises shall accompany the application. 
M.  Motorists' Line of Sight. All sign locations shall be safe for traffic sight purposes. A sight distance study may be required with each monument or pylon sign being proposed in the Uniform Sign Program when located next to any right-of-way, sidewalk, driveway, or as designated by the Planning Director. 
N.  Program Approval. All sign programs shall be filed and reviewed as provided in this Chapter. Such Uniform Sign Programs shall be developed in full compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. No sign shall be installed which does not conform to the approved Uniform Sign Program. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.070 - General provisions. 
A.  Exempt Signs. Subject to the qualifications and conditions stated in this section, the following signs are exempt from the application, permit and fee requirements of this Chapter. However, the exemption from the sign permit requirement does not exempt the proposed sign from safety code permitting, such as building, electrical, plumbing, grading permits, etc. 
1.  Permanent window signs not exceeding four square feet and limited to business identification, hours of operation, address and emergency information only; 
2.  Real estate signs not exceeding four square feet in area of five feet in height, maximum one sign per parcel or lot, provided it is unlit and is removed within 15 days after the close of escrow or the rental or lease has been accomplished; 
3.  Contractor or construction signs: One sign shall be permitted on a construction or remodeling site. The sign may not exceed 32 square feet unless a larger sign is required by another body of law, in which case the smallest sign conforming to the law shall be used. The construction sign may not exceed eight feet in overall height, and shall be set back from the property line by at least ten feet. Construction signs must be removed at the earliest of: issuance of certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion, or final inspection check off, or their functional equivalent. 
4.  Future tenant identification sign: Future tenant identification signs may be placed on vacant or developing property to advertise the future use of the property and where this information may be obtained. Such sign shall be limited to one per street frontage and to a maximum of 32 square feet in area and eight feet in overall height for parcels containing ten acres or less. For parcels greater than ten acres, one sign is permitted for every 600 feet of street frontage and is limited to 64 square feet in area per side and 15 feet in overall height. Such signs may also be placed along the freeway at 1,000 foot intervals, not to exceed 150 square feet in area per side and 20 feet in overall height. Further, such signs shall be placed no less than ten feet from any property line. Any such sign shall be removed upon completion of such project; 
5.  Real estate signs on industrial, commercial or agricultural property: One sign per street frontage not to exceed 32 square feet; no such sign shall exceed eight feet in overall height and shall be set back from the property line at least ten feet. Where a property has in excess of 600 linear feet of frontage, one additional sign is permitted for each 600 linear feet of street frontage. 
6.  Real estate signs on residential properties: one sign not exceeding eight square feet in area per display face, not more than two display faces, maximum height five feet, setback from the property line at least five feet. 
7.  Memorial tablets, plaques, or directional signs for community historical resources, installed by a recognized historical society or civic organization; 
8.  Directional signs not exceeding three square feet in area; 
9.  Residential building identification signs used to identify individual residences and not exceeding two square feet; 
10.  Official and legal notices issued by the court, public body, person or officer in performance of his public duty or in giving any legal notice; 
11.  Directional, warning, identification, or informational signs or structures required or authorized by law or by federal, State, County or City authority; 
12.  Flags. Flags on commercial, industrial, or agricultural properties: 
a.  Maximum number of flags for property less than one acre: three; maximum height of flag poles: 30 feet; maximum area of each flag: 60 square feet (measured one side only). 
b.  Maximum number of flags for property one acre or larger: six; maximum height of flag poles: 30 feet; maximum area of each flag: 60 square feet (measured one side only) 
c.  Flags on residential properties less than 3/4 acre: maximum number of flags: three; maximum number of flag poles: one; maximum height of flag poles: 20 feet; maximum area of each flag: 40 square feet (measured one side only). No flags displaying commercial messages, images or symbols may be displayed in residential zones. 
d.  Flags on residential properties 3/4 acre or larger: maximum number of flags: three; maximum number of flag poles: one; maximum height of flag poles: 30 feet; maximum area of each flag: 40 square feet (measured one side only). No flags displaying commercial messages, images or symbols may be displayed in residential zones. 
13.  Signs of public utility companies, indicating danger or which serve as an aid to public safety or which show location of underground facilities or public telephones; 
14.  Safety signs on construction sites; 
15.  Political etc. Signs displaying political or other noncommercial messages may be displayed on private property in any zone at any time under the message substitution policy of this Chapter. 
a.  In residential zones and on legal residential uses, in addition to the flag allowance, temporary or permanent signs displaying political or other noncommercial messages may be displayed at anytime subject to: 
1.  Maximum number of signs: not limited 
2.  Maximum size of any one side (measured one side only): ten square feet. 
3.  Maximum area of all signs combined: 20 square feet. 
4.  Maximum height: six feet. 
5.  Placement shall be at least five feet from any sidewalk property line or driveway and shall not obstruct any line of sight for traffic. 
b.  In Commercial or industrial zones and on legal commercial or industrial uses on land one-half acre or less, temporary or permanent signs displaying political or other noncommercial messages may be displayed at anytime subject to: 
1.  Maximum number of signs: not limited 
2.  Maximum size of any one side (measured one side only): ten square feet. 
3.  Maximum area of all signs combined: 20 square feet. 
4.  Maximum height: six feet. 
5.  Placement shall be at least five feet from any sidewalk property line or driveway and shall not obstruct any line of sight for traffic. 
c.  In Commercial or industrial zones and on legal commercial or industrial uses on land over one-half acre, temporary or permanent signs displaying political or other noncommercial messages may be displayed at anytime subject to: 
1.  Maximum number of signs: not limited 
2.  Maximum size of any one side (measured one side only): 16 square feet. 
3.  Maximum area of all signs combined: 64 square feet. 
4.  Maximum height: eight feet. 
5.  Placement shall be at least five feet from any sidewalk property line or driveway and shall not obstruct any line of sight for traffic. 
d.  These limits on size, number and total area (but not height or placement) may be doubled during the time period which commences 45 days before and ends ten days after any general or special election. 
16.  Temporary window signs for any establishment in a commercial zone, and for commercial uses in industrial or industrial/business park zones when approved as part of a Uniform Sign Program, are allowed without permit subject to: 
a.  Maximum window sign: 30 percent of the window area (on multi-story buildings, only the windows on the first floor may be counted), but in no event shall window signs exceed 150 square feet per street frontage. 
b.  The placement of the sign shall be located on the first floor only on multi-story buildings, and shall not exceed 20 feet in height above finished grade on one-story buildings. 
c.  No temporary window sign shall be displayed continuously for more than 30 days. 
17.  Paper signs, which advertise "weekly specials", and similar signs which are rotated on a regular basis, shall have a fastening device for a more permanent look. 
18.  Residential garage or yard sale signs are allowed without permit subject to the following requirements: 
a.  A permit for the garage and yard sale shall be obtained prior to the erection of any signs for such event. 
b.  A maximum of three signs are permitted. 
c.  Signs shall be limited to a maximum size of three square feet each. 
d.  Signs shall only be placed on private property, and not in the public right-of-way or on utility poles. 
e.  Signs shall only be erected on the day of the event as permitted and shall be removed at sunset each day. 
B.  Prohibited Signs. The signs described in this subsection are prohibited, unless some other more specific provision in this Chapter or other applicable law makes them allowable, either by permit or exemption from the permit requirement. 
1.  Roof signs; 
2.  Flashing signs, except time and temperature signs; 
3.  Animated signs; 
4.  Revolving signs; 
5.  Portable signs; 
6.  Off-site commercial signs on permanent structures; 
7.  Signs blocking doors or fire escapes; 
8.  Light bulb strings and exposed tubing, except for temporary uses such as Christmas tree lots; 
9.  Banners, flags, pennants and balloons, except for special events as provided for in this Chapter; 
10.  Inflatable signs or signs designed to be air activated, floated or flown, including balloons used for commercial advertising purposes, kites or other serial signs that are made of any electrically conducive material; 
11.  Signs, posters, advertisements, etc., attached to utility poles, shall be prohibited. 
C.  Roof Signs. Roof signs may be used only in the event no other signing alternatives are available. Roof signs may be permitted if architecturally designed and built into the roof structure. Such design shall be compatible in design and materials with the building. 
D.  Signs Related to Inoperative Establishments. Signs promoting activities or establishments which are no longer in operation shall be removed from the premises or the sign copy shall be removed or obliterated within 60 days after the premises has been vacated. Any such sign not removed within the specified time shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to removal under the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  Enforcement, Penalties and Abatement. 
1.  Any violation of this Chapter shall be deemed to be a continuing violation until the violation has been corrected. 
2.  Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a nuisance and a Zoning ordinance violation. 
3.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the City Attorney, upon the direction of the City Council, may commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an injunction prohibiting the construction, erection, maintenance or display, or requiring the removal, of any sign that is in violation of any of the provisions of this section. In any such action, the City shall be entitled to recover its costs and its reasonable attorney's fees. 
4.  The owner or other person entitled to possession of a sign which is removed, stored and/or destroyed pursuant to any provision of this section shall be liable to the City for the cost of the removal, storage and/or destruction and the City may recover the same through an action commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction together with the City's court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
5.  Any illegal sign within the public right-of-way is found and declared to be a public nuisance, and such sign may be abated by the City as follows: 
a.  If the address of the owner or other person entitled to possession of the sign is known, notice of the City's intention to remove and destroy the sign, stating the date after which sign will be removed and destroyed, shall be mailed to the owner or other person entitled to possession by certified mail, return receipt requested at least ten days before the date. If the address of the owner or other person entitled to possession is not known, the notice shall be affixed in a conspicuous place on said sign at least ten days before the date. The notice shall also set forth the provisions of this section. 
b.  The owner or other person entitled to possession of the sign may, before the removal date stated in the notice, file a written request for hearing with the Planning Department. The request shall identify the sign and its location, state the name and address of the owner or other person entitled to possession and set forth in detail the contentions why the sign should not be removed and destroyed. 
c.  If a request for hearing is filed, the Planning Commission shall hear the matter at a regularly scheduled meeting held not more than 30 days thereafter. After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether or not the sign is an illegal sign within the public right-of-way. The written decision of the Planning Commission shall be rendered within ten days after the hearing and a copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner or other person entitled to possession within seven days thereafter. Unless a notice of appeal is filed as provided for in this Chapter, the decision of the Planning Commission shall become final ten days after mailing. 
d.  The owner or other person entitled to possession may file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days after the date of mailing of the Planning Commission's decision. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the matter shall be heard by the City Council at a regular meeting scheduled not more than 30 days thereafter. After hearing, the City Council shall determine whether or not the sign is an illegal sign within the public right-of-way. The written decision of the City Council shall be rendered within ten days after the hearing and a copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner or other person entitled to possession within seven days thereafter. The decision of the City Council becomes final ten days after mailing. 
e.  Unless the owner or other person entitled to possession of the sign, on or before the removal date stated in the notice described in this section, files a written request for hearing with the Planning Department, the City may, at any time after said date, remove and destroy the sign. If a written request for hearing is filed then upon any final decision of the Planning Commission or the City Council determining that the sign is an illegal sign within the public right-of-way, the City may remove and destroy the sign. 
f.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, any illegal sign within the public right-of-way which constitutes a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic may be removed immediately and stored by the City, at the expense of the owner, or other person entitled to possession, pending completion of the notification and hearing procedures set forth in this section. 
F.  Construction and Maintenance of Signs. 
1.  Every sign and all parts, portions, and materials shall be manufactured, assembled and erected in compliance with all applicable State, federal, and City regulations, the Uniform Building Code and the National Electrical Code. 
2.  Every sign and all parts, portions and materials shall be maintained and kept in proper repair. The display surface of all signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from rust and corrosion. Any cracked, broken surfaces, malfunctioning lights, missing sign copy or other unmentioned or damaged portion of a sign shall be repaired or replaced within 30 days following notification by the City. Noncompliance with such a request will constitute a zoning violation and will be enforced as such. 
G.  Flags (real estate sales and leasing). Commercial flags and banners are permitted in conjunction with an approved residential subdivision sales office or a commercial sales or leasing office, or an industrial sales or leasing office. Such flags shall conform to the following provisions: 
1.  A maximum of six may be used. 
2.  The flags or banners shall be no higher than 15 feet. 
3.  The flags or banners shall be displayed in the immediate vicinity of the sales/leasing office. In no case shall the flags be allowed within the public right-of-way. 
4.  In the case of a residential subdivision office, the flags may be maintained as long as a valid operating permit for the sales office remains in effect. 
5.  In the case of a commercial office or industrial sales or leasing office, the flags may be maintained until 75 percent of the spaces have been leased. 
6.  The maximum size of any one flag shall not exceed 15 square feet. All flags shall be maintained in good condition; torn or worn flags shall be replaced. 
H.  Roof Signs. Roof signs may be used only in the event no other signing alternatives are available. Roof signs may be permitted if architecturally designed and built into the roof structure. Such design shall be compatible in design and materials with the building. 
I.  Inoperative establishments. Signs pertaining to activities or businesses which are no longer in operation shall be removed from the premises or the sign copy shall be removed or obliterated within 60 days after the premises has been vacated. Any such sign not removed within the specified time shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to removal under the provisions of this chapter. 
J.  Enforcement, penalties and abatement. 
1.  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a continuing violation until the violation has been corrected. 
2.  A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a nuisance and a zoning ordinance violation. 
3.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the City Attorney, upon the order of the City Council, may commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an injunction prohibiting the construction, erection, maintenance or display, or requiring the removal, of any sign that is in violation of any of the provisions of this section. In any such action, the City shall be entitled to recover its costs and its reasonable attorney's fees. 
4.  The owner or other person entitled to possession of a sign which is removed, stored and/or destroyed pursuant to any provision of this section shall be liable to the City for the cost of the removal, storage and/or destruction and the City may recover the same through an action commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction together with the City's court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
5.  Any illegal sign within the public right-of-way is found and declared to be a public nuisance, and such sign may be abated by the City as follows: 
a.  If the address of the owner or other person entitled to possession of the sign is known, notice of the City's intention to remove and destroy the sign, stating the date after which sign will be removed and destroyed, shall be mailed to the owner or other person entitled to possession by certified mail, return receipt requested at least ten days before the date. If the address of the owner or other person entitled to possession is not known, the notice shall be affixed in a conspicuous place on said sign at least ten days before the date. The notice shall also set forth the provisions of this section. 
b.  The owner or other person entitled to possession of the sign may, before the removal date stated in the notice, file a written request for hearing with the planning department. The request shall identify the sign and its location, state the name and address of the owner or other person entitled to possession and set forth in detail the contentions why the sign should not be removed and destroyed. 
c.  If a request for hearing is filed, the planning commission shall hear the matter at a regularly scheduled meeting held not more than 30 days thereafter. After the hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether or not the sign is an illegal sign within the public right-of-way. The written decision of the planning commission shall be rendered within ten days after the hearing and a copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner or other person entitled to possession within seven days thereafter. Unless a notice of appeal is filed as provided for in this chapter, the decision of the planning commission shall become final ten days after mailing. 
d.  The owner or other person entitled to possession may file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days after the date of mailing of the planning commission's decision. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the matter shall be heard by the City Council at a regular meeting scheduled not more than 30 days thereafter. After hearing, the City Council shall determine whether or not the sign is an illegal sign within the public right-of-way. The written decision of the City Council shall be rendered within ten days after the hearing and a copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner or other person entitled to possession within seven days thereafter. The decision of the City Council becomes final ten days after mailing. 
e.  Unless the owner or other person entitled to possession of the sign, on or before the removal date stated in the notice described in this section, files a written request for hearing with the planning department, the City may, at any time after said date, remove and destroy the sign. If a written request for hearing is filed then upon any final decision of the planning commission or the City Council determining that the sign is an illegal sign within the public right-of-way, the City may remove and destroy the sign. 
f.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any illegal sign within the public right-of-way which constitutes a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic may be removed immediately and stored by the City, at the expense of the owner, or other person entitled to possession, pending completion of the notification and hearing procedures set forth in this section. 
K.  Construction and Maintenance of Signs. 
1.  Code compliance. Every sign and all parts, portions, and materials shall be manufactured, assembled and erected in compliance with all applicable state, federal, and City regulations, the uniform building code and the national electrical code. 
2.  Maintenance. Every sign and all parts, portions and materials shall be maintained and kept in proper repair. The display surface of all signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from rust and corrosion. Any cracked, broken surfaces, malfunctioning lights, missing sign copy or other unmentioned or damaged portion of a sign shall be repaired or replaced within 30 days following notification by the City. Noncompliance with such a request will constitute a zoning violation and will be enforced as such. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007; Ord. No. 1071, §§ 4(Exh. A), 5(Exh. B), 5-17-2016 ) 
17.07.080 - Signs permitted in all zones. 
A.  Permitted Signs. Generally, Sign permits shall be issued for signs included under this section, provided the signs are in compliance with the qualifications stated in this section, and all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
B.  Directional Signs. 
1.  Private party directional signs shall be designed, constructed and mounted so as to be viewed from on-site or from an area adjacent to the site by pedestrians or motorists while parking their automobile. 
2.  Private party directional signs may not contain commercial advertising material. 
3.  Private party directional signs are not be allowed within the public right-of-way. 
4.  Private party directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in area, per side. In the case of a ground sign, the overall height shall not exceed four feet. 
C.  Special Event Signs. Special event signs shall be permitted when they comply with the provisions of this subsection. Such signs are permitted for a limited period of time in any zoning district in connection with a special temporary event, such as (by way of example and not limitation), grand openings, parades, marches, demonstrations, carnivals, festivals, charitable events, special holiday season displays, etc., when such events comply with all applicable laws. Applicants for a special event signs shall submit a letter to the director that describes the proposed event by location, area and time duration. The application shall be processed in the same manner, and subject to the same appellate procedures, as an application for a sign permit. Special event sign permits shall be limited to the following provisions: 
1.  No more than one special event sign shall be permitted per special event and may be in the form of a banner or pennant. 
2.  The special event sign shall be a maximum of 50 square feet in area (measured one side) and shall be no higher than ten feet in the case of a ground sign. 
3.  Special event signs shall be limited to cumulative total of 45 days per calendar year. 
D.  Permitted Signs-On-site Subdivision Signs. Onsite subdivisions may display signs which conform to the following: 
1.  One temporary on-site subdivision sign not to exceed 64 square feet total for two sides or 32 square feet for one side and a total overall height of 15 feet may be permitted on each primary street frontage of the property being subdivided, not to exceed two such signs for all phases of any subdivision (interior streets of the subdivision are not recognized as a main street frontage). 
2.  Such signs shall be removed within ten days from the date of the final sale of the land and/or residences. 
3.  Signs shall be maintained in good repair at all times. 
4.  A cash deposit of $500.00 per sign shall be deposited with the sign application to ensure compliance with this section and removal of such sign. The deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon sign removal by the applicant. If the City is forced to remove any signs, then the cost of removal shall be deducted from the deposit. 
E.  Permitted Signs-Temporary Subdivision Directional Signs. The following signs may be permitted in any zoning district subject to the provisions listed: 
1.  A maximum of six signs may be used to lead customers to the site. 
2.  Signs shall be no larger than 600 square inches and shall be grouped on a two-sided sign structure as shown in exhibit A. the City may, from time to time, develop or amend the design details for this sign structure. 
3.  A sign structure shall be located not less than 600 feet from an existing or previously approved sign site. Further, each sign may only contain the name of the subdivision, and a directional arrow as shown on exhibit B. 
4.  The placement of each sign structure shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director, who shall base the decision on non-communicative aspects of the sign. 
5.  Signs placed on private property shall require the written consent of the property owner, to be filed with the Planning Director prior to issuance of a permit. Signs in the public right-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the public works director prior to issuance of the sign permit, and shall require approval of an encroachment permit. 
6.  A sign location plan shall be prepared showing the site of each directional sign and shall be submitted to the planning department prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
7.  Any such sign approved for a particular subdivision within the City shall not be changed to advertise another subdivision. 
8.  There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, devices, display boards, or appurtenance added to the sign as originally approved. Further, no other directional signing may be used, such as posters or trailer signs. 
9.  All nonconforming subdivision signs associated with the subdivision in question must be removed prior to the issuance of a new sign permit. 
10.  A $500.00 cash deposit shall be placed with the City to ensure compliance with this subsection. Any sign placed contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by the City and the cost of removal shall be deducted from the deposit. Additional costs incurred by the City resulting from the removal of illegal signs shall be charged to the developer. 
11.  The sign(s) may remain on display only until the subdivision is sold out. 
F.  Signs on the Public Right-of-Way. Signs on the public right-of-way, except where required by a governmental agency, shall require an encroachment permit and are limited to political or other noncommercial messages. The encroachment permit shall be on a form as provided by the City with information as deemed fit by the City Manager or designee to review compliance with section. A maximum of six encroachments per calendar year are permitted per applicant, organization, or candidate. The maximum time limit for signs to be on display is 30 days. 
1.  Signs that are 24" × 18" or 432 square inches and under have the following requirements: 
a.  Maximum number of signs: 50. 
b.  Maximum size: 24" × 18" or 432 square inches. 
c.  Placement requirements: Signs shall be placed a minimum of one foot from edge of sidewalk and shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic and a minimum of five feet from edge of curb or street pavement if no curb exists; No signs shall be placed in lawn areas, parks, medians, civic center, CRC, or other government buildings; signs shall not be attached to fences, traffic control posts, utility poles, or bus shelters; Signs shall be limited to one sign per block of street in each direction of travel in developed areas and limited to one sign per one-quarter mile spacing in each direction of travel for undeveloped areas. 
2.  Signs that are over 24" × 18" or 432 square inches have the following requirements: 
a.  Maximum number of signs: 8. 
b.  Maximum size: 48" × 48". 
c.  Placement requirements: Signs shall be placed a minimum of one foot from edge of sidewalk and shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic and a minimum of five feet from edge of curb or street pavement if no curb exists; No signs shall be placed in lawn areas, parks, medians, civic center, CRC, or other government buildings; signs shall not be attached to fences, traffic control posts, utility poles, or bus shelters; Signs shall be limited to one sign per block of street in each direction of travel. 
d.  Applicant shall submit insurance naming the City as additionally insured in an amount as required by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 984, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 1071, § 6(Exh. C), 5-17-2016 ) 
17.07.090 - Signs in recreation, open space, residential and agricultural zones. 
A.  R-C (Recreation-Conservation) Zone. Signs in the R-C Zone shall be limited to "for sale" signs in accordance with Section 17.07.070 of this Chapter and the following signs for commercial recreation uses, subject to approval of a Uniform Sign Program as described in Section 17.07.060. 
1.  One monument sign for each street frontage, limited to five feet in height and 32 square feet in size. 
2.  Building mounted signage not exceeding ten percent for any building wall. 
B.  Residential Zones. The following signs shall be permitted in residential zoning districts: 
1.  Single-Family Residential Zone (R-SF). Real estate for sale signs, and identification signs in accordance with Section 17.07.070.A(2) of this Chapter, and noncommercial signs per Section 17.07.070.A(15). 
2.  Multi-Family Residential Zone (R-MF). 
a.  Real estate for sale signs in accordance with Section 17.07.070.A(2) of this Chapter. 
b.  A maximum of two signs indicating the name of the multiple-family dwelling, apartment or dwelling group shall be permitted. Such signs may include monument signs not exceeding six feet in height and/or wall-mounted signs. The total area of each sign shall not exceed four square feet for less than 12 units, or 12 square feet for 12 or more units. Signs attached to the wall of the building shall not extend above the roof or eave line. Such sign may project 12 inches maximum from the building face. Identification signs may be illuminated, either internally or externally; provided, that all lights are directed away from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. 
c.  An illuminated directory sign shall be provided at each entrance of all multi-family complexes with more than 12 dwelling units. Directory signs shall provide a diagrammatic representation of the complex in accordance with the requirements of the Fire Department 
d.  Noncommercial signs per Section 17.07.070.A(15) of this Chapter. 
C.  Rural Residential (R-R) Zone. 
1.  Real estate for sales signs and identification signs in accordance with Section 17.07.070.A(2) of this Chapter. 
2.  Signs for produce sales, subject to approval of a Uniform Sign Program in accordance with Section 17.07.060.L of this Chapter. 
3.  Noncommercial signs per Section 17.07.070.A(2) of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.100 - Signs in manufacturing zones. 
A.  M (Manufacturing) Zone. 
1.  Permitted Signs. The following signs are specifically permitted for industrial complexes, subject to the approval of a Uniformed Sign Program in accordance with Section 17.07.060 B. of this Chapter: 
a.  Wall Signs. One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment, up to a maximum of four wall signs. If said signs display commercial images or messages, they shall qualify as "onsite" commercial messages. In no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or buildings primary frontage. In no event shall the area of any one wall sign exceed 100 square feet. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 70 percent of the storefront or unit width. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof, eave line or parapet of the wall upon which it is mounted. 
b.  Monument Signs. One monument sign not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area may be permitted to identify separate businesses or uses in the industrial complex. The monument sign structure shall not exceed six feet in height. Additional monument signs may be permitted on parcels having more than one frontage if the signs are located at least 300 feet apart. Monument signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet and shall be located a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
c.  Pylon Sign. One pylon sign not to exceed 100 square feet in sign area will be permitted to identify separate business or uses in the industrial complex. The pylon sign structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Pylon signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet. Pylon signs shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
d.  Directional Signs. A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
2.  Signs Permitted for Uses Not in an Industrial Complex. 
a.  Wall Signs: One wall sign is permit for each wall face of the establishment, provided: There are not more than four wall signs for any one establishment; if the display is used for a commercial message, then it must be onsite commercial; in no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 100 square feet per sign. A wall sign shall not occupy more than 70 percent of the storefront or unit width. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof, eave line or parapet of the wall upon which it is mounted. 
b.  Monument Signs: One monument sign not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area which may be permitted to identify a business. The monument sign structure shall not exceed six feet in height. Monument signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet and shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
c.  Pylon Signs: One pylon sign not to exceed 75 square feet in sign area will be permitted. The pylon sign structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Pylon signs for individual establishments which are not located within an industrial complex shall be subject to the approval of a sign permit by the Planning Commission, and shall require the applicant to demonstrate that the specific land use necessitates a pylon sign for visibility; in considering such an application, the Planning Commission shall consider only the non-communicative aspects of the sign. Pylon signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet and shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
d.  Directional Signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
B.  Special Signage Requires for Business Parks. 
1.  Permitted Signs: The following signs are permitted for industrial complexes, subject to the approval of a Uniform Sign Program in accordance with this Chapter: 
a.  Wall Signs: One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment provided there are not more than four wall signs for any one establishment. All commercial messages on such signs must qualify as onsite. In no case hall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 100 square feet per sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 70 percent of the storefront or unit width. Sign copy for all wall signs shall be individual channel letters of a maximum of 24 inches in height. If the sign contains a logo, said logo shall be a maximum of 36 inches in height. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof, eave line or parapet of the wall upon which it is mounted. 
b.  Monument Signs: One monument sign not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area is permitted to identify separate establishments or uses in the industrial complex, or to display noncommercial messages. The monument sign structure shall not exceed six feet in height. Additional monument signs may be permitted on parcels having more than one frontage and if the signs are located at least 300 feet apart. Monument signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet and shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
c.  Pylon Signs: One pylon sign not to exceed 100 square feet in sign area which may be permitted to identify a separate business or uses in the industrial complex. The pylon sign structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Pylon Signs shall be placed in a landscaped are or planter of not less than 250 square feet and shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
d.  Under Canopy Signs: For each use occupancy, one under canopy sign not exceeding four square foot shall be permitted. 
e.  Directional Signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height 
2.  Signs Specifically Permitted for Uses Not in an Industrial Complex: 
a.  Wall Signs: One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment provided there are not more than four wail signs for any one business. Any commercial messages on such signs must qualify as onsite. In no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 100 square feet per sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 70 percent of the storefront or unit width. Sign copy for all wall signs shall be individual channel letters of a maximum of 24 inches in height. If the sign contains a logo, said logo shall be a maximum of 36 inches in height. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof, eave line or parapet of the wall upon which it is mounted. 
b.  Monument Signs: One monument sign not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area. The monument sign structural shall not exceed six feet in height. Monument signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet and shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. If such sign displays a commercial message, it must qualify as onsite. 
c.  Pylon Signs: One pylon sign not to exceed 75 square feet in sign area. The pylon sign structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Pylon signs for individual establishments which are not located within an industrial complex shall be subject to the approval of a sign permit by the Planning Commission, and shall require the applicant to demonstrate that the specific land use necessitates a pylon sign for visibility; in considering such an application, the Planning Commission shall consider only the non-communicative aspects of the proposed sign. Pylon signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet and shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
d.  Directional Signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.110 - Signs in commercial zones. 
    The standards and provisions contained in this section shall be applicable to the General-Commercial (C-G) and Community Commercial (C-C) zones, but not including properties with these zoning designations, which are located in the "Special Commercial Areas" as set forth in Section 17.07.120 of this Chapter. 
A.  Permitted signs in the C-G and C-C Zones within a commercial complex shall include: 
1.  Wall Signs: One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment provided there are not more than four wall signs for any one establishment. If used to display a commercial message, the sign must qualify as onsite. In no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 100 square feet per sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 70 percent of the storefront or unit width. If the sign contains a logo, said logo shall be a maximum of 36 inches in height a wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof eave line or parapet of the wall upon which is mounted. 
2.  Monument Signs: One monument sign not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area which may be permitted to identify separate establishments or uses in the commercial complex. The monument sign structure shall not exceed six feet in height. Additional monument signs may be permitted on parcels having more than one frontage and the signs are located at least 300 feet apart. Monument signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet. Monument signs shall be located a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
3.  Pylon Signs: One pylon sign not to exceed 100 square feet in sign area will be permitted to identify a separate business or uses in the commercial complex. The pylon sign structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height. For each secondary street frontage with at least 300 feet of length, one additional pylon sign may be permitted not to exceed 100 square feet in sign area and shall not exceed 20 feet in height. When such a sign is used to display a commercial message, it must qualify as onsite. 
a.  Where pylon signs are placed on both major and secondary street frontages, each such sign shall be placed as near to the middle of the street frontage as practical or at a major driveway entrance to the commercial complex from the street frontage. 
b.  Pylon signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet. Pylon signs shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
c.  A maximum of three signs may be used to identify any one establishment pursuant to the criteria outlined in this section. 
4.  Service and Delivery Signs: One unlighted sign per occupancy not to exceed two square feet may be placed on the rear of the building for service and delivery purposes. 
5.  Directional Signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach, each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
6.  Window Signs: Window signs conforming to the provisions of Section 17.07.070.A(1), (16). 
7.  Under Canopy Signs: For each use or occupancy, one maximum four foot under canopy sign per frontage. 
B.  Permitted signs in the C-G and C-C Zones for uses not part of a commercial complex shall include: 
1.  Wall Signs: One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment provided there are not more than four wall signs for any one establishment. If such sign is used for a commercial message, it must qualify as onsite. In no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 100 square feet per sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 70 percent of the storefront or unit width. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof eave line or parapet of the wall upon which is mounted. 
2.  Service and Delivery Signs: One unlighted sign per occupancy not to exceed two square feet may be placed on the rear of the building for service and delivery purposes. 
3.  Directional Signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
4.  Window Signs: Window signs conforming to the provisions of Section 17.07.070.A(1), (16) 
5.  Under Canopy Signs: For each use or occupancy, one maximum four foot under canopy sign per frontage. 
6.  Exceptions: Certain exceptions to the sign standards applicable to commercial uses not located within a commercial complex may be approved by the Planning Commission including the election of freestanding sign(s) when the following findings can be made by the Planning Commission, without consideration of proposed message content (other than the onsite/offsite distinction in the case of commercial messages): 
a.  The site is subject to limited visibility and additional signing is necessary for a reasonable level of advertising exposure; 
b.  The type of establishment or the configuration of the site necessitates additional signage. 
c.  Exceptions shall be processed through the sign permit and minor variance process provided for in the Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Freeway-Facing Signs. Permitted in the C-G and C-C Zones subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The maximum allowable sign face area of any freeway-facing sign for a shopping center or commercial complex which totals more than 250,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be 300 square feet and shall not exceed 60 feet in height. When such display area is used for commercial speech, the copy must qualify as onsite as to the shopping center or commercial complex. 
2.  The maximum allowable sign face area of any freeway-facing sign for a shopping center or commercial complex which totals less than 250,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be 150 square feet and shall not exceed 60 feet in height. 
3.  Freeway-facing signs, including freeway-facing electronic message signs, may only be permitted subject to the approval of a sign permit by the Planning Commission. Freeway-facing signs will be permitted when they satisfy all of these criteria: 
a.  The proposed sign is located upon the property upon which the use identified is located; 
b.  The proposed sign is located in the vicinity of a freeway interchange and within 300 feet of the freeway right-of-way and 600 feet of the intersecting street right-of-way; 
c.  The following findings must be made, without consideration of message content of the proposed sign: 
i.  The elevation of the freeway in relation to the elevation of the abutting properties justifies the height requested, and is the minimum necessary. 
ii.  The number and spacing of freeway signs will not cause unnecessary confusion, clutter or other unsightliness in the general location. 
iii.  The use identified, as well as its type, size and intensity, justifies the size, design and location of the sign requested. 
iv.  The needs of the traveling public for identification and directional information justifies the sign requested. 
D.  Automobile Service Station Signs. Automobile service station signs shall be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Identification/Price Monument Sign: For each service station, one monument, combination price and identification sign, maximum 30 square feet in size and maximum six feet in overall height shall be permitted, and must include all price advertising as required by State law. Elevated signs may be used subject to approval of the Planning Commission (without consideration of message content) where vision impairments exists, however elevated signs shall be designed with appropriate vision spaces. Such signs shall not exceed 15 feet in overall height. 
2.  Identification Pylon Sign: For service stations located contiguous to a freeway, where a freeway exit serves the street from which the service station takes direct access, in addition to the identification/price monument sign allowed by paragraph (1) above, one pylon sign, maximum 100 square feet in size and 40 feet in overall height, situated so as to be directed toward and permanently viewable from the freeway, shall be permitted. 
3.  Special Service Signs: Each service station may display two special service signs per pump island. Special service signs shall be limited to such items as self serve, full serve, air, water, cashier, and shall be non-illuminated. Such signs must be permanently affixed to the pump island they identify. Each sign may not exceed four square feet in overall size. 
4.  Wall Signs: Wall signs for automobile service stations shall be permitted subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.07.110.A(1) and (16). 
5.  Directional Signs: Maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach, each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
6.  Window Signs: Window signs conforming to the provisions of Section 17.61.025.A(1) and (16). 
E.  Theater Marquee Signs. Theater marquee signs shall be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The size of a theater marquee sign shall be determined by the number of screens. Each screen shall be permitted a maximum of ten square feet for each sign face area. A theater marquee sign may not total more than 100 square feet of sign face area. 
2.  A maximum of one theater marquee sign, not to exceed 25 feet in height, is permitted per street frontage exclusive of freeway; provided, however, that the theater is part of an integrated shopping center. 
3.  A maximum of one theater marquee sign, not to exceed 25 feet in height, shall be permitted for theaters not considered to be part of an integrated shopping center. 
4.  A maximum of one wall-mounted theater marquee sign shall be permitted at the main entrance to the theater. 
F.  Electronic Message Signs. Electronic message signs shall be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
1.  One electronic message sign may be permitted in a commercial complex with a minimum of 25,000 square feet of floor area. No electronic message sign shall be located closer than 2,500 feet to another electronic message sign. A conditional use permit shall be required whereby the Planning Commission will determine the size and height of the sign. 
2.  Each display shall appear for a period of at least eight seconds. Displays shall not be animated, appear in incremental stages or move across the changeable copy sign face. The sign shall remain blank (no message or display) for at least one second between separate images. 
3.  The sign may display only noncommercial messages or onsite commercial messages, related to those establishments that are part of the complex or the merchandise or activities available on the parcels which are part of the commercial complex. The sign shall not be used as a billboard. 
4.  The sign shall be reviewed for traffic safety purposes by the City's Public Works Director and shall comply with any and all safety standards as prescribed by the State of California. Such reviews shall not consider message content. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.120 - Signs in special commercial areas. 
    Certain commercial areas within Beaumont are of a unique character due to historic, land use, parcelization and circulation considerations. These areas, which contain C-G (Commercial-General), and C-C (Community Commercial) Zoning Districts, shall be subject to differing criteria as compared to other commercial areas in the City, as set forth within this section. 
A.  Antique Village District Area. This area consists of properties fronting on the north side of Sixth Street between Magnolia Avenue and Veile Avenue, on the south side of Sixth Street Between Euclid Avenue and Veile Avenue, and on the east and west sides of Beaumont Avenue between Sixth Street and Seventh Street. 
1.  Within this special district, signs are permitted for commercial complexes as follows: 
a.  Wall Signs: One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment provided there are not more than four wall signs for any one establishment. If used for commercial messages, the message must qualify as onsite. In no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed three-quarters square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 75 square feet per sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 60 percent of the storefront or unit width. Painted wall signs are permitted when determined to be compatible with the architectural character of the building and area. If the sign contains a logo, said logo shall be a maximum of 36 inches in height. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof, eave line or parapet of the wall upon which it is mounted. 
b.  Monument Signs: One monument sign not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area which may be permitted to identify separate establishments or uses in the commercial complex, or for noncommercial messages. The monument sign structure shall not exceed six feet in height. One additional monument sign may be permitted on parcels having more than one frontage and the signs are located at least 200 feet apart. 
c.  Pylon Signs: Pylon signs not to exceed 75 square feet in sign area which may be permitted to identify separate establishments or uses in the commercial complex, subject to approval of a sign permit by the Planning Commission. In consideration of pylon signs in this area the Planning Commission shall consider the need for compatibility and appropriateness of such signage at the proposed location, but shall not consider the message content of the proposed sign, other than the onsite/offsite distinction for commercial messages. 
d.  Monument and pylon signs shall be placed in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 square feet. Monument and pylon signs shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
e.  Service and delivery signs, limited to one unlighted sign per occupancy not to exceed two square feet, may be placed on the rear of the building for service and delivery purposes. 
f.  Directional signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
g.  Window signs: Window signs conforming to the provisions of Section 17.07.070.A(1) and (16). 
h.  Under canopy signs: For each use or occupancy, one maximum four square foot identification under canopy sign per frontage. 
i.  Internally or back-lit fluorescent signs shall not be permitted in the Antique Village District Area. 
2.  Permitted signs for uses not part of a commercial complex shall include: 
a.  Wall signs: One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment provided there are not more than four wall signs for any one establishment. Any such sign used for commercial messages must qualify as onsite. In no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed three-quarters square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 75 square feet per sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 60 percent of the storefront or unit width. Painted wall signs are permitted when determined by the Director, without consideration of message content, to be compatible with the architectural character of the building and area. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof, eave line or parapet of the wall upon which it is mounted. 
b.  Service and delivery signs: One unlighted sign per occupancy not to exceed two square feet may be placed on the rear of the building for service and delivery purposes. 
c.  Directional signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
d.  Window signs conforming to the provisions of Section 17.07.070.A(1) and (16). 
e.  Under canopy signs: For each use or occupancy, one maximum four foot identification under canopy sign per frontage. 
3.  Automobile service stations signs shall be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Identification/price monument sign: For each service station, one monument, combination price and identification sign, maximum 30 square feet in size and maximum six feet in overall height shall be permitted, and must include all price advertising as required by State law. 
b.  Special service signs: Each service station may display two special service signs per pump island. Special service signs shall be limited to such items as self serve, full serve, air, water, cashier, and shall be non- illuminated. Such signs must be permanently affixed to the pump island they identify. Each sign may not exceed four square feet in overall size. 
c.  Wall signs for automobile service stations shall be permitted subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.07.110.A.(1) and (16). 
4.  Directional Signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
5.  Window Signs: Window signs conforming to the provisions of Section 17.07.070.A.(1) and (16). 
B.  Beaumont Avenue Corridor. Properties fronting on both sides of Beaumont Avenue between Seventh Street and Fourteenth Street are allowed signs as follows: 
1.  Permitted signs for commercial complexes shall include: 
a.  Wall Signs: One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment provided there are not more than four wall signs for any one business. If used to display a commercial message, the sign must qualify as onsite. In no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed three-quarters square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 75 square feet per sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 60 percent of the storefront or unit width. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof, eave line or parapet of the wall upon which it is mounted 
b.  Monument Signs: One monument sign not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area which may be permitted to identify separate businesses or uses in the commercial complex. The monument sign structure shall not exceed six feet in height. Additional monument signs may be permitted on parcels having more than one frontage and the signs are located at least 200 feet apart. Monument signs shall be located in a landscaped planter of not less than 250 square feet and shall be a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
c.  Service and Delivery Signs: One unlighted sign per occupancy not to exceed two square feet may be placed on the rear of the building for service and delivery purposes. 
d.  Directional Signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
e.  Window Signs conforming to the provisions of Section 17.07.070.A. 
f.  Under Canopy Signs: For each use or occupancy, one maximum four square foot under canopy sign per frontage. 
2.  Permitted signs for uses not part of a commercial complex shall include: 
a.  Wall Signs: One wall sign is permitted for each wall face of the establishment provided there are not more than four wall signs for any one business. If used to display a commercial message, the sign must qualify as onsite. In no case shall the total sign area of any unit or building exceed three-quarters of one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the unit's or building's primary frontage and shall not exceed 75 square feet per sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 60 percent of the storefront or unit width. A wall sign may not project any of its height above the roof, eave line or parapet of the wall upon which it is mounted. 
b.  Monument Sign: One monument sign not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area that may be permitted to identify an establishment. The monument sign structure shall not exceed six feet in height. Additional monument signs shall be located in a landscaped area or planter of not less than 250 feet and shall be located a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way, sidewalk or driveway. 
c.  Service and Delivery Signs: One unlighted sign per occupancy not to exceed two square feet may be placed on the rear of the building for service and delivery purposes. 
d.  Directional Signs: A maximum of two on-site directional signs per drive approach each not to exceed a total of ten square feet in area and four feet in height. 
e.  Window Signs conforming to the provisions of Section 17.07.070.A.(1) and (16). 
f.  Under Canopy Signs: For each use or occupancy, one maximum four square foot identification under canopy sign per frontage. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.130 - Sign regulations for specific plan area zone. 
A.  Permitted Signs in the Specific Plan Area (SPA) Zone-Exempt Signs. The SPA Zone permits a variety of residential and supporting commercial and other supporting land uses. Signs, which may be erected without permits as provided for in Section 17.07.070 of this Chapter are permitted in the SPA Zone consistent with the respective land use. 
B.  Signs Subject to Permits. Provisions and standards for signs shall be established within a specific plan for land uses contained therein. The specific plan shall establish a project-wide sign program and shall make provisions for the development and review of Uniform Sign Programs consistent with Section 17.07.060.L of this Chapter for each non-residential land use component of the specific plan. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.07.140 - Sign design standards. 
    The design standards set forth in this section apply to all signs in the City of Beaumont. 
A.  Relationship to Other Signs. Where there is more than one monument sign located upon a lot, all such signs shall have designs which are well related to each other by the similar treatment or incorporated of not less than four of the following six design elements: 
1.  Type of construction materials as used in the several sign components (such as cabinet, sign copy, supports); 
2.  Letter style of sign copy; 
3.  Illumination; 
4.  Type or method used for supports, uprights or structure on which sign is supported; 
4.  Sign cabinet or other configuration of sign area; 
6.  Shape of entire sign and its several components. 
B.  Landscaping. Each monument sign shall be located in a planted landscaped area which is of a shape, design and size (equal to at least the sign area) that will provide a compatible setting and ground definition to the sign. The planted landscaped area shall be maintained on a reasonable and regular basis. 
C.  Illumination and Motion. Monument signs shall be non-moving stationary structures (in all components) and illumination, if any, shall be maintained by artificial light which is stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times (non-flashing). 
D.  Sign Color. Sign colors should be compatible with the building architecture. Within shopping centers, sign color should complement the color scheme for the center. This provision does not apply to noncommercial messages displayed on signs. 
E.  Special Commercial Areas. Signs proposed within the special commercial areas identified in this Chapter shall be subject to detailed design review by the Planning Director and/or Planning Commission for the purpose of ensuring consistency and compatibility with the respective area. Such review shall be performed in conjunction with the processing of permit applications as set forth in this Chapter. However, such analysis shall not consider the message content of the proposed sign. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
Chapter 17.08 - NONCONFORMING USES 

17.08.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    This chapter establishes uniform provisions for the regulation of nonconforming structures, land uses and lots. Within the zoning districts established by title, there exist structures, land uses and lots that were lawful prior to the adoption, or amendment of this development code, but which would be prohibited, or regulated or restricted differently under the terms of this development code or future amendments. It is the intent of this development code to discourage the long-term continuance of these nonconformities, but to permit them to exist under limited conditions. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.08.020 - Applicability. 
    This Chapter applies to all zone districts and to any parcels or structures in the City Beaumont that are nonconforming. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.08.030 - Restrictions regarding nonconforming structures and uses. 
    Nonconformities may be continued subject to the following provisions, except as otherwise provided by this Section 17.08. 
A.  Nonconforming Uses of Land. A nonconforming use of land or within a structure may be continued, transferred or sold, provided that the use shall not be: 
1.  Enlarged or increased; 
2.  Be extended to occupy a greater area than it lawfully occupied before becoming a nonconforming use; and 
3.  No additional uses shall be established on the site unless the nonconforming use is first discontinued, and any replacement use shall comply with all applicable provisions of this development code. 
B.  Nonconforming Structures. A nonconforming structure may continue to be used as follows: 
1.  Additions to Structures that are 25 percent or Less of the Total Floor Area Excluding Garages. An enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration of a structure that is nonconforming only as to height and setback regulations and does not exceed 25 percent of the existing total floor area, excluding garages, may be allowed if the additions or improvements conform to all other applicable provisions of the development code, the applicant provides a certified notification letter to any applicable homeowner association and all adjacent property owners 14 days in advance of approval of a zoning clearance, and the exterior limits of the new construction do not exceed the applicable height limit or encroach any further into the setbacks than the comparable portions of the existing building. This provision can only be used once every five years. Any additional changes to structure which exceeds a total of 25 percent within five years from the issuance of a building permit may be allowed with conditional use permit approval. 
2.  Additions to Structures that are Greater Than 25 Percent of Total Floor Area Excluding Garages. The enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration of a structure that is nonconforming only as to height and setback regulations which exceeds 25 percent of the existing total floor area, excluding garages, may be allowed with conditional use permit approval if the additions or improvements conform to all other applicable provisions of the development code and the exterior limits of the new construction do not exceed the applicable height limit or encroach any further into the setbacks than the comparable portions of the existing building. The applicant must provide a certified notification letter to any applicable homeowner association prior to scheduling a public hearing. 
3.  Maintenance and Repair. A nonconforming structure may undergo normal maintenance and repairs, provided no structural alterations are made (exception: see subsection 4, following), and the work does not exceed 15 percent of the appraised value of the structure as shown in the Riverside County assessor's records in any one year period, unless the commission allows more extensive work through conditional use permit approval after finding that the additional work will not prolong the duration of the nonconforming use; and 
4.  Seismic Retrofitting. Reconstruction required to reinforce un-reinforced masonry structures shall be permitted without cost limitations, provided the retrofitting is limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards. 
C.  Nonconforming Use of a Conforming Structure. The nonconforming use of a building that otherwise conforms with all applicable provisions of this chapter may be continued, transferred and sold, as follows: 
1.  Expansion of Use. The nonconforming use of a portion of a structure may be extended throughout the building with conditional use permit approval. 
2.  Substitution of Use. The nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to a use of the same or more restricted nature, with conditional use permit approval. 
D.  Destroyed Structure. The reconstruction of a structure damaged by fire or calamity, which at the time was devoted to a nonconforming use may be authorized by the conditional use permit approval, provided that reconstruction shall occur within 12 months after the date of the damage, and the reconstructed building shall have no greater floor area than the one destroyed. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.08.040 - Loss of nonconforming status. 
    If a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a conforming structure is discontinued for a continuous period of one year, it shall be presumed that the use has been abandoned. Without further action by the City, further use of the site or structure shall comply with all the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.08.050 - Nonconforming lots. 
    A nonconforming lot of record that does not comply with the access, area or width requirements of this development code for the Zone District in which it is located, shall be considered to be a legal building site if it meets one of the criteria specified by this section. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one or more of the following. 
A.  Approved Subdivision. The lot was created through a subdivision approved by the County of Riverside or the City of Beaumont. 
B.  Individual Lot Legally Created by Deed. The lot is under one ownership and of record, and was legally created by a recorded deed prior to the effective date of the zoning amendment that made the parcel nonconforming. 
C.  Variance or Lot Line Adjustment. The lot was approved through the variance procedure or resulted from a lot line adjustment. 
D.  Partial Government Acquisition. The lot was created in conformity with the provisions of this development code, but was made nonconforming when a portion of the lot was acquired by a governmental entity so that the lot size is decreased not more than 20 percent and the yard facing any road was decreased not more than 50 percent. 
E.  Where structures have been erected on a nonconforming lot, the area where structures are located shall not be later divided so as to reduce the building site area and/or frontage below the requirements of the applicable zoning district or other applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, or in any way that makes the use of the parcel more nonconforming. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.08.060 - Reserved. 
Chapter 17.09 - ANIMAL KEEPING 

17.09.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    This Chapter establishes provisions for the regulation of animal keeping within the City of Beaumont. It is the intent of this Chapter to accomplish the following: 
A.  To ensure that animal keeping within the City of Beaumont does not result in an adverse impact related to a health and safety violation; 
B.  To eliminate conditions that contribute to environmental degradation and pollution; and, 
C.  To ensure that the keeping of animals does not create a nuisance. 
(Ord. 961 §1, 11/2009) 
17.09.020 - Applicability. 
    This Chapter is applicable to all Zone Districts in the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 961 §1, 11/2009) 
17.09.030 - Domestic animal keeping. 
    Domestic and non-dangerous wild animals may be kept or maintained as pets or for the non-commercial use of members of the family residing on the premises subject to the following restrictions and in conformance with Title 6, and all other local, state and federal laws. 
A.  Large Animals. Lots or parcels of land within the Rural Residential (R-R) zone district having a minimum area of 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit may keep or maintain the large animals listed in Table 17.09-1 in the numbers specified, not to exceed one animal per 20,000 square feet. Other large animals that, in the opinion of the Planning Director are neither obnoxious nor detrimental to the public welfare than the animals enumerated in this subsection are permitted with the same numerical limitations. Such animals shall be kept or maintained in full compliance with applicable Riverside County Health Department regulations. 
Table 17.09-1
Requirements for Large Animals Type of Animal Number of Animals Permitted Horses, donkeys, mules, pigs, and other equine cattle and cows One over nine months of age for each 20,000 square feet of lot area Sheep and goats One over six months of age for each 20,000 square feet of lot area  
B.  Small Animals. Small animals permitted in all residential zones shall include birds, chickens, peafowl, duck and other fowl, monkeys, rabbits and similar species which do not constitute a public nuisance. Other similar small animals that in the opinion of the Planning Director are neither more obnoxious nor detrimental to the public welfare than the animals enumerated in this subsection are permitted. Such animals shall be kept or maintained at a place where the keeping of domestic animals is permitted and shall be maintained in full compliance with Riverside County Health Department regulations. The number of small animals is limited to no more than ten per household. No more than four birds, chickens, or other fowl shall be permitted per Section 6.02.160. 
C.  Dogs and Cats. Domesticated dogs and cats are limited to a maximum for four dogs and four cats over the age of four months for each developed residential lot consistent with Title 6. 
D.  Other. Other animals as provided for by Title 6. 
(Ord. 961 §1, 11/2009; Ord. No. 1020, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 1028, 12-18-2012) 
17.09.040 - Performance standards for pens, stables, and other animal keeping uses. 
    Accessory structures and other improvements related to the keeping of animals must conform to the following performance standards and in conformance with Title 6. 
A.  Fencing. All persons owning or having care, custody, or control of any animal, fowl, domestic or otherwise, shall maintain adequate fencing to hold the animal, fowl, domestic, or otherwise, from wandering or flying upon the property of another 
B.  Use of Animal Keeping Improvements. The use of animal keeping improvements and accessory structures will not be permitted to create a nuisance for neighboring properties. Such nuisances may include, but not be limited to, noise, light and glare, odors, or fugitive dust. 
C.  Housekeeping. Animal keeping facilities and accessory uses must be maintained at all times and kept free of debris, trash, and animal waste, and must comply with other provisions outlined in Sections 17.09.70. 
D.  Restrictions. The use of animal keeping improvements and accessory structures shall not be permitted to unduly interfere with the free and unencumbered enjoyment and use of adjoining or nearby residential lots or otherwise be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
E.  Portable Facilities. The construction, placement, and use of portable facilities, including but not limited to fences, structures used for the storage of animal feed, and animal shelters, must be in conformance with all of the provisions outlined in this Section 17.09.060. 
F.  Shelter (Dogs). Any person owning or keeping a dog confined outside must provide the dog with access to clean water, food and an appropriate dog shelter. The shelter must be sanitary, of sound construction, and provide adequate protection from the elements (wind, rain & sun). It must have at least 3 sides, a weather-proof roof, a solid sanitary floor and be adequately ventilated. The shelter must be large enough for the dog to stand, lie down and turn around. Suitable drainage must be provided so that water is not standing in or around the shelter". 
G.  Tethering. No person shall tether, fasten, chain, tie or restrain a dog, or cause a dog to be tethered, fastened, chained, tied or restrained, to a dog house, tree, fence or any other stationary object". 
H.  Notwithstanding subdivision (G), a person may do the following: 
(i)  Tether, fasten, chain or tie a dog no longer than is necessary for the person to complete a temporary task that requires a dog to be restrained for a reasonable period of three hours in a 24-hour period. 
(ii)  Attach a dog to a running line, pulley or trolley system. 
(a)  Only one dog may be tethered to each running line, pulley or trolley system. 
(b)  The tether must be attached to a properly fitting collar or harness worn by the dog with enough room between the collar and the dog's throat through which two adult fingers may fit. Choke collars, pinch collars and chain collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering a dog to a running line, pulley or trolley system. 
(c)  There must be a swivel on each end of the tether to minimize tangling of the tether. The tether and the running line, pulley or trolley system must be at least ten feet in length and must allow continuous access to clean water, food and shelter. 
(d)  The running line, pulley or trolley system and tether must be of appropriate configuration to confine the dog to the owner's or keeper's property to prevent the tether from extending over an object that could result in injury or strangulation and to prevent the tether from becoming tangled with other objects or animals. 
(iii)  No dog shall be kept on a residential property by running line, pulley or trolley system or fenced yard where the dog's owner or keeper does not reside. 
(Ord. 961 §1, 11/2009; Ord. 1048, 7-15-14) 
17.09.050 - Development standards for pens, stables, and other animal keeping uses. 
    Accessory structures and other improvements related to the keeping of animals must conform to the following development standards. 
A.  Horse Stables. Horse stables are permitted only on lots containing a residential unit that has a minimum area of 20,000 square feet. The stable shall be located at least 50 feet from any street and not less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
B.  Riding Ring and Dressage Ring. Other equestrian improvements are restricted to those lots that have a total land area of more than one acre. Such uses shall be located at least 150 feet from any street and not less than 50 feet from any lot line unless a standards modification is approved. 
C.  Pens and Enclosures for Other Animals. Pens and enclosures for other large animals identified under Section 17.09.030.A are permitted only on lots containing a residential unit that has a minimum area of 20,000 square feet. The pen or enclosure shall be located at least 50 feet from any street and not less than 50 feet from any lot line unless a standards modification is approved. 
D.  Pig Pens. Pig(s) shall be confined in a pen or other enclosure. If the pig(s) are kept year-round and all or a portion of the pen or enclosure is uncovered, the uncovered portion of the enclosure shall have an impervious floor. Pens and enclosures for pigs are permitted only on lots containing a residential unit that has a minimum area of 20,000 square feet. The pig pen shall be located at least 50 feet from any street and not less than 50 feet from any lot line unless a standards modification is approved. 
Table 17.09-2
Development Standards for Stables, Pens, and Enclosures
for Large Animals Type Setback
from Street Setback from Adjacent Property Minimum Lot Size Equestrian Stables 50 feet 50 feet 20,000 square feet Equestrian Rings 50 feet 150 feet One acre Sheep and Goat Pens 50 feet 50 feet 20,000 square feet Pig Pens 50 feet 50 feet 20,000 square feet Cattle 50 feet 50 feet 15,000 square feet  
E.  Enclosures for Small Animals. Any pen, coop, or enclosure for the keeping of domestic animals identified under Section 17.09.030.B shall be located at least 100 feet from any street and not less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
F.  Modifications. Requests for modifications from the setback requirements of this Section shall be submitted to the Planning Director for consideration. 
17.09.060 - Environmental management. 
    This section outlines the requirements governing the maintenance and upkeep of animal keeping facilities that includes, but may not be limited to, stables, pens, corrals, equestrian rings, and other structures used for the housing of animals. 
A.  Water Runoff. All animal-keeping facilities must be designed in a manner so that water runoff is contained and disposed of in such a manner so that the runoff does not contribute to the pollution of local groundwater or the flooding of adjacent properties. 
B.  Open Water Containers or Standing Water. Open watering containers must be designed so that they do not become attractants for mosquito larvae. Standing water is not permitted. 
C.  Waste and Debris Containers. Animal keeping facilities and accessory uses must be maintained at all times and kept free of debris, trash, and animal waste. Storage containers for such debris, trash, and animal waste must be kept closed at all times. 
D.  Odors. Animal keeping facilities and accessory uses must be designed and maintained to prevent odors from affecting adjacent properties. 
E.  Feed Storage. Buildings, containers, or any other improvement used for the storage of feed must be constructed of materials to ensure that such feed is not an attractant to insects, rodents, and other vectors and to control odors. 
F.  Pest Control. All animal-keeping facilities must be kept free of vectors through periodic pest control inspections. 
G.  Chemicals. The storage, handling, and disposal of any potentially hazardous chemicals or commercial products used in the routine maintenance of animal control facilities or in the care of the animals, must adhere to all pertinent Federal, State, or Riverside County Health Department regulations. 
H.  Fugitive Dust and Particulates. All animal keeping facilities and accessory uses must be designed and maintained to prevent fugitive dust and particulates from affecting off-site locations. 
I.  Noise. All keeping of animals permitted herein shall be conducted in a manner which does not result in nuisance noise detrimental to residential living. Animals shall be kept and maintained in manner which contains animal sounds and noise consistent with applicable laws and regulations. 
J.  Manure. Refuse excrement and manure from animals, poultry, fowl or any livestock shall not be permitted to accumulate on any premises in the City for a period in excess of 14 days and shall be removed from such premises at not less than 14-day intervals unless spread upon and buried in the earth. Pending its removal from the premises, refuse excrement or manure shall be piled in a well drained area on a base at least four inches above the surrounding levels, to the end that storm or surface waters will flow away from, rather than into the pile. 
K.  Dead Animals. Dead animals, fowl or poultry, and offal, pending removal from the premises must be in fly tight containers. 
L.  Flies. Upon inspection, should the animals services officer discover flies in unreasonably excessive numbers, he shall require further controls through the use of insecticides, chemicals or other means. 
(Ord. 961 §1, 11/2009) 
Chapter 17.10 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES/DENSITY BONUS PROVISIONS 

17.10.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low income, lower income, moderate income, and senior households in accordance with Government Code Sections 65915-65918. In enacting this Chapter, it is the intent of the City to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Housing Element of the City's General Plan. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
17.10.020 - Definitions. 
    Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings established by this section: 
A.  Additional Incentive. A regulatory concession as described in Government Code Section 65915 that may include, but not be limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing development or any other regulatory incentive, which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or reductions, that are offered in addition to a density bonus. 
B.  Affordable Rent. Monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities, for rental target units reserved for very low, lower- or moderate-income households, not exceeding the following calculations: 
(1)  Very-Low Income. Unless otherwise provided by law, households at 50 percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12; 
(2)  Lower Income. Unless otherwise provided by law, households at 80 percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12. 
(3)  Moderate Income. Unless otherwise provided by law, households at 120 percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12. 
C.  Affordable Sales Price. A sales price at which lower or very low income households can qualify for the purchase of target units, calculated on the basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the housing development. 
D.  Density Bonus. A density increase of up to those percentages above the otherwise maximum residential density, specified in this Chapter. 
E.  Density Bonus Housing Agreement. A legally binding agreement between a developer of a housing development and the City, which ensures that the requirements of this Chapter and State density bonus law are satisfied. The agreement shall establish, among other things, the number of target units, their size, location, terms and conditions of affordability and production schedule. 
F.  Density Bonus Units. Those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, that exceed the maximum residential density for the development site. 
G.  Housing Cost. The sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the following associated with for-sale target units: principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees and a reasonable allowance for utilities. 
H.  Housing Development. Construction projects consisting of five or more residential units or lots, including single-family and multifamily, that are proposed to be constructed pursuant to this chapter. 
I.  Lower Income Household. Household whose income does not exceed the lower income limits applicable to Riverside County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5. 
J.  Maximum Residential Density. The maximum number of residential units permitted by the City's General Plan Land Use Element and Development Code, applicable to the subject property at the time an application for the construction of a housing development is deemed complete by the City, excluding the additional units permitted by this Chapter. 
K.  Moderate Income Household. Household whose income does not exceed the moderate income limits applicable to Riverside County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50093. 
L.  Non-Restricted Units. All units within a housing development excluding the target units. 
M.  Senior Citizen Housing. A housing development consistent with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, that has been 'designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens,' and which otherwise qualifies as 'housing for older persons', as that phrase is used in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and its implementing regulations, and as that phrase is used in Civil Code Section 51.3. 
N.  Target Unit. A dwelling unit within a housing development, which will be reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, very low-, lower- or moderate- income households. 
O.  Very Low Income Household. Household whose income does not exceed the very low income limits applicable to Riverside County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50105. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
17.10.030 - Implementation. 
A.  The City shall grant a density bonus and additional incentives to an applicant who agrees to provide the following target units: 
1.  Lower Income Units. Designate at least ten percent of the total units of a housing development, or such other percentage provided by law, as target units affordable to lower income households; or 
2.  Very Low Income Units. Designate at least five percent of the total units of a housing development, or such other percentage provided by law, as target units affordable to very low income households. 
3.  Moderate Income Condominium or Planned Development Units. Designate at least ten percent of the total units of a condominium project, as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(f), or planned development as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(k), or such other percentage provided by law, as target units affordable to moderate income households. 
4.  Any senior housing development. 
5.  Donation of land pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(h). 
B.  In determining the number of density bonus units to be granted pursuant to this Section, the maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be computed as follows: 
1.  Lower Income Household. The maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by 20 percent provided, however, that for each one percent increase above ten percent in the percentage of units affordable to lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by 1.5 percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
2.  Very Low Income Household. The maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by 20 percent provided, however, that for each one percent increase above five percent in the percentage of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by 2.5 percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
3.  Moderate Income Condominium or Planned Development. The maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by five percent provided, however, that for each one percent increase above ten percent of the percentage of units affordable to moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
4.  Senior Housing Development. The maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by 20 percent. 
5.  Certain Donations of Land. When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the City that satisfies the requirements of Government Code Section 65915(h), and complies with all procedural requirements of that subsection, including recordation of a deed restriction, then the maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be increased by 15 percent provided, however, that for each one percent increase above the minimum percentage of land required to be donated pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(h), the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. This increase shall be in addition to any increase required by Section 17.10.030A of this Chapter, up to a maximum combined density increase of 35 percent if an applicant seeks both the increase required by this subsection and by Section 17.10.030A. 
All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the percentage of target units. When calculating the required number of target units, any resulting fraction of units shall be deleted. 
C.  Number of Incentives. 
1.  One density bonus and one incentive shall be provided to a developer who agrees to construct at least ten percent of the total units for lower income households, five percent of the total units for very low income households, or ten percent of units in a condominium or planned development for moderate income households. A density bonus and two incentives shall be provided to a developer who agrees to construct at least 20 percent of the total units for lower income households, ten percent of the total units for very low income households, or 20 percent of units in a condominium or planned development for moderate income households. A density bonus and three incentives shall be provided to a developer who agrees to construct at least 30 percent of the total units for lower income households, 15 percent of the total units for very low income households, or 30 percent of units in a condominium or planned development for moderate income households. In cases where a density increase of more than the amount specified in Section 17.10.030.B is requested, the density increase, if granted, shall be considered an additional incentive. 
2.  In cases where the developer agrees to construct a housing development that qualifies for a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.10.030A of this Chapter, that includes a childcare facility as defined in Government Code Section 65915(i)(4), the developer shall be entitled to an additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the childcare facility; or an additional incentive described in Section 17.10.040 of this Chapter, that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility. Any such childcare facility shall comply with the following: 
a.  The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable; 
b.  Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the children of very low income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income, pursuant to this Chapter. 
c.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive for a childcare facility when it is found, based upon substantial evidence, that the City has adequate childcare facilities. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
17.10.040 - Types of bonuses and incentives allowed. 
A.  Density Bonus. The density bonus allowed by this Chapter shall consist of those density increases specified in Section 17.10.030, above the maximum residential density applicable to the site as of the date of the project land use permit application. A single development project shall not be granted more than one density bonus in compliance with this Chapter. 
1.  The City shall provide a density bonus and an additional incentive for qualified developments, upon the written request of a developer unless the City makes the written findings set forth in Government Code Section 65915(d)(1). 
2.  The development incentive granted shall contribute significantly to the economic feasibility of providing the target units. Any applicant seeking a waiver or modification of development or zoning standards shall show that such waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing development economically feasible. This requirement may be satisfied by reference to applicable sections of the housing element of the City's General Plan. 
B.  Other Incentives. If requested by the applicant, a qualifying project shall be entitled to at least one of the following incentives, unless the City makes the findings required by Government Code Section 65915(d)(1): 
1.  Types of Incentives. The allocation of an additional incentive shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. The additional incentive may include, but is not limited to any of the following: 
a.  A reduction in site development standards or a modification of the requirements of this Development Code, which exceed the minimum building standards provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code. These may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following: 
i.  Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions. 
ii.  Reduced minimum lot setbacks. 
iii.  Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor open space. 
iv.  Increased maximum lot coverage. 
v.  Increased maximum building height. 
vi.  Reduced on-site parking standards. 
vii.  Reduced minimum building separation requirements. 
viii.  Other site or construction conditions applicable to a residential development. 
b.  Mixed use zoning to allow the housing development to include nonresidential uses and/or allow the housing development within a nonresidential zone. Approval of mixed use activities in conjunction with the housing development if other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development, and the other land uses are compatible with the housing development and the existing or planned development in the area, and is consistent with the General Plan. 
c.  Another regulatory incentive or concession proposed by the applicant and agreed to by the City, that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. Permissible incentives include direct financial aid (e.g., redevelopment set-aside, Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding) in the form of a loan or a grant to subsidize or provide low interest financing for on or off-site improvements, land, or construction costs. 
d.  A density bonus of more than 35 percent. 
e.  Waived, reduced or deferred plan check, construction permit and/or development impact fees (e.g., capital facilities, park, traffic, etc.). 
2.  Requirements. 
a.  Economic feasibility. Any development incentive granted shall contribute to the economic feasibility of providing the target units. 
b.  Waivers or modifications. An applicant seeking a waiver or modification of development or zoning standards shall show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing development economically feasible assuming a reasonable rate of return (e.g., at a minimum, an application shall include itemized accounting of projected costs and revenues of the development). 
c.  Revenue. Project revenues shall include moneys from the sale or rental of all units, including the density bonus units. 
d.  Costs. Projected costs: 
i.  Shall not include the 'lost opportunity' cost of the target units (e.g., the amount that would have been generated had the target units been rented or sold at market rate). 
ii.  May include items that are required solely because of the inclusion of the density bonus units and would not have been required without the units. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
17.10.050 - Requirements for density bonus projects. 
A.  The entry into and execution of the density bonus housing agreement shall be a condition of any application for a discretionary planning permit (e.g., tract maps, parcel maps, site plans, planned development, or conditional use permits) for a housing development proposed pursuant to this Chapter. The agreement shall be recorded at the applicant's cost as a restriction running with the land on the parcel or parcels on which the target units will be constructed. The owner's obligation to maintain units as affordable housing shall be evidenced in the density bonus housing agreement. The agreement shall indicate the household type, number, location, size, and construction scheduling of all affordable units and any other information required by the City to determine the applicant's compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Target units shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated group for a period of 30 years (or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program), or otherwise as provided by law. 
C.  In determining the maximum affordable rent or affordable sales price of target units the following household and unit size assumptions shall be used, unless the housing development is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations: 
SRO (residential Hotel) unit 75% of 1 person Studio 1 person 1 bedroom 2 persons 2 bedroom 3 persons 3 bedroom 4 persons 4 bedroom 6 persons  
D.  Those units targeted for lower income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed current Housing and Urban Development (HUD) income limits for lower income households for the county, adjusted for household size. 
E.  Those units targeted for very low income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed current HUD income limits for very low income households for the county, adjusted for household size. 
F.  An applicant shall agree that the initial occupants of the moderate-income units in the condominium project or in the planned development are persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093. Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. The City shall recapture its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within three years for any of the purposes described in Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2(e), that promote homeownership. For purposes of this subsection, the City's proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the percentage by which the initial sale price to the moderate-income household was less than the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. 
G.  The owner shall submit annually, and within 30 days of occupancy of a target rental unit, a certificate of compliance, which shall include the name, address, and income of each tenant occupying the target unit. 
H.  The owner shall maintain and keep on file annual sworn and notarized income statements and current tax returns for all tenants occupying the target rental units. 
I.  The owner shall provide to the City any additional information required by the City to insure the long-term affordability of the target units by eligible households. 
J.  The City shall have the right to inspect the owner's project-related records at any reasonable time and shall be entitled to audit the owner's records once a year. 
K.  The City may establish fees associated with the setting up and monitoring of target units. 
L.  All for-sale target units shall be occupied by their purchasers; no renting or subleasing shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
17.10.060 - Development standards. 
A.  Target units shall be constructed concurrently with non-restricted units unless both the City and the applicant agree within the density bonus housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development. 
B.  Target units shall be built on-site wherever possible and when practical, be dispersed within the housing development. Where feasible, the number of bedrooms of the target units shall be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the non-target units of the housing development, except that the developer may include a higher proportion of target units with more bedrooms. The design and appearance of the target units shall be compatible with the design of the total housing development. All housing developments shall comply with all applicable development standards, except those standards, which may be modified as provided by this chapter. Deviations from these provisions may only be permitted as part of an approved density bonus housing agreement. 
C.  Circumstances may arise in which the public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the target units associated with one housing development to be produced and operated at an alternative development site. Where the applicant and the City form an agreement, the resulting linked developments shall be considered a single housing development for purposes of this chapter. Under these circumstances, the applicant shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter for the target units to be provided on the alternative site. 
D.  Special parking requirements. Upon request of the developer of a housing development qualifying for a density bonus pursuant to this Chapter, the City shall permit vehicular parking ratios, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  0-1 bedrooms: One on-site parking space. 
2.  2-3 bedrooms: Two on-site parking spaces. 
3.  4 or more bedrooms: Two and one-half parking spaces. 
If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subsection, a housing development may provide 'on-site parking' through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
17.10.070 - Processing of density bonus requests. 
    An application for a density bonus housing agreement pursuant to this Chapter shall be processed as part of the application for a housing development. An application for a housing development shall not be determined 'complete' for purposes of Government Code Section 65920, et seq., unless and until the City Council has given preliminary approval of the form and content of a density bonus housing agreement, which complies with the provisions of this chapter. The process for obtaining preliminary approval of the density bonus housing agreement, shall be as follows: 
A.  Filing. An applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this chapter shall submit an application for a density bonus housing agreement as part of the submittal of any formal request for approval of a housing development. The application, whether a pre-application or a formal application, shall include: 
1.  A brief description of the proposed housing development, including the total number of units, target units, and density bonus units proposed; 
2.  The zoning and general plan designations and assessor's parcel number(s) of the project site; 
3.  A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveways, and parking layout; and 
4.  If an additional incentive is requested, a description of why the additional incentive is necessary to provide the target units. 
B.  Review of Density Bonus Request. 
1.  Within 90 days of receipt of the application for a density bonus housing agreement and a housing development, the City shall provide to an applicant a letter, which identifies project issues of concern, and the procedures for compliance with this Chapter. 
2.  If additional incentives are requested, the Director of Planning shall inform the applicant that the requested additional incentives shall or shall not be recommended for consideration with the proposed housing development, or that alternative or modified additional incentives shall be recommended for consideration in lieu of the requested additional incentives. If the Director of Planning recommends alternative or modified incentives, the recommendation shall establish how the alternative or modified incentives can be expected to have an equivalent affordability effect as the requested incentives. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
17.10.080 - Density bonus housing agreement. 
A.  The terms of the draft density bonus housing agreement (the "agreement") shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the Director of Planning and the City Attorney who shall formulate a recommendation to the Planning Commission for review and the City Council for final approval. 
B.  Following execution of the agreement by the applicant and the City, the completed agreement, or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded. The conditions contained in the agreement shall be filed and recorded on the parcel or parcels designated for the construction of target units as a condition of final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for such parcels or units. The agreement shall be binding upon all future owners and successors in interest for this property, which is the subject of the housing development application. 
C.  At a minimum, the agreement shall include the following: 
1.  The total number of units proposed within the housing development, including the number of target units; 
2.  A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the housing development, and the standards for determining the corresponding affordable rent or affordable sales price and housing cost; 
3.  The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms of target units; 
4.  Tenure of use restrictions for target units of at least 30 years; 
5.  A schedule for completion and occupancy of target units; 
6.  A description of any additional incentive being provided by the City; 
7.  A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the City may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement); and 
8.  Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this chapter. 
D.  In the case of for-sale housing developments, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the initial sale and use of target units during the applicable use restriction period: 
1.  Target units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to and occupied by eligible very low, lower income, or, in the case of a condominium or planned development, moderate income households at an affordable sales price and housing cost, or to qualified senior citizen residents (i.e., maintained as senior citizen housing). 
2.  The initial purchaser of each target unit shall execute an instrument or agreement, approved by the City Attorney, restricting the sale of the target unit in accordance with this chapter during the applicable use restriction period. Such instrument or agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the target unit and shall contain provisions as the City may require to ensure continued compliance with this Chapter and the State density bonus law. 
E.  In the case of rental housing developments, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of target units during the use restriction period: 
1.  The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies and the proper management and maintenance of target units for qualified tenants; 
2.  Provisions requiring owners to verify tenant incomes and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter; and 
3.  Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the City, which includes the name, address and income of each person occupying target units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each target unit. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
17.10.090 - Changes in State density bonus laws. 
    It is the intent of the City Council that the provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to fulfill the requirements of Government Code Section 65915 et seq., notwithstanding changes in State laws revising percentages, numerical thresholds and/or other standards applicable to the granting of density bonuses or related incentives that may occur after the effective date of this chapter. Accordingly, it is the further intent of the City Council that any such changed percentages, numerical thresholds or other standards shall be deemed to supersede and govern any conflicting percentages, numerical thresholds or other standards contained in this chapter, to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 982, 12-7-2010) 
Chapter 17.11 - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

17.11.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    This Chapter establishes general development standards for all land uses and development in the City. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.020 - Applicability. 
    The regulations contained in this Chapter are applicable to all site development in the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.030 - Lots and divisions of land. 
    Whenever a division of land is proposed, the total number of lots or density permitted shall be determined pursuant to the City of Beaumont General Plan, any applicable adopted specific plan and the Government Code. In any event, no parcel shall be created that is below the minimum size allowed by the zoning classification that has been applied to the parcel of land unless a variance has been granted that allows smaller parcel sizes, or a planned residential development that allows smaller lot sizes as a part of an overall development has been approved by the granting of a conditional use permit. Other requirements that are applicable are indicated in this Section. 
A.  Recorded Lots. Any lot shown upon an official subdivision map or record of survey map duly approved and recorded or any lot for which a bonafide deed has been recorded prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 324 may be used as a building site, provided the required yard setbacks are maintained. 
B.  Sale of a Portion of a Lot. Where a lot is divided into separate ownerships and the area of either portion is such that the number and location of the buildings on the lot are not located within a particular zone, then, in determining the permissible number and location of any buildings on either portion of the lot, both parts shall be considered as one parcel only. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.040 - Site preparation. 
    This Section indicates the requirements are applicable to the preparation of a site for development. 
A.  Property Lines. Boundary stakes shall be placed on the property by a licensed land surveyor prior to beginning construction for the purpose of delineating property lines. 
B.  Site Grading Requirements. Site grading shall conform to the following: 
1.  All grading shall conform to the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 70, as may be amended by City Ordinance. 
2.  The minimum building pad and drainage swale slope shall equal one percent if cut or fill is less than ten feet. The minimum building pad and drainage swale slope shall equal two percent if the cut or fill is greater than ten feet. Drainage swales shall be a minimum of 0.3 feet deep and be constructed a minimum of two feet from the top of cut or fill slopes. 
3.  The maximum cut and fill slopes are two to one (2:1). 
4.  A five foot wide by one foot high berm must be provided, or its equivalent along the top of all fill slopes over five feet high. 
5.  All grading shall be done under the supervision of a competent soils engineer who shall certify that all fill has been properly placed and who shall submit a final compaction report for all fills over one feet deep. 
6.  A Registered Civil Engineer shall submit to the Building and Safety Department, written certification of completion of rough grading in accordance with the approved grading plan prior to issuance of the building permit. This certification shall apply to line; grade, elevation and the location of cut fill slopes. 
7.  A final compaction report will be required for all fills greater than one foot. 
8.  All grading shall be done in conformance with recommendations of a preliminary soils investigation. 
9.  Two sets of the final compaction report shall be submitted to the Building and Safety Department which shall include foundation design recommendations and certification that grading has been done in conformance with the recommendation of the preliminary soils report. 
10.  The contractor shall notify the Building and Safety Department, at least 24 hours in advance requesting finish lot grade and drainage inspection. This inspection must be approved prior to building permit final inspection for each lot. 
11.  During rough grading operations and prior to the construction of permanent drainage structures, temporary drainage control shall be provided to prevent the ponding of water of water and the flooding of adjacent properties. 
12.  No fill shall be placed on existing ground until the ground has been cleared of weeds debris, topsoil, and other deleterious material. 
13.  If steep sloping terrain occurs upon which fill is to be placed, it must be cleared, keyed, and benched into firm natural soil for full support. Preparation shall be approved by a registered Soils Engineer prior to the placement of fill material. 
14.  Cut slopes or fill slopes equal to or greater than three in vertical height shall be planted with grass or ground cover to protect the slope from erosion and instability in accordance with policies of the City Engineer prior to the approval of final inspection. 
15.  Dust shall be controlled by watering or other approved methods. 
16.  All existing drainage courses on the project site must continue to function, especially during storm conditions. Protective measures and temporary drainage provisions must be used to protect adjoining properties during grading operations. 
17.  Stability calculations with a factor of at least one and five-tenth shall be submitted by a soils engineer to the Building and Safety Department for cut and cut and fill slopes over 30 feet in vertical height. 
18.  A Registered Civil Engineer or licensed land surveyor shall submit certification of building pad elevation. Where specific elevations are required; the elevation (with respect to mean sea level) shall be given. If an elevation with respect to adjacent ground surface is required, the actual distance above the adjacent ground shall be given. 
19.  The design engineer shall provide a minimum of one blue top finished pad, prior to rough grade approval. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.050 - Off-site improvements. 
    This section indicates the specific requirements with respect to off-site improvements. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this ordinance, this Section shall not be subject to Section 17.02.100 of this ordinance related to the following of variances. 
A.  Requirements for Certain Improvements. Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for erecting a new structure, an enlargement or addition in excess of 300 square feet or of more than 25 percent of the original area of an existing residential structure, or movement of structure on any lot abutting a public street, the applicant for such building permit for the owner of such property shall comply with the off-site improvement requirements, where applicable, which include lot surveying, and installation of curbs and gutters and other improvements as outlined in the ordinance. 
B.  Provisions Made for Completing Improvements. No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged or altered on a lot which abuts a street unless provision is made or has previously been made, for the dedication of the necessary right-of-way for street and highway purposes, and for the improvement of that portion of the street and/or right-of-way upon which the lot fronts and adjoins. The improvement shall include the installation of curb, gutter and pavement and such sidewalk as is required on that side of the centerline of the street and/or right-of-way adjoining said lot. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued for any building or structure subject to the provisions of this ordinance without all improvements and dedications required hereunder being made and completed or the appropriate security filed with the Director of Public Works/City Engineer as required. 
C.  Plans and Standards for Improvements. The owner, developer or applicant for the building permit shall submit plans prepared by a Registered Engineer for said dedication and improvement to the City Engineer for his review and approval. The following requirements also apply: 
1.  All street improvements required by this Subsection shall be designed in accordance with the standards for such streets as set forth in the official standards as approved by the City Council. 
2.  All plans to be based on City Bench Mark Systems. 
D.  Street Dedication and Improvements Required. This Subsection indicates specific requirements with respect to street dedications and any required improvements. 
1.  No building shall be erected, enlarged by more than 25 percent or moved to any lot or parcel of lots, which abuts or adjoining a street unless the one-half portion of such street adjoining or abutting the developed area has been dedicated and improved in accordance with the current standards and specifications on file in the Office of the City Engineer. 
2.  Curb and gutter in front of the lot upon which the building or structure is to be erected shall be provided as required by the City Engineer in compliance with the Standard Specifications of the City. 
3.  If sidewalks exist on 25 percent or more of the total frontage of the lots in the block on that side of the street adjoining the lot upon which the building or structure is to be erected or constructed, then a sidewalk shall be provided in front of said lot provided that the City Council may waive the provisions for sidewalks in front of single family residences, in manufacturing zones, and in open space zones if appealed by property owner. 
4.  The City Council may extend the time for of improvements for a period the date of occupancy permit security and development the-construction of one year from with a signed agreement. 
E.  Costs of Engineering and Improvements. The owner, developer or applicant for the building permit shall pay all costs of dedication and improvement, including any cost for the removal or relocation of utilities, including fire hydrants, traffic signals, street lighting, drainage culverts, and of preparation of plans and blueprints. 
F.  Completion of Improvements. Any person required to make street improvements pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection shall make and construct all of said improvements in accordance with said standards and specifications and other requirements of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer, or upon City Council approval, shall file with the City Engineer, a letter of credit, cash, certificate of deposit, or an agreement and note for the obligation secured by a deed of trust on the property, in such amount as the City Engineer shall estimate and determine to be necessary to cover the total costs of all required improvements. The City Engineer may determine the period of time during which the installation of said improvements could be reasonably delayed, provided that, in any event, the installation or construction of said improvements shall not be delayed for a period of more than two years from the date of final inspection of the building without the approval of the City Council. The City Engineer shall cause a written itemized estimate of the costs of all improvements and the amount of the required security to be given to the owner or applicant required to make the improvements within 30 days after issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.060 - Building permits. 
    Building permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following conditions: 
A.  Access Required. No building permit shall be issued for a building or structure on a lot that does not have access on a dedicated and improved street or on a private road acceptable to the Planning Director and the City Engineer. 
B.  Compliance with Zoning Required. No building permit shall be issued for a building, structure, or improvement that would be in violation of or contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, other applicable ordinance or law, or lawful condition or regulation of the City of Beaumont. In the event the Director of the Building and Safety Department declines to issue a building permit pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the applicant may appeal such decision to the Planning Commission that shall review, study and suggest possible alternative proposals that would be in compliance with such ordinances, law, condition or regulation. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.070 - Dwellings. 
    This Section indicates the requirements applicable to dwellings. 
A.  Transferal of Residential Requirements. Where a building for dwelling purposes is erected on a lot in a zone other than the zone in which such building for dwelling purposes is first ordinarily or primarily permitted by this ordinance, such lot shall be subject to the same requirements for yards, minimum lot area and percentage of lot coverage as are specified in this ordinance for a lot in the zone in which such building for dwelling purposes is first ordinarily or primarily permitted. This general provision shall prevail over any specific setback stated in nonresidential zones. 
B.  Location of Dwellings. Except in multiple dwelling developments or where otherwise provided in this ordinance, every dwelling shall face or front upon a street or permanent means of access to a street, and in no event shall any dwelling face or front upon an alley. 
C.  Size of Dwellings. No dwelling unit shall be constructed unless it has a minimum floor living area as stated in Table 17.11-1 below, provided, however, a larger or smaller minimum size dwelling unit may be specifically required in any area of the City by an official zoning map. Porches, garages, patios and similar features, whether attached or detached to a dwelling, shall not be included when calculating the floor living area. 
Table 17.11-1
Requirements for Size of Dwellings Unit Type Floor Area (in sq. ft.) Studio 500 sq. ft. minimum bedroom combined One Bedroom Residential Unit 650 sq. ft. minimum Two Bedroom Residential Unit 800 sq. ft. minimum Three Bedroom Residential Unit 1,000 sq. ft. minimum Single Family Detached Residential Unit 1,000 sq. ft. minimum Accessory Buildings 400 sq. ft. minimum to 640 sq. ft. maximum  
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.080 - Walls and fences. 
    This Section indicates the requirements applicable to fences and walls. 
A.  Fencing Materials. Solid fences in multiple family residential, commercial and manufacturing zones shall be masonry or other permanent materials as approved by the Planning Director. Open work fences facing any public street in commercial zones must be either masonry or metal grill work such as wrought iron. Open work fences in any other situation may, in addition to the above, be open metal mesh, or any other appropriate material as determined by the Planning Director. Fencing materials for residential development in the single-family residential zones shall be subject to approval by the Planning Director. Fencing materials shall be compatible with, and complement, conditions which prevail in the subject area, with consistency relative to architectural characteristics, other fencing in the vicinity and materials. Wherever practical and appropriate, decorative masonry and other materials shall be employed as determined appropriate by the Planning Director. Barbed wire fences may only be permitted in agricultural and manufacturing zones when specifically approved by the Planning Director. 
B.  Prohibited Materials for Fences and Walls. In no case shall barbed or other similar type wire be used as any part of a fence except where approved by the Planning Director for use in agricultural or manufacturing zones. Barbed or similar type wire when permitted by the Planning Director shall not be placed so as to be visible from any facing public street. 
C.  Nonconforming Fences. Every fence erected prior to , the adoption of the ordinance which does not conform with the provisions of the Code of the City of Beaumont, shall be removed, altered or replaced in order to so conform to the Code requirement. Such nonconforming fences shall be abated according to the following schedule provided in Table 17.11-2. The value of fence shall be determined by the building official after consultation with the fence owner and/or a fence installer. Value shall be the book value of the fence, as it existed on the effective date of this ordinance. 
D.  Fence and Wall Location and Height. Fences and walls may be erected on property lines in any zone, with a maximum height of six feet above the ground level immediately abutting the fence at its highest point, with the following exceptions: 
1.  No fence greater in height than three and one-half feet (42 inches) may be placed in the required front yard, either along the front or side property line; 
2.  On corner lots, the maximum height shall not exceed three and one-half feet (42 inches) within an area defined on both intersecting street by a 45 degree angle taken through the corner of the building or structure at the point that the structure is closest to the intersection; 
3.  Within residential zones, fencing in the front yard areas shall be limited to three and one-half feet (42 inches), either along the front or side property line, in the requires front yard, or the closest projection of the front of the residences, whichever is greater; 
4.  In manufacturing zones, fences which do not exceed eight feet in height measured from the ground level immediately abutting the fence at its highest point may be erected at or near property lines; provided that the maximum height of such fences in any yard abutting a public street shall be limited to six feet in height within a five foot setback area from any public street. 
Table 17.11-2
Abatement Schedule for Nonconforming Walls and Fences Value of Wall or Fences Period for Removal $100.00 or less 90 days $100.01 to $200.00 6 months $200.01 to $400.00 1 year $400.01 to $650.00 2 years $650.01 to $1,000.00 3 years $1,000.01 to $1,500.00 4 years $1,500.01 to $2,500.00 5 years $2,500.01 to $5,000.00 7 years $5,000.01 to $7,500.00 8 years $7,500.01 to $10,000.00 9 years $10,000.01 or more 10 years  
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.090 - Acquisition and use of public property. 
    When the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of Title 17 of the Government Code, known as the Conservation and Planning Law, approves the acquisition of any square, park or other public ground or open space, by any public entity, it may in its approval designate for what purpose such property may be used and when so approved such property may be used for any use designed pursuant to this section in addition to those uses permitted in the zone in which such property is located. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.100 - Swimming pool, spa and similar. 
    This Section indicates the requirements applicable to swimming pools, spas and similar. 
A.  Adoption of the California Building Code. The California Building Code, current Edition, as Published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
B.  Requirements. 
1.  Private swimming pools and their mechanical equipment for the use of the occupants of the premises and their nonpaying guests shall be located not closer than five feet to any property line or dwelling; 
2.  All other swimming pools shall be located not nearer than ten feet from any property line or building. 
3.  Walls. A masonry wall or other sound reducing material as approved by the Planning Director shall be erected on three sides of the mechanical equipment facing neighboring properties to a height of not less than 18 inches taller than the equipment." 
17.11.110 - Home occupations. 
    The purpose of this Section is to provide for the conduct of home occupations/home-based businesses in residential zones or buildings in such a manner as to be compatible with, and not disruptive to, residential neighborhoods. The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of a residential dwelling as a dwelling. 
A.  Uses Permitted. The following uses or similar uses shall be considered as home-based businesses provided that such uses comply with the criteria stated in this Section: 
1.  Professional office occupation whose principal product is information, management or design, including but not limited to accounting, architecture, artist/talent management and promotion, brokerage, business/financial management, computer programming and software development, credit/financial counseling, drafting and illustration, engineering, fashion design, interior decoration and design, legal services, marketing and advertising, property management, and writing and editing. The primary means of contact must be by phone, mail, or other electronic form of communication. Professional office activity does not include research requiring the use of hazardous materials and equipment. Professional office activity does not include a medical office. 
2.  A secondary office for a business in which the principal office, staff and equipment are located elsewhere. 
3.  The home office of a salesman, wherein all sales are conducted by telephone or by correspondence and wherein there are no displays or related commodities on premises. 
4.  Any legal use customarily conducted entirely within a residential dwelling. 
5.  The home office of a service business where not more than one 2,000-pound (one ton) or smaller vehicle used in conjunction with the home-based business is kept on the subject property. 
6.  Sales of produce (fruit or vegetables) grown on the subject property. 
7.  Cottage food operations, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758, shall be a permitted home-based business provided it complies with all applicable provisions of this Section and under the California Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended. 
B.  Conditions. Home-based businesses may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of this Section, subject to the following conditions. 
1.  Employment shall be limited to residents of the dwelling only. 
2.  Material or equipment used in connection with such home-based businesses shall be limited to that normally found in a dwelling and recognized as being part of the normal uses and practices in the zone in which the use is a part. 
3.  There shall be no direct sales of products or merchandise from the dwelling, except for produce (fruit or vegetables) grown on the subject property or otherwise as authorized by this Section. 
4.  Produce and sales may be permitted subject to sales being limited to three days per week. No structure or stand of a permanent nature shall be erected on the subject property. 
5.  Customers or clientele shall not be permitted to visit/enter the dwelling in connection with the home-based business. However, incidental uses such as music lessons, tutoring, and the sale of produce may be permitted if the intensity of such use is approved by the Community Development Director. 
6.  No more than one room of the dwelling shall be used for the home-based business. Use of the garage for the home-based business may be permitted if such use does not obstruct required parking. 
7.  No alteration of any kind will be allowed to the principal building which changes its residential character. This includes, but is not limited to, the enlargement of public utility services or the installation of special equipment attached to walls, floor or ceilings. 
8.  The home-based business use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal/customary to the zone in which it is located. 
9.  The home-based business shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises. 
10.  Materials or supplies shall not be stored indoors or outdoors for purposes other than those permitted in the zone. 
11.  The home-based business shall not involve the display of signs or advertising devices on the premises except one unlighted sign, not more than two square feet in area, may be posted on temporary produce displays 
12.  A valid business license from the City shall be obtained each year and shall be posted on any temporary produce displays. 
13.  The activities of the home-based business shall not be conducted in a manner that negatively impacts the residential area. Such determination of the City may include, but not be limited to, consideration of color of the building, construction, lighting, signs, sounds, noises and vibrations. 
14.  All operations of such home-based business shall be conducted so as to prevent the emanation of any dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, or electrical disturbances which are or may be detrimental to the welfare of the occupants of surrounding properties. 
15.  No accessory building or space outside of the principal building shall be used for the home-based business other than the growing of produce. No outdoor storage, including the storage or parking of vehicles associated with the home-based business, shall be permitted. 
16.  The following requirements shall also apply to cottage food occupations: 
i.  The permit applicant shall be the individual who conducts the cottage food operation from his or her private residential dwelling and is the owner of the cottage food operation. The permit shall not be transferable to another operator nor transferable to another site. 
ii.  The cottage food operation shall be registered or permitted as a "Class A" or "Class B" operation by the Riverside County Department of Environmental Health in accordance with Section 114365 of the California Health and Safety Code. Cottage food operations shall comply with all California Health and Safety Code requirements. 
iii.  Any applicant for a permit under this Section shall provide to the City, as part of the home-based business application: (1) a copy of the operation's registration or permit to operate as a "Class A" or "Class B" operation, as required under Health and Safety Code Section 114365, and (2) a copy of the self-certification checklist submitted to and approved by the County. 
iv.  The permit shall be granted if the application is complete and the cottage food operation complies with the requirements set forth in this Section, and all other code sections regarding spacing and concentration, traffic control, parking, and noise control. 
v.  A permit issued under this Section may be revoked for any violation of this Section or of Section 114365 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code. 
vi.  The City may, for inspection purposes, access the permitted area of a private home where a cottage food operation is located if the City has, on the basis of a consumer complaint, reason to suspect that adulterated or otherwise unsafe food has been produced by the cottage food operation, or that the cottage food operation has violated this Section and/or California Health and Safety Code Section 114365 et seq. 
vii.  Gross annual sales shall not exceed the amount specified in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758. 
17.  A home occupation shall be subject to any additional condition or requirement, which may be imposed by the Commission or Council. 
C.  Applications. Applications to have a home-based business shall be made to the Community Development Director, accompanied by the filing fee set forth in the fee schedule, and shall include such information and documentation as may be required to complete an Home Occupation Permit. The applicant shall be the operator of the home-based business and shall be a resident of the dwelling in which the home-based business is located. Information shall be provided to ensure that the proposed home-based business complies with the requirements of this Section. Additional information necessary to make the findings required for approval may be required by the City. The permit may include specific conditions and restrictions necessary to make the use compatible with a residential setting. 
D.  Exemptions. Activities exempt from the home-based business requirements include temporary sales stands with nominal sales such as children's lemonade stands and hostess parties, not more than three in any 12-month period. No structure or stand of a permanent nature shall be erected onsite for these exempt sales. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007; Ord. No. 1075, § 4(Exh. A), 7-5-2016 ) 
17.11.120 - Manufactured homes on foundations. 
A.  Conditions. A manufactured home may be installed on a foundation on any lot in the City of Beaumont, that is zoned to permit the construction of a conventional single-family dwelling, if it meets the following conditions: 
1.  The manufactured home shall be certified under the national Mobilehome Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) and shall bear a California insignia or Federal label as required by section 18550 (b) of the Health and Safety Code. 
2.  The foundation system shall meet the requirements of section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code. 
3.  The manufactured home shall contain a minimum of 1,100 square feet of living area with a minimum width of 20 feet. On all lots less than 60 feet in width the manufactured home shall contain a minimum of 950 square feet of living area with a minimum width of 20 feet. Porches, garages, patios and similar features, whether attached or detached, shall not be included when calculating the floor living area. 
4.  The manufactured home shall have a roof overhang of not less than 16 inches with a minimum 12-inch gable overhang, unless it is determined that it is not compatible to the neighborhood in which the manufactured home is being located. 
5.  The manufactured home shall have non-reflecting roofing material and siding material that is compatible with the neighborhood in which the manufactured home is to be located. 
6.  A garage compatible to the neighborhood in which the manufactured home is being installed shall be constructed. 
7.  The manufactured home shall be used only as a single family residential use and shall comply with all the setback and height requirements of the zone in which it is located. 
B.  Applications. Applications to install a manufactured home on a permanent foundation shall be made to the Planning Director, on the form provided by the Planning Department, accompanied by the filing fee set forth in the fee schedule and shall include such information and documentation as may be required by the Planning Director, including the following: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant and all owners of the subject property, including evidence that all owners agree to the application. 
2.  Location or address, legal description and zoning of the property on which the manufactured home is to be located. 
3.  A site plan of the entire property showing location of the manufactured home and all accessory buildings, including all dimensions and setbacks. 
4.  Certification that the manufactured home complies with the National Mobilehome Construction and Safety Standards of 1974. 
5.  Photographs that show the manufactured home in sufficient detail with regard to siding material, roof overhang and roof materials. 
6.  Photographs that depict the type of structures, siding and roofing materials and roof overhang of structures in the neighborhood in which the manufactured home is to be located. 
C.  Processing of Applications. Within 14 days following the acceptance of an application as being complete, the Planning Director shall determine whether the request meets all the of the requirements of this ordinance and shall determine the roof overhang, roofing and siding materials and any automobile enclosure necessary to achieve compatibility with the neighborhood. Upon approval of the application, the Planning Director shall forward the original thereof to the Building Director, file one copy, and return one copy to the applicant, who shall then obtain all necessary installation and construction permits from the Building Department. If the Planning Director is unable to approve the application, it shall be returned to the applicant along with a statement of the reasons therefore, giving notice that the applicant may meet with the Planning Director to discuss the matter. 
D.  Appeal. Appeals shall be provided for plot plans in Section 17.02.060 of the Ordinance. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.11.130 - Mobilehome parks. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide regulations for the establishment, maintenance and operation of mobilehome parks in the City of Beaumont. 
B.  Classification of Mobilehome Parks. 
1.  Pre-Existing Mobile Home Parks. A pre-existing mobilehome park shall not be deemed nonconforming by reason of failure to meet the minimum requirements prescribed by this section, provided that the regulations of this section shall apply to the enlargement or expansion of a mobilehome park, and provided that the pre-existing mobilehome park on a site less than ten acres shall not be further reduced in area. 
2.  Planned Residential Mobilehome Parks. A Planned Residential Mobilehome park is a site intended for residential use exclusively in mobilehomes together with recreation and necessary facilities (including trailer and boat storage areas). Planned Residential Mobilehome Parks shall be constructed in accordance with the hereinafter listed requirements. In addition thereto, planned residential mobilehome parks shall be subject to, and shall comply with, such additional conditions and requirements as are determined to be necessary in approving the development to make it compatible with the area in which it is proposed to be located. 
3.  Integrated Mobilehome Parks. An integrated mobilehome park is a site intended for residential use exclusively in mobilehomes not including recreation and accessory facilities. Development standards shall include site development as required in the 17.03.060 (residential Single Family Zone) and in 17.11.120 (Manufactured Homes on Foundations). In addition thereto, integrated mobilehome parks shall be subject to, and comply with, such additional conditions and requirements as are determined to be necessary in approving the development to make it compatible with the area in which it is proposed to be located. 
C.  Development Approval. All mobilehome parks shall be developed subject to a conditional use permit as found in Section 17.02. 
D.  Development Standards for Planned Residential Mobilehome Parks. 
1.  Site Standards. The following regulations shall apply to the site of a mobilehome park. Additional regulations may be specified as conditions of a use permit. 
a.  Minimum Gross Area: Ten acres 
b.  Maximum Density: Seven units per gross acre. 
c.  Minimum Access Frontage: 250 feet continuous frontage on a dedicated public street. 
d.  Minimum Park Perimeter Yards: Five feet adjacent to a public street. 
e.  Maximum Height: Mobilehomes and accessory structures 35 feet. 
2.  Interior Site Development. The following requirements shall apply to development of mobilehome spaces and to facilities within a mobilehome park. Additional requirements may be specified as conditions of a use permit. 
a.  Mobilehome Space. Each space shall contain a minimum of 4,000 square feet for exclusive use by the occupants of the space. Each space shall have dimensions capable of accommodating a rectangle with minimum dimensions of 46 feet by 75 feet, and 75 percent of the spaces shall have a minimum depth of 90 feet. 
b.  Mobile homes shall meet the following minimum lot setbacks: 20 feet front yard. Five feet side yard and ten feet rear yard. The 20 foot front setback may be reduced on interior streets to ten feet if an attached garage is located in front of the mobilehome with at least 65 percent of the front yard landscape with live plant material. 
c.  Access Drive. All mobilehome access drives within a mobilehome park shall be privately owned, and shall be at least 30 feet wide exclusive of adjoining parking areas and sidewalks. The Mobilehome Park will be developed in a manner that permits adequate circulation to and within the proposed development for emergency and protective services, including police and fire equipment. Main access drives shall have standard class A curbs and gutters. Other interior access drives shall have rolled curbs and gutters. 
d.  Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks at least five feet in width shall be provided to serve all central or common facilities within the mobilehome park. Access drives shall be provided with sidewalks on at least one side. 
e.  Accessory Building and Uses. Accessory buildings and uses serving the entire mobilehome park, including recreation facilities, laundry areas, mobilehome park offices, maintenance and storage buildings or storage areas shall be located at least 50 feet from the boundary of the Mobilehome park site. 
f.  Landscaping. Not less than 20 percent of each mobilehome space shall be landscaped with live plants, including at least one tree on each space. 
g.  Community Recreation. A minimum of 500 square feet of community recreation area, (exclusive of any mobilehome space) shall be provided within the mobilehome park for each site. The community recreation areas shall contain a clubhouse and a recreational area for outdoor games and activities such as shuffleboard, horseshoes, putting green, or swimming pool. The community recreation and service areas together with the identification of activities planned for the areas, shall be shown on the plans and specifications in such detail as shall be required by the Planning Director. The location and size of all facilities indicated in this paragraph shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. The clubhouse shall have a floor area of not less than 25 square feet for each residential lot, and shall contain adequate kitchen, restroom and storage facilities. In no event shall the community area for any mobilehome park be less than two acres. 
h.  Improvements. The following improvements shall be installed on all lots used for residential purposes: 
1.  A concrete slab or other metal or wood deck containing at least 200 square feet. 
2.  The area between the ground level and the floor of a mobilehome shall be screened from view by an opaque skirt entirely around the mobilehome. 
i.  No common area for storage of camp and boat trailers shall be permitted unless it is designated on the map. 
j.  Not more than one mobilehome for residential purposes shall be permitted on a lot. 
k.  Whenever the soil is excavated below a mobilehome, a retaining wall shall be installed extending six inches above grade. Plans for the retaining wall shall be approved by the Department of Building and Safety. 
l.  Electrical and Television Service. All electrical, telephone, C.A.T.V. and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed shall, within the exterior boundary line of such property, be installed underground. Risers on poles and buildings are permitted and shall be provided by the developer or owner onto the pole which provides service to said property. Utility service poles may be placed on the rear of the property to be developed, only for the purpose of terminating underground facilities. The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and he shall make the installation of such facilities. 
m.  Exemption. The improvement and setback requirements contained in this subsection may be modified or eliminated when the Commission finds that due to topographical conditions or property ownership patterns these requirements are impractical and will not serve to protect the present or future welfare of the public. 
3.  Screening and Landscaping. Masonry walls six feet high shall be erected along all boundary lines, except that along all street boundaries the wall shall be erected five feet from the right-of-way line. The area between the wall and the street shall be planted in ground cover. Trees or shrubs shall be planted within the ten foot strip adjacent to the inside of all boundary walls. All trees and shrubs planted shall be of a variety that will grow to a height of not less than 15 feet and shall be planted at intervals so that at maturity the trees or shrubs will provide a screening of the mobilehome park. All plantings shall be maintained in a growing condition. 
4.  Improvement Requirements. On-site improvements shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with mobilehome park improvement standards, approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council. Such standards may include, but shall not be limited to the design, construction and maintenance of the following: 
a.  Access drives, sidewalks and parking spaces; 
b.  Walls and fences; 
c.  Lighting, signs; 
d.  Curb and gutter, drainage, and sanitary sewer facilities; 
e.  Electrical and water services; 
f.  Fire protection facilities. 
5.  Signs. The provisions of Chapter 17.07 of this ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
Chapter 17.12 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

17.12.010 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this Chapter are: 
A.  To establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult entertainment businesses, as defined herein, within the City of Beaumont. 
B.  To establish reasonable and uniform regulations governing signs advertising adult entertainment businesses. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.12.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
A.  Adult Arcade. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slide or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of "specific sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas". 
B.  Adult Bookstore. An establishment which has a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photograph, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
2.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specific sexual activities". 
C.  Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities", or film, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
D.  Adult Motel. A motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". Only one registration per unit per 24 hours. 
E.  Adult Motion Picture Theater. An establishment where for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
F.  Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities". 
G.  Establishment. As used in subsection C hereof, the "establishment" of an adult entertainment business shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult entertainment business, to any of the adult entertainment businesses defined herein; 
3.  The addition of any of the adult entertainment businesses defined herein to any other existing adult entertainment business; or 
4.  The relocation of any such business. 
H.  Massage Parlor. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person licensed by the State of California. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service. 
I.  Public Park. A park, playground, swimming pool, reservoir, golf course or athletic field within the City of Beaumont which is under the control, operation or management of the City of Beaumont, the County of Riverside, the Beaumont-Cherry Valley Park and Recreation District, or the State of California. 
J.  Religious Institution. A building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
K.  School. An institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary, junior high school, middle school, senior high school or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university. 
L.  Sexual Encounter Establishment. An establishment, other than hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons can congregate, associate of consort in connection with "specified sexual activities" of the exposure of "specified anatomical areas". This definition does not include an establishment where medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the State of California engages in sexual therapy. 
M.  Specified anatomical areas. As used herein, "specified anatomical areas" shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areole; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
N.  Specified sexual activities. As used herein, "specified sexual activities" shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
3.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above. 
O.  Substantial Expansion. As used in subsection G hereof, the "substantial expansion" of adult entertainment business shall mean the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent as such floor area exists on the effective date of the section. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.12.030 - Prohibition. 
    No person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial expansion of an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor or sexual encounter establishment within 1,000 feet of another such business, or within 1,000 feet of any religious institution, school or public park within the City of Beaumont, or within 600 feet of any property zoned for residential use or used for residential property, or within 300 feet of any property zoned for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.12.040 - Measurement of distance. 
    The distance between any two adult entertainment businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any adult entertainment business any religious institution, school or public park or any property zoned for residential use or used for residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior wall of the adult entertainment business to the closest property line of the religious institution, school or public park or the property zoned for residential use or used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.12.050 - Severability. 
    If any provision or clause of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other Chapter provisions, clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause or application thereof, and to this end the provisions and clauses of this Chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.12.060 - Signs. 
    In addition to the sign regulation contained elsewhere in Title 17, the following restrictions shall apply to all premises used for an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, massage parlor or sexual encounter establishment: 
A.  Except as provided in this Chapter, only one sign shall be permitted on the premises. The sign shall be flush with the building, and shall not extend above the height of the doorway of the main entrance of the business. 
B.  Additional signs or signs not in conformity with the above restrictions shall be permitted only upon the approval of the Planning Commission or the City Council. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
Chapter 17.13 - UNLICENSED GROUP HOMES 

17.13.010 - Purpose. 
    This Chapter is intended to preserve the residential character of a single-family residential neighborhood and further the purposes of state and federal housing anti-discrimination laws by, among other things: 
A.  Ensuring that unlicensed group homes that seek special preference under the City's zoning code are actually entitled to such special preference and not simply skirting the City's boarding house and lodging house regulations; 
B.  Limiting the commercial use of single-family homes; 
C.  Promoting ownership and owner-occupation of single family residences; 
D.  Providing a suitable environment for family life by reducing noise, preserving safety and providing adequate on and off street parking; 
E.  Ensuring that unlicensed group homes are actually furthering the purposes of housing anti-discrimination laws; and 
F.  preventing the over concentration of unlicensed group homes that can impair the integrity of a single family residential neighborhood and/or to prevent the creation of group home campuses or clusters than are inconsistent with State law and policy to limit the institutionalization of the disabled. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.13.020 - Special use permit required. 
    An unlicensed group home may locate in a R-SF or R-MF zone with a special use permit provided: 
A.  An application for a special use permit or an unlicensed group home is submitted to the Planning Director by the owner/operator of the unlicensed group home. The application shall provide the following: 
1.  The name, address and phone number of the owner/operator; 
2.  The name and phone number of the house manager; 
3.  A copy of the unlicensed group homes rules and regulations which must include a policy prohibiting alcohol or non-prescribed drugs (other than over-the-counter medicine) on the premises and use thereof by any disabled occupant whether on or off the premises; 
4.  Written intake procedures; 
5.  The relapse policy; 
6.  An affirmation that only residents (other than the house manager) who are disabled as defined by state and federal law shall reside in the group home; 
7.  Blank copies of all forms that all residents and potential residents are required to complete; and 
8.  A fee for the processing of the application as may be set from time-to-time by the City Council; and 
B.  The unlicensed group home has six or fewer occupants, not counting the house manager; and 
C.  The unlicensed group home has a house manager who either resides at the unlicensed group home or any multiple of persons acting as a house manager who are present at the unlicensed group home on a daily basis and who are responsible for the day-to-day operation of the unlicensed group home; and 
D.  The unlicensed group home is not located within 300 feet, as measured from the closest property lines, of any other state-licensed group home or group home issued a special use permit under this Chapter; and 
E.  Any owner/operator of an unlicensed group home and any person designated as a house manager or other staff shall provide his or her full name, current residence and phone number, date of birth, social security number, prior employment history, education, driver's license number, history of criminal convictions, if any, and any other information the Beaumont Police Department reasonably requires to perform a criminal background check through the State Department of Justice and/or United States Department of Justice. No person shall begin employment with the unlicensed group home until this information has been provided; and 
F.  The unlicensed group home's rules and regulations must prohibit the use of any alcohol or any non-prescription drugs at the unlicensed group home or by any disabled resident either on or off-site. This rule and regulation shall be posted on site in a common area inside the Home. Any violation of this rule must be cause for immediate eviction under the unlicensed group home's rules for residency; and 
G.  The unlicensed group home shall have a written visitation policy that shall preclude any visitors who are under the influence of any drug or alcohol; and 
H.  All garage and driveway spaces associated with the home shall, at all times, be available for the parking of vehicles. Residents and the house manager may store or park only a single vehicle per resident at the home or on any street within 300 feet of the home. The vehicle must be operable and currently used as his or her primary form of transportation; and 
I.  It is not located in accessory living quarters. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.13.030 - Grounds for denial or revocation. 
    The special use permit shall be denied by the Planning Director or his/her designee and if already issued, any transfer shall be denied by the Planning Director or may be revoked upon a hearing by the Planning Director or his/her designee under any of the following circumstances: 
A.  Any owner/operator or staff person has provided any false or misleading information on the application or omitted any pertinent information. 
B.  Any owner/operator or staff person has an employment history in which he or she was terminated because of physical assault, sexual harassment, embezzlement or theft; falsifying a drug test; and selling or furnishing illegal drugs or alcohol. 
C.  Any owner/operator or staff person has been convicted of or plead nolo contendre to any of the following offenses: 
1.  Sex offense for which the person is required to register as a sex offender under California Penal Code Section 290; 
2.  Arson offenses - violations of Penal Code Sections 451-455 (last seven years); or 
3.  Violent felonies, as defined in Penal Code Section 667.5, which involve doing bodily harm to another person (last ten years); 
4.  The sale or furnishing of any controlled substances (last seven years). 
D.  Any owner/operator or staff person is on parole or formal probation supervision on the date of the submittal of the application or at anytime thereafter. 
E.  Any owner/operator or staff person is a recovering drug or alcohol abuser and upon the date of application or employment has had less than one full year of sobriety. 
F.  The owner/operator fails to immediately evict any resident that uses alcohol or abuses any non-prescription drugs. 
G.  The owner/operator accepts residents, other than a house manager, who are not disabled as defined under state and federal law. 
H.  The address of the group home is located within 300 feet of any other licensed or unlicensed group home. If a licensed group home lawfully moves within 300 feet of an existing unlicensed group home this shall not cause the revocation of unlicensed group home's permit. 
I.  For any other significant, repeated or refusal to remedy violations of this Chapter or any other applicable laws and/or regulations. 
(Ord. 920 §2, 9/2007) 
17.13.040 - Prohibition on reapplication after revocation. 
    In the event the special use permit is revoked pursuant to Section 17.13.030, no new application for the same or similar permit shall be accepted within one year of the date of revocation. 
Chapter 17.14 - DEFINITIONS 

17.14.010 - Introduction. 
    This list of terms is designed to clarify the Zoning Ordinance's intent as it relates to land uses and development requirements. The word "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, except when used in connection with an action or decision of the City Council or any City commission, board, or official. In these latter instances, the word "shall" shall be directory only. For general terminology used throughout this ordinance, the definitions used in the Uniform Building Code or accepted dictionaries of the English language, shall apply. 
17.14.020 - General grammatical interpretation. 
    Words, terms, and phrases used in this Title 17 shall have the meanings usually ascribed to them, or as defined or used in state planning and zoning laws, or as defined in Section 17.08.030 of this Zoning Ordinance. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain terms used in herein are defined as follows: 
A.  Words in the present tense include the future; 
B.  Words in the singular number include the plural; 
C.  Words in the plural number include the singular; 
D.  The terms "shall" and "will" and "must" are mandatory; 
E.  The term "his" is gender neutral and means his or her; 
    The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. The present tense includes the future, the future includes the present. The singular number includes the plural, the plural includes the singular. 
17.14.030 - Definitions (A through Z). 
A 
    Above-ground/on-ground pool. See "Swimming pool". 
    Abut or Abutting. The same as meaning adjoining. 
    Access. The place, or way, by which pedestrians and vehicles are provided adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this Zoning Code. 
    Accessory Use. A use incidental to, related, and clearly subordinate to the principal use established on the same lot or parcel of land where such accessory use is located. 
    Adjacent. Two or more lots or parcels of land separated by an alley, street, highway or recorded easement, or two or more objects located near or in close proximity to each other. 
    Adjoining. Two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or two or more objects in physical contact with each other. 
    Affordable Unit. Refers to a housing development project in which 80 percent of the units shall be designated for very low-income households and 20 percent reserved for low-income households as those terms are defined in the Health and Safety Code. 
    Alley. A public or private right-of-way, other than a street or highway, permanently reserved as a secondary means of vehicular access to adjoining properties. 
    Amendment. A change in the wording, context, content, or substance of this Zoning Code or in the zoning map. Such changes must be adopted by ordinance by the City Council in the manner prescribed by law. 
    Amusement Arcade. Any place open to the public where five or more amusement games are maintained for use by the public. When only a portion of the premises is used for the operation of amusement games, only that portion shall be considered as an amusement arcade. 
    Amusement Game. Any entertainment device for which a fee is paid to play, including, but not limited to, pinball, video or other electronic games. 
    Animal Hospital. Shall mean a place where anima s or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use. 
    Animals-Retail Sales. The retail sales of small animals (such as dogs, cats, birds, and fish), provided such activities take place within an entirely enclosed building. 
    Antique Shop. An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of antiques. 
    Apartment House. A building, or a portion of a building, designed or used for occupancy by three or more households living independently of each other and containing three or more individual dwelling units within a single structure. 
    Apartment Unit. A room or suite of two or more rooms with a single kitchen in a multiple-family dwelling, suitable for occupancy as a dwelling unit for one household. 
    Arcade. See "Amusement arcade". 
    Artists' Studio. A building containing work space and retail sales space for artists and artisans producing individual one-of-a-kind works of art, including individuals practicing a fine art, or skilled in an applied art or craft, provided that the use does not impact any other use or property with noise, odor, dust, vibration, or other nuisance. This classification includes, but is not limited to, painter's studios, ceramic studios, and custom jewelry studios. 
    Assessor. The Assessor of the County of Riverside. 
    Automobile Wrecking or Automobile Dismantling. A business establishment engaged in the dismantling and/or wrecking of automobiles, used motor vehicles or trailers, and/or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or parts. 
    Automobile Service Station. An establishment providing gasoline oil and other additives, and/or performing minor repairs and other customary services for automobiles and light vehicles, but excluding painting, body work steam cleaning, and major repairs. 
    Advertising Structure. A structure of any kind or character, erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster bill, 
    Awning. Either a fabric covered appendage or a temporary collapsible shelter of noncombustible materials supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building. 
B 
    Balcony. A platform that projects from the wall of a building, typically above the first level, and is surrounded by a rail, balustrade, or parapet on at least one side. 
    Balcony, Unenclosed. A balcony open to the sky and not fully enclosed on more than two sides. 
    Balloon. A floating air-filled or gas-filled object tethered to a fixed location (also see "Sign, balloon"). 
    Banks and Savings. A state- or federally-chartered financial institution that provides retail banking 
    Barrier. A fence, a wall, a building wall or a combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool. 
    Bars and Cocktail Lounges. Establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises. This classification excludes restaurants and commercial recreation uses that may serve alcoholic beverages incidental to the primary use. 
    Basement. That portion of a building located between the ground level or first floor of a structure. 
    Billiard Parlor. An establishment that provides five or more billiard and/or pool tables. 
    Boarding. A residence or dwelling, other than a hotel, wherein three or more rooms are rented under three or more separate written or oral rental agreements, leases or subleases or combination thereof, whether or not the owner, agent or rental manager resides within the residence. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
    Building; Accessory. A detached subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the primary building or to the principal use of the land, and which is located on the same lot or parcel of land with the main building or principal use of the land. 
    Building, Height. The vertical distance as measured continuously along a line at existing grade bisecting the width of the lot to the highest point of a building or structure, except as provided elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance. 
    Building, Main. A building in which is conducted a principal use of the lot or parcel of land upon which it is situated. In a residential or agricultural zone, any residential unit shall be deemed to be a main building upon the lot or parcel of land on which it is situated. 
    Building Material Sales. An establishment engaged in retailing or wholesaling of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards and tool and equipment sales, but excludes businesses engaged in the retail sales of paint and hardware, building contractor's yards, and activities classified under "Equipment Leasing and Rentals." 
    Building Site. The ground area of one or the ground area of two or more lots when used in combination of a building or group of buildings together with all open spaces as required by this Ordinance. 
    Building Wall. The vertical surface, or any element thereof, including any structural member or group of structural members attached the vertical surface, that defines the exterior boundaries of a building. 
    Business and Trade School. An establishment which provides on-site training of business, commercial, and/or trade skills such as accounting, data processing, and computer repair. This classification excludes establishments providing training in an activity that is not otherwise permitted in the applicable zone. Incidental instructional services in conjunction with another primary use shall not be considered a business and trade school. 
C 
    Cabana. A structure containing not more than 700 square feet, not containing a kitchen. 
    Camp, Day. A facility with an organized daytime program involving the supervision and care of children. 
    Canopy. Has the same meaning as "awning" as defined in this section, except that a canopy contains separate supporting posts and is not supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building. A fixed overhead shelter used as may or may not be attached to a building. 
    Carport. A permanently-roofed structure with no more than two enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage. 
    Cellar. See "Basement". 
    Center-line. The center-line of any street, as established by the City Engineer by official surveys, and on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
    Check Cashing. A business that, for compensation, engages in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. This classification does not include a state- or federally- chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan company. Further, this classification does not include establishments selling consumer goods where the cashing of checks or money orders is incidental to the main purpose of the business. 
    Church. A facility used for religious worship and incidental religious education and/or activities, including a parsonage which shall be a maximum of 1,200 square feet or 50 percent of the assembly hall whichever is less. Setbacks and parking shall meet the residential single family requirements. This definition does not include private schools as defined in this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 
    Child Care Center. A facility that provides non-medical care to children under 18 years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis. "Child care center" includes day care centers and family day care homes. 
    City. Refers to the City of Beaumont. 
    Club, Private. Any building or premises used by an association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. This definition does not include "Adult" business establishments. 
    Clubs and Lodges. A private or nonprofit organization providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities primarily for use by members and/or guests. 
    Commercial Printing. A business providing printing, blueprinting, photocopying, engraving, binding, or related services. 
    Commercial Vehicle. A vehicle which, when operated on a street, is required to be registered as a commercial vehicle under the State Vehicle Code, and which is used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit, or which is designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Commission. Refers to the Planning Commission of the City of Beaumont. 
    Communications Facilities. An establishment engaged in broadcasting, recording, and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms. This classification includes, but is not limited to, radio, television, or recording studios, telephone switching centers, and telegraph offices. 
    Communications Facilities, Wireless. An unstaffed facility used for the transmission or reception of wireless telecommunication services, commonly consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, a support structure, and ancillary support facilities. 
    Community Center. A building, buildings, or portions thereof used for recreational, social, educational, and cultural activities where buildings and associated improvements are owned and/or operated by a public, nonprofit, or public serving group or agency. 
    Condominium. An undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a "unit," the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan. The description of the unit may refer to: a) boundaries described in the recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan, b) physical boundaries, either in existence, or to be constructed, such as wall, floors, and ceilings of a structure or any portion thereof, c) an entire structure containing one or more units, or d) any combination thereof. An individual condominium within a condominium project may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property. This term shall also include stock-cooperative developments. 
    Condominium Project. A common interest development consisting of condominiums. 
    Convalescent Facilities. A business establishment engaged in providing care on 24-hour basis for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services. 
    Convalescent Home. A home or establishment offering or providing lodging, meals, nursing, dietary, or other personal services to five or more convalescents, invalids, or aged persons, but shall not include surgery or the care of persons with contagious or communicable diseases. 
    Conversion (Condominium). A change in the type of ownership of a parcel or parcels of land, together with the existing structures, from rental housing, as defined in this section, to a condominium, community apartment, planned development, stock cooperative, or common interest development. 
    County. Refers to the County of Riverside. 
    Court. An open, unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building. "Inner court" is a court entirely enclosed within the exterior walls of a building. All other courts are referred to as outer courts. 
    Coverage. The percentage of total site area covered by structures, open or enclosed, excluding the following uncovered structures: steps, courts, patios, terraces, and swimming pools. 
D 
    Dairy. Any premises where three or more cows, three or more goats or one or more cows and two or more goats, or two or more cows and one or more goats are kept, milked, or maintained. 
    Daycare Center, Adult. A state-licensed facility designed to provide necessary care and supervision to persons 18 years of age or older on less than a 24-hour basis. Adult day care centers include the various types of adult day services as defined under state law that include "adult day care facilities," "adult social day care facilities," and "adult day health care facilities." 
    Day Care Center, Children. A state-licensed facility, other than a family day care home, providing non-medical care and supervision to children under 18 years of age on less than a 24-hour basis. Child day care centers shall include "day care centers" as defined under state law, which include infant centers, preschools, and extended day care facilities. 
    Deck. A platform other than a balcony, either freestanding or attached to a building, without a roof, that is supported by pillars, posts, or walls. 
    Director and Director of Planning and Planning Director. Refers to the Community Development Director or his or her designee. 
    Drive-in Restaurant. Any building or structure in which food and drink are prepared for service to customers outside of such building or structure, even though the same is served to customers inside said building or structure or to customers occupying vehicles outside such structure, and shall include self-service restaurants for take-out food. 
    Drive-thru. See "Establishment with drive-up service". 
    Driveway. An appropriately paved and privately-owned surface or road that provides access to off-street parking or loading facilities. 
    Dump. An area devoted to the disposal of combustible or non-combustible refuse. 
    Duplex. A structure consisting of two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling or Dwelling Unit. An attached or detached building containing one or more rooms wherein the occupants of each dwelling unit are living and functioning together as a single housekeeping unit, meaning that they have established ties and familiarity with each other, jointly use common areas, interact with each other, share meals, household activities, expenses and responsibilities, membership in the single housekeeping unit is fairly stable as opposed to transient and members have some control over who becomes a member of the single housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, Multiple Family Residential. One or more buildings located on a lot containing a total of two or more dwellings within a structure. 
    Dwelling, Single-Family. An attached or detached building not to contain more than one kitchen wherein the occupants of the dwelling unit are living and functioning together as a single housekeeping unit, meaning that they have established ties and familiarity with each other, jointly use common areas, interact with each other, share meals, household activities, expenses and responsibilities, membership in the single housekeeping unit is fairly stable as opposed to transient and members have some control over who becomes a member of the single housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, Tri-plex. A building designed for occupancy by three families living independently of each other and containing three dwelling units under one common roof. 
    Dwelling, Two-Family or Duplex. An attached or detached building containing two Dwelling Units wherein the occupants of each Dwelling Unit are living and functioning together as a single housekeeping unit, meaning that they have established ties and familiarity with each other, jointly use common areas, interact with each other, share meals, household activities, expenses and responsibilities, membership in the single housekeeping unit is fairly stable as opposed to transient and members have some control over who becomes a member of the single housekeeping unit. 
E 
    Establishment with Drive-up Service. A business or institution providing services accessible to persons who remain in their automobiles. 
F 
    Family. One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. A family includes the residents of residential care facilities and group homes for people with disabilities. A family does not include larger institutional group living situations such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries or nunneries. 
    Family Day Care Home, Large. A dwelling that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for 12 or fewer children under the age of ten, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day. 
    Family Day Care Home, Small. A dwelling that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for one to six children inclusive, including children under the age of ten. 
    Fire Arm Sales or Firearms Business. An establishment having at least 25 percent of its gross floor area devoted to the sale of fire arms, ammunition and ammunition components, and hunting or shooting equipment. 
    Floor Area, Gross. The total horizontal area of all the floors of a building included within the surrounding walls, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. 
    Floor Area, Net. The total useable floor area within all floors of a building included within the surrounding walls. 
    Floor Area Ratio. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross floor area of a building or buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of land on which such building or buildings are located. 
    Food and Beverage Sales. A business establishment where the primary use involves the retail sales of food and beverages for off-site preparation and consumption. Typical uses include grocery markets and delicatessens. This category does not include liquor stores. 
    Food Manufacturing. A business establishment engaged in manufacturing, processing, and/or packaging of food products for wholesaling and distribution. This use may include incidental direct sale to consumers of the products manufactured on-site, souvenirs, and ancillary tasting facilities for the public. 
    Frontage. The frontline of a site, separating the site from the street. 
G 
    Garage, Parking Garage. A structure with a common vehicular entrance and exit which is used by vehicles in parking spaces and which otherwise conforms to the requirements of this Zoning Code. 
    Garage, Private. A detached accessory building, or a portion of a main building on the same lot, enclosed on three sides and with a door capable of enclosing the fourth side, for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles owned by the occupants of the premises. 
    General Plan. The General Plan of the City of Cudahy, consisting of the General Plan and Map, adopted by the City Council. 
    Grade, Existing. The surface of the ground or pavement at a specific location as it existed prior to disturbance in preparation for a construction project. 
    Grade, Finished. The finished surface elevation of the ground or pavement at a specific location after the completion of a construction project. 
    Grade, Ground Level. The average level of the finished ground surface surrounding a building, measured at the center of all walls of the building. 
    Gradient. The rate of vertical change of a ground surface expressed in a percentage and determined by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance. 
    Group Home (Unlicensed) or Unlicensed Group Home. A single family dwelling unit with six or fewer occupants who are all (other than the house manager) considered disabled under state or federal law, but not licensed by the state. 
    Guest House. Refers to living quarters, having no kitchen facilities, located within an accessory building located on the same premises with a main building and occupied solely by members of the family, temporary guests, or persons permanently employed on the premises. 
    Guest Room. A room designed for or occupied as sleeping quarters by one or two persons, providing lodging for compensation. 
H 
    Hazardous Waste. Any waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: a) exhibit toxicity, corrosivity, flammability, and/or reactivity; b) cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; or, c) present a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Hazardous Waste Facility. All contiguous land, structures, other appurtenances, and improvements within a property, used for handling, treating, storing, or disposing of hazardous wastes. 
    Health and Physical Fitness Facility. A private athletic clubs and gymnasiums including, but not limited to, weight training facilities, aerobic exercise floors, racquetball courts, swimming pools, and similar athletic facilities. 
    Height. See "Building height". 
    Home Occupation. An occupational activity carried on by the occupant(s) of a residential dwelling as a secondary use in connection with which there is no display, no walk-in customers, no stock-in-trade, nor commodity sold upon the premises, no person employed, and no mechanical equipment used, except such as is necessary for housekeeping purposes. 
    Hospital. A facility providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, and/or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons, primarily on an inpatient basis. This classification includes incidental facilities for out-patient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees. 
    Hotel or Motel. One or more buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, with one or more such rooms or units having a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building or from an interior court. Such facilities are designed to be used, or intended to be used, rented, or hired out for temporary or overnight accommodations for guests, and are offered primarily to patrons by signs or other advertising media. This classification may contain public meeting rooms and eating, drinking, and banquet services associated with the facility. 
    Hot Tub. See "Swimming pool". 
    Household. A single individual or group of individuals, unrelated or related by blood or marriage, residing in a dwelling unit. 
    Household Pet. A domesticated animal commonly maintained within a residence. 
I 
    Industrial Complex. Any group of three or more industrial uses on a parcel or combination of parcels which are generally served either by common access or common parking, or single industrial use occupying at least 100,000 square feet of floor area. 
    In-ground pool. See "Swimming pool". 
J 
    Junk Yard. The use of a lot, or the use of any portion of a lot, for the dismantling of machinery or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking, or for the storage or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials. 
K 
    Kennel. Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or cats at least four months of age are boarded or trained. 
    Kitchen. A room in a building or dwelling unit that is used in the cooking or preparation of food. 
L 
    Laboratory. An establishment providing analytical or testing services, including, but not limited to, chemical labs, dental-medical labs, optical labs, and labs conducting mechanical, electrical, physical, or environmental tests, as well as research and development. 
    Landscaping. The planting and maintenance of live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and lawn areas, including the installation of irrigation systems required by the provisions of this Zoning Code. "Landscaping" may include inorganic decorative materials of natural or man-made origin if used to accent or complement, but in no case imitate, the natural vegetation. Inorganic decorative materials used in landscaping may include rock, stone, wood, waterfall, fountains, pools, sculptures, benches, and architectural screens, walls, and fences. 
    Liquor Store. A business establishment having at least 50 percent of its gross floor area used for the sale of alcoholic beverages intended for off-site consumption. 
    Loading Space. An off-street space on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which has access from a street, alley, or other permanent means of ingress and egress. 
    Lodging House. A residence or dwelling, other than a hotel, wherein lodging and meals are provided to four or more persons for compensation, whether direct or indirect. In determining the number of persons lodging in a lodging house, all residents shall be counted, including an owner, agent or manger. 
    Lot. Real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County Recorder as a part of an approved subdivision, shall also mean (1) a parcel of real property when shown as a delineated parcel of land with a number of other designations on a plat recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Riverside County; or (2) a parcel of land the dimensions or boundaries of which are defined by a record of survey recorded pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California in the Office of the County Recorder of Riverside County; (3) a parcel of real property not delineated as in (1) or (2) above, and containing not less than the prescribed minimum square footage required in the zone in which it is located and which abuts at least one public street, and alley or a private easement determined by the Commission to be adequate for purposes of access from a street; (4) a parcel of land registered under Land Title Law (Torrens Title) and held under separate ownership from adjacent property on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
    Lot, Area. The total area, measured in a horizontal plane, included within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land. 
    Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an interior lot. 
    Lot, Cul-de-sac. A lot fronting on, or with more than one-half of its lot frontage, on the turnaround end of a cul-de-sac street. 
    Lot, Depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
    Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner or reverse corner lot. 
    Lot, Key. Any lot where the side property line abuts the rear property line of one or more lots, and where such lots are not separated by an alley or any public way. 
    Lot Line. Any line bounding a lot as defined in this section. 
    Lot Line, Exterior. A lot line abutting a street. 
    Lot Line, Front. On an interior lot, the front lot line of the property line abutting the street, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line as the front lot line. On a corner or reversed corner lot, the front lot line is the shorter property line abutting a street. On a through lot, or a lot with three or more sides abutting a street, or a corner or reversed corner lot with lot lines of equal length, the Zoning Administrator shall determine which property line shall be the front lot line for purposes of compliance with the setback provisions of this Zoning Code. 
    Lot Line, Interior. A lot line not abutting a street. 
    Lot Line, Rear. A lot line not abutting a street that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For triangular lots where there is no rear lot line, the rear lot line shall be defined as the point at which the side lot lines intersect. 
    Lot Line, Side. Any lot line that is not classified as a front lot line or rear lot line. 
    Lot Line, Zero. A lot line that does not have any side-yard setback. 
    Lot, Reverse Corner. A corner lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the lot to its rear. 
    Lot, Through. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. A through lot may have no rear lot line. 
    Lot; Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth line at a distance located midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
M 
    Main Building. A building that is designed, and used for, or intended to be used, to accommodate the principal use on the lot. In residential zones, any dwelling shall be considered the main building on the lot. 
    Maintenance and Repair Services. An establishment providing household appliance repair, furniture repair, office machine repair, bicycle repair, or building maintenance services. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of motor vehicles, boats, or ships. 
    Mansard or Mansard Roof. A roof having two slopes on all sides with the lower slope steeper than the upper one. 
    Manufactured Housing. A mobile home, or manufactured housing unit, as defined by and installed in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 18008 and 18551, respectively, and factory-built housing as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 19971. 
    Medical Clinic. Any facility providing physical or mental health service, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, but shall not include inpatient or overnight accommodations. Activities included within this definition are health centers, health clinics, and doctors' offices. 
    Mini-Warehouse. A warehouse operation serving the public where customers rent or lease, or self-storage and have direct access to, individual storage areas, compartments, or facilities rooms within a larger structure or structures provided for storage use. This use may also include limited caretaker facilities. 
    Mobile Home. A movable or transportable vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, intended for occupancy for one family, and having no foundation other than jacks, piers, wheels or skirtings. All mobile homes located on lots must be a minimum of 450 square feet, with a minimum of ten feet in width. All mobile homes must have a complete sanitary facilities, including a lavatory, flush type toilet, tub or shower, and kitchen sink, all connected to sewage outlets in conformity with state, county and health requirements. 
    Mortuary. An establishment providing services such as preparing the deceased for burial, and arranging and managing funerals and related services, and may include limited caretaker facilities. This classification excludes cemeteries, crematoriums, and columbariums. 
    Motel. One or more buildings containing more than five completely furnished individual guest rooms with one or more such rooms or units having a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building or an inner court. Such facilities are designed, used, or intended to be used, rented or hired out as temporary or overnight accommodations for guests, and are offered primarily to automobile tourists or transients. Motels include auto courts, motor lodges, and tourist courts. 
N 
    Nonconforming. A building and/or improvement, or portion thereof, which does not conform improvement to current Zoning Code regulations. Nonconforming use, any use of land or property that was lawfully established and in effect at the lawful or legal time this Zoning Code or any amendment became effective, but no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the use is located. Nonconforming any structure or improvement that was lawfully established and in existence structure, lawful at the time this Zoning Code or any amendment became effective, but no or legal longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the structure or improvement is located. 
O 
    Offices. Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, government including postal facilities, together with incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles. 
    Offices, Medical. Offices or health facilities providing health services, including without limitation, preventative and rehabilitation treatment, diagnostic services, and testing and analysis, but excluding inpatient services and overnight accommodations. This classification includes without limitation offices providing medical, dental, surgical, rehabilitation, podiatric, optometric, chiropractic, and psychiatric services, and medical or dental laboratories incidental to such offices. 
    Offices, Professional. Offices for firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management or administrative services, such as architectural, engineering, real estate, insurance, investment, or legal offices. This classification excludes savings and loan associations, banks, and medical offices. 
    Off-Street Parking Facility. A lot, or portion thereof, improved and used for the parking of vehicles, including, but not limited to, enclosed garages and parking structures, open parking areas, aisles, driveways, and appurtenant landscaped planters and their improvements. 
    Open Space, Useable (Useable Open Space). Open space upon the lot or parcel to which it is appurtenant, which can be used by inhabitants of the property for outdoor living, activity and/or recreation and may include landscaping. Each linear dimension of such space shall be a minimum of six feet. Balconies may be credited as "usable open space" provided they each have linear dimensions of a minimum of five feet. Enclosed recreation or multi-purpose activity rooms may be credited as "usable open space." All such areas shall be readily accessible to the inhabitants of the property. "Usable open space" does not include driveways, open or covered parking areas, utility space such as trash or garbage areas, or space occupied by the required front yard setback. For the R-MF zone, the following minimum usable open space is required for: 
1.  Each studio apartment, 200 square feet; 
2.  Each one-bedroom apartment, 200 square feet; 
3.  Each two-bedroom apartment, 200 square feet plus 100 square feet making a total of 300 square feet; 
4.  Each additional bedroom an additional 100 square feet. 
The computation of usable open space provided shall be as follows: 
1.  The following areas shall be computed at 1.25 times the area actually devoted to such use: 
a.  Private patios, when directly accessible to the dwelling unit to which it is appurtenant; such patios shall be completely enclosed on all sides by a fence which is a minimum of five feet in height; 
b.  Balconies and lanais, when directly accessible to the unit to which they are appurtenant; such balconies and lanais must have a minimum dimension of five feet; and 
c.  Swimming pool areas, including the hard surface deck, which normally surrounds such pools. Deck area more than 25 feet from the edge of the pool will not be counted as open space under this recreation activity rooms, provided these rooms are permanently maintained for the use of tenants for various recreation activities. Such activity rooms shall not include lobbies, but may include common steam rooms, sauna baths, or the like. 
2.  All other areas meeting usable open space requirements shall be credited with the actual area (square feet) provided. 
3.  No area will be considered as usable open space if it has any dimension less than six feet except balconies. 
    Outdoor Advertising. The use of signs or other measures soliciting public support or directing public attention to the sale, lease, hire, or use of any objects, products, services, or functions which are not produced, sold, or otherwise available on the premises where such signs are erected or maintained. 
    Outdoor Living Space. Either an open passive landscaped area specifically designed, improved, and maintained to enhance the architectural design, privacy, and general environmental quality of a residential development or an easily accessible public or private activity area specifically designed, improved, and maintained for outdoor living and/or recreation by occupants of the residential development. 
P 
    Parcel. A contiguous quantity of land owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same claimant or person. 
    Parking Space. A space within an off-street parking facility that has the minimum attributes of size, location, and design specified in Article 21 (Parking requirements) of this Zoning Code. 
    Parks and Recreation Facilities. Uses that include, but are not limited to, land and interests in land; swimming pools; tennis, volleyball and basketball courts; baseball grounds; play areas; turf; sprinkler systems; community center buildings; recreation buildings; and other works, properties, structures, and facilities necessary or convenient for public park, playground, or recreation purposes. 
    Pawn Shop. A business establishment engaged in the buying or selling of new or secondhand merchandise and offering loans secured by personal property. 
    Performance Art. A public building used for theatrical performances, concerts, recitals, and facilities similar entertainment. This classification excludes commercial cinemas or theaters. 
    Personal Convenience Service. A business establishment providing recurrently-needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes, but is not limited to, barber and beauty shops, seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair shops, photocopying, retail dry cleaning establishments (excluding wholesale dry cleaning plants), self-service laundromats, and similar services. This classification excludes massage parlors, tattoo parlors, and/or skin piercing establishments. 
    Personal Improvement Service. A business establishment providing instructional services or facilities, including, but not limited to, photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios, driving schools, modeling agencies, reducing salons, and health or physical fitness clubs. Incidental instructional services associated with a retail use shall be classified as "retail sales" rather than "personal improvement services." 
    Planned Unit Development. The planning, construction, or implementation and operation of any use or structure, or a combination of uses and structures, on a single parcel of land based on a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, structures, and uses as a single project. 
    Plant Nursery. A site used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants for sale or for transplanting, and where all merchandise (other than plants) is kept within an enclosed building or fully-screened enclosure, and fertilizer of any type is stored and sold in package form only. 
    Pre-existing. In existence prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
    Public Building. A building owned and operated by a public agency for public use. 
    Public Safety Facility. A public facility providing public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection, and associated support and training facilities. 
    Public Utility Facility. A building or structure used by any public utility including, but not limited to, any gas treatment plant, reservoir, tank, or other storage facility, water treatment plant, well, reservoir, tank or other storage facility, electric generating plant, distribution or transmission substation, telephone switching or other communications plant, earth station or other receiving or transmission facility, any storage yard for public utility equipment or vehicles, and any parking lot for parking vehicles or automobiles to serve a public utility. The term "public utility" shall include every gas, electrical, telephone and water corporation serving the public or any portion thereof for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued by the State Public Utility Commission. 
Q 
R 
    Recreational Facility. A publicly-owned and operated recreational structure or building, such as a tennis court, swimming pool, multi-purpose community building, or similar use. 
    Recyclable Material. A reusable material, including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic, and paper, and which is intended for reuse, re-manufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. "Recyclable material" shall not include refuse or hazardous materials. "Recyclable material" may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Section 25250.11 and Section 25143.2(b)(4) of the State Health and Safety Code. 
    Recycling Facility. A center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. "Certified recycling facility" or "certified processor" refers to a recycling facility certified by the State Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the State Beverage Container Recycling and Lifter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activities located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use, and used solely for the recycling of material generated by such residential property, business, or manufacturer. 
    Recycling, Collection Facility. A center for the acceptance of recyclable materials from the public by donation, redemption, or purchase. 
    Recycling, Processing Facility. A building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. "Processing" means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and re-manufacturing. 
    Rental Units. A housing unit leased for the occupancy of a residential household. 
    Residence. One or more rooms designed, used, or intended to be used as permanent living quarters for a household, and not as temporary or overnight accommodations. 
    Residential Care Facility, Licensed. A residential care facility licensed or supervised by any federal, state, or local agency, which provides housing and nonmedical care for children, elderly persons, or physically and mentally handicapped persons in a family-like environment. These facilities include the following: 
(a)  An intermediate care facility, developmentally disabled habilitative and intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-nursing or a congregate living facility as identified in State of California Health and Safety Code section 1267.8; 
(b)  A community care facility as identified in State of California Health and Safety Code section 1566.3; 
(c)  A residential care facility for the elderly as identified in State of California Health and Safety Code section 1569.85; 
(d)  An alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility as identified in State of California Health and Safety Code section 11834.02; 
(e)  A home for the care of mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons as identified in State of California Welfare and Institutions Code section 5116; 
(f)  A home for the care of dependent and neglected children as identified in the State of California Welfare and Institutions Code section 300, but not including wards of the court as identified in the State of California Welfare and Institutions Code section 601ff. 
    Rest Home. See "Convalescent home". 
    Restaurant, Sit Down. A business establishment that is maintained, operated, and/or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food and beverage are served to the public on demand from a menu during stated business hours, served in and on reusable containers and dinnerware, to be consumed on the premises primarily inside the building at tables, booths, or counters, with chairs, benches, or stools. This use may include incidental delivery service utilizing no more than two delivery vehicles. 
    Restaurant, Fast-Food. A business establishment that is maintained, operated, and/or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food and beverage are served to customers from a serving counter in disposable containers or wrappers and where food and meals are generally prepared in advance for immediate sale, and which may include inside seating, drive-through service, delivery service, and take-out/carry-out service. 
    Restaurant, Delivery. A place where orders for food and beverages may be placed in person or by telephone, facsimile, copier, or other off-site means of communication, from a limited menu, and which orders are delivered to a location directed by the customer. 
    Restaurant, Take-out. A business establishment that is maintained, operated, and/or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food and beverages are served in disposable containers or wrappers from a serving counter for consumption exclusively off the premises. 
    Retail Sales. A business establishment engaged in the retail sale of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification as defined in this section. This classification includes, but is not limited to: department stores, clothing stores, furniture stores, and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies, books, electronic equipment, records, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art supplies, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation). This classification excludes thrift shops and pawnshops. 
    Room. An unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closets, hallways, and service porches. 
S 
    School, Elementary, Junior High, and High. An institution of learning which offers instruct on in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State of California. 
    School, Private. An educational institution having a curriculum comparable to that required in the public schools of the State of California. 
    Secondary (or second) Unit. A detached dwelling unit that provides complete, independent living residential unit facilities for one or more persons. A secondary residential unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same lot on which the primary unit is situated. 
    Senior Housing. A housing development project in which 100 percent of the project rental units are intended to be occupied by persons who are 62 years of age or older, or married couples, of which one spouse is over 62 years of age. 
    Service Station. See "Vehicle, service station". 
    Setback. A required open space on an improved lot that is unoccupied by buildings and unobstructed by structures from the ground upward, except for projections and accessory buildings permitted by the provisions of this Zoning Code. Setbacks shall be measured as the shortest distance between a property line and the nearest vertical support or wall of the building, enclosed or covered porch, or other structure. 
    Setback, Between. A required open space between separate buildings or between separate buildings or dwelling units on the same lot or building site. Such setback shall be setback between measured as the minimum distance between the nearest vertical support dwelling units or wall of each building or enclosed or covered porch. 
    Setback, Exterior Side. A side setback abutting a street. 
    Setback, Front. A setback extending across the full width of the front of the lot, the minimum and/or average dimensions of which are determined by the property development standard of the applicable zone in which such lot is located. 
    Setback, Rear. A setback extending across the full width of the rear of a lot, the minimum and/or average dimensions of which are determined by the property development standards of the applicable zone in which such lot is located. 
    Setback, Side. A setback extending from the required front setback to the required rear setback, or to the front and/or rear property lines where no front and/or rear setback is required by the provisions of this Zoning Code, the minimum and average dimensions of which are determined by the property development standards of the applicable zone in which such lot is located. 
    Sign. Any card, cloth, plastic, paper, metal or other material or painted character visible from outside of a structure for advertising purposes, mounted to the ground or any, tree, building, wall, bush, rock, fence or structure,. whether privately or publicly owned. "Sign", means any graphic announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or object used to advertise or promote the interest of any person or business when the same is placed out-of-doors in view of the general public. This definition shall not include the display of. the American flag, flag of the State, county, public entity or City flag. 
    Sign, A-Frame. A freestanding sign usually hinged at the top or attached in a similar manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter "A." Such signs are usually designed to be portable, and are not considered to be permanent signs or displays. 
    Sign, Animated Signs. Signs designed to attract attention through movement or the semblance of movement of the whole or any part including, but not limited to, signs which swing, twirl, move back and forth or up and down; or signs which change color or shades of color; or any other method or device which suggests movement. Animated signs do not include flags and banners, time and temperature signs. 
    Sign, Announcement or Bulletin Board Signs. Signs permanent in character designed to accept changeable copy, handbills, posters and matters of a similar nature. 
    Sign, Area of Sign. The area of a sign shall include the entire area within a series of rectangles whose outermost boarders are defined by the outermost extent of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, character or separate sign surface. When letters comprising a sign message are placed on a background or field which is different in color or materials from the architectural features of the building on which the sign is mounted, the sign area shall be calculated as the entire area comprising the overall sign feature. In the case of a two-sided sign, the area shall be computed as including only the maximum single display surface that is visible from any ground position at one time. The supports or uprights on which any sign is supported should not be included in determining the sign area unless such supports or uprights are designed in such a manner as to form an integral background of the sign. In the case of any cylindrical or spherical sign, the total area shall be computed on the total area of the surface of the sign. 
    Sign, Awning Sign. A sign painted or printed on the exterior surface of an awning. An alternative to a wall sign, permitted as same. 
    Sign, Balloon. One or more balloons used as a permanent or temporary sign or as a means of directing attention to any business or profession, or to a commodity or service sold, offered, or manufactured, or to any entertainment. 
    Sign, Banner. A fabric or fabric-like material on which an advertising message is painted or otherwise affixed. 
    Sign, Billboard. A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, product, commodity or service offered on the site on which the sign is located. 
    Signs, Changeable Copy. Copy for temporary use which is changed at periodic intervals and which may be utilized on pylon, monument, wall, bulletin board or announcement signs. 
    Sign, Commercial Complex. Any group of three or more commercial uses on a parcel or combination of parcels which are generally served either by common access or common parking, or large single commercial use occupying at least two and one-half acres with a minimum of 200 feet of street frontage. 
    Sign, Construction Signs. Signs stating the names of those individuals or businesses, such as architects, engineers, contractors, or owners directly connected with a construction project and/or the name of the project, the address of the business, and emergency telephone numbers. 
    Sign, Directional Signs. Signs which contain any of the following words: "Entrance", "enter", "out", "one-way" or other words, or words which contain nonflashing arrows or other characters indicating traffic direction. 
    Sign, Electronic Message Sign. A sign having the capability of presenting variable message displays, including time and temperature, by projecting an electronically controlled light pattern against a contrasting background and which can be programmed to change the message display periodically. 
    Sign, Flag. A device, generally made of flexible materials, usually cloth, paper or plastic, usually used as a symbol of a government, school, religion, etc. It may or may not contain any copy. 
    Sign, Flashing Signs. Lighted signs which in whole or in part disappear and reappear at periodic intervals, or are intermittently on and off, and which are placed so as to attract vehicular traffic with emphasis on the recurrence of lights as in those types generally referred to as "nervous" signs, arrows, stars, etc., and/or beacon signs. 
    Sign, Freestanding. A sign that is completely supported by structures or other supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground and are independent from any building or other structure. 
    Sign, Height of Signs. The distance from the average ground level immediately surrounding the base of the sign to the top of its highest element, including any structural or architectural element. Landscape mounding shall not be used to artificially increase the height of a sign. 
    Sign, Monument Signs. A sign with an overall height of six feet or less, standing directly on the ground or on a base of where supporting poles or structures, if any, are enclosed by decorative covers. 
    Sign, Nameplate. Signs naming the occupant of the premises, the business and/or address. 
    Sign, Off-site Signs. Any sign which advertises or informs in any manner businesses, services, goods, persons or events at some location other than that upon which the sign is located. 
    Sign, Painted Signs. Signs painted on the exterior surface of a building or structure. Painted signs do not 
    Sign, Pennant. A device generally made of flexible materials, usually cloth, paper or plastic. A pennant may or may not contain any copy and is primarily intended to draw attention. 
    Sign, Pylon Sign. A sign with an overall height exceeding six feet and having one or more decorative supports permanently attached directly into or upon the ground. 
    Sign, Political Signs. Political signs are signs setting forth a political message with respect to an upcoming federal, State or local governmental election. 
    Sign, Portable Signs. Signs not designed to be attached to a building or anchored to the ground, including "A" boards, sandwich signs and signs attached to a fence/wall. 
    Sign, Poster Signs. Any sign attached to the ground in a manner approved by the building official, which may be visible from adjacent streets or highways. 
    Sign, Projecting Signs. Signs including wall signs which are suspended from or supported by a building or wall and which project from said building or wall. 
    Sign, Real Estate Signs. All signs and sign structures relating to the sale, lease or other disposition of the real property on which the sign is located and which are temporary in nature. 
    Sign, Revolving Signs. Signs, all or a portion of, which rotate in a constant, circular manner. 
    Sign, Roof Signs. Any sign supported by or attached to or projecting through the roof of a building or structure, or projecting above the eave line or parapet wall of the building or structure. 
    Sign, Special Event Sign. A temporary sign, which advertises special events and activities such as grand openings, charitable events, Christmas trees, fireworks, or as specified by the Planning Director. 
    Sign Structure. The supports, uprights, bracings, guy rods, cables and other structural framework of a sign or outdoor display. 
    Sign, Temporary Signs. Signs erected for a temporary purpose not exceeding 45 days, including banners, pennant valances, streamers, balloon signs, inflated devices, search lights, beacons, costumed or live persons, moving stuffed animals, or advertising light or similar materials used for advertising purposes attached to or pinned on or from any structure, staff, pole, line, framing, vehicle or other object. 
    Sign, Time and Temperature Sign. An electronically controlled sign with illuminated flippers or light bulbs for the sole purpose of displaying the time, and temperature (F. and/or C.) at intermittent intervals. Under Canopy Signs. A sign with a single or double face copy attached to the underside of a projecting canopy perpendicular to the building frontage. 
    Sign, Unofficial (Non-Regulatory) Signs. Signs located on public property (e.g., street or median island, parkway, sidewalk, traffic control sign posts, utility poles, park land, trees, etc.). 
    Sign, Vehicle Signs. Signs on or affixed to trucks, vans, automobiles, trailers, or other vehicles which advertise or provide direction to a use or activity not related to its lawful making of deliveries or sales of merchandise or rendering of service from such vehicles. 
    Sign, Wall Signs. Signs which are in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or structure, the exposed face of which is in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall and which projects not more than 12 inches from the building or structure wall. 
    Sign, Window Signs. Signs painted, attached, glued or otherwise affixed to a window or otherwise easily visible from the exterior of the building. 
    Sign, Wall Murals. The decoration on the exterior surface of a structure with scenic, architectural or artistic paints which in themselves do not identify or advertise any product, service or business. A wall mural is a sign if it is related by language, logo or pictorial depiction to the advertisement of any product or service or the identification of any business. 
    Snack Shop. A business establishment that is maintained, operated, and/or advertised or held out to the public as serving snack foods, such as donuts, ice cream, yogurt, candy, cookies, bakery items, beverages, and similar items to be consumed either on the premises or off the premises. 
    Solid Fill. Any noncombustible materials insoluble in water, such as soil, rock, sand, or gravel, that can be used for grading land or filling depressions. 
    Spa, Non-Portable. See "Swimming pool". 
    Spa, Portable. A non-permanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all controls, water-heating, and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product and which is cord-connected (not permanently electrically wired). 
    Story. "Story" as defined in the currently adopted and effective Uniform Building Code of the City. 
    Story-Half. A story with at least two of its opposite sides situated immediately under a sloping roof, with the floor area of said story not in excess of two-thirds of the floor area of the floor immediately below it. 
    Street. A public thoroughfare or right-of-way acquired for use as such, or an approved private thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. "Street" shall include all major and secondary highways, traffic collector streets, and local streets. 
    Street, Center line. See "Center line". 
    Street Line. The boundary line between the street right-of-way and abutting property. 
    Structural Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floor joists, ceiling joints, or roof rafters. 
    Structure. Any physical improvement constructed or erected, including an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially constructed or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner, and which structure requires location on or in the ground or is attached to another improvement or in the ground, including fences, walls, swimming and wading pools, and patios. 
    Swap Meet. Any indoor or outdoor place, location, or activity where new or used goods or secondhand personal property is offered for sale or exchange to the general public by a multitude of individual licensed vendors, usually in compartmentalized spaces; and, where a fee may be charged to prospective buyers for admission, or a fee may be charged for the privilege of offering or displaying such merchandise. The term "swap meet" is interchangeable with, and applicable to, flea markets, auctions, open air markets, farmer's markets, or other similarly named or labeled activities; but the term does not include the usual supermarket or department store retail operations. 
    Swimming Pool. Any structure intended for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas. 
    Swimming Pool, Indoor. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a residential structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure. 
    Swimming pool, Outdoor. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool. 
    Structure Advertising. A structure existing, erected, or maintained to serve exclusively as a stand, frame, or background for the support or display of signs. 
T 
    Thrift Shop. A business establishment primarily engaged in the sale of used clothing, household goods, furniture, or appliances. This classification does not include antique shops. 
    Townhouse. A single-family dwelling which visually appears to share one or more common walls with an adjacent single-family dwelling, but which, in fact, is structurally and functionally independent of any other single-family dwelling. 
    Trailer Coach. Any vehicle, with or without motor power, designed or used for human habitation and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares in accordance with the provisions of the California State Vehicle Code. 
    Trailer Park. A site designed and equipped for the harboring, parking, or storing of one or mobile home park more trailers or mobile homes being used as living and/or sleeping quarters. 
    Trailer Site. That portion of a trailer park designated for use or occupancy of one trailer coach and including all appurtenant facilities. 
    Transfer Station. An area, including any necessary building or structures, for the temporary waste storage and the salvage of rubbish, garbage, or industrial waste. This definition also includes material recovery facilities. 
    Triplex. A structure containing three individual residential dwelling units. 
    Trucking Terminal. A business engaged in the storage and distribution of goods having more than five heavy trucks (having a rating of more than 10,000 pounds and/or an unladen weight of more than 6,000 pounds) on the premises at any one time, but excluding trucking accessory to another industrial use on the site. 
U 
    Uniform Sign Program. All applications for approval of signs in a shopping center, commercial, industrial or office complex, a group of three or more businesses on a parcel or project site or for commercial recreation uses shall be submitted in the form of a construction, including connections and electrical plans, if any, and shall delineate the typical size, shape, design, material, coloring, lettering, lighting and position of the signage in relationship to the building form or place where it will be displayed. Scaled sketches of existing signs on the premises shall accompany the application. 
    Use. The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied, utilized, or maintained. 
V 
    Variance. A modification of a literal provision of this Zoning Code, granted by an administrative or quasi-judicial act in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code. 
    Vehicle. A business engaged in the washing, waxing, cleaning, and/or detailing of automobile washing automobiles or similar light vehicles. 
    Vehicle Body. A business establishment involved in the repairing, restoring, and/or painting and fender shop of the bodies of motor vehicles. 
    Vehicle Rentals. A business engaged in the sale, lease and/or rental of automobiles and light trucks (having a rating of less than 10,001 pounds, an unladen weight of less than 6,001 pounds, and equipped with an open box-type bed less than nine feet in length), including storage and incidental maintenance and repair. 
    Vehicle Repair Garage. Any site and improvements used for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, light trucks (having a rating of less than 10,001 pounds, an unladen weight of less than 6,001 pounds, and equipped with an open box-type bed less than nine feet in length), or other similar passenger vehicles licensed by the State Department of Motor Vehicles. This classification shall not include the repair or maintenance of motor homes or commercial vehicles as defined in Section 3-7.901 of this Zoning Code. "Motor vehicle repair garage" shall be construed broadly to include the place where the following types of commonly-known garage or shop activities occur: tune-up and muffler work, parts and tire sales and installation, wheel and brake work, engine and transmission overhaul, and installation of car alarms and car stereos. "Motor vehicle repair garage" shall not include automobile wrecking, dismantling, or salvage, motor vehicle body and fender shops, or tire retreading or recapping. 
    Vehicle, Service. A business establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of vehicle fuel station and lubricants. This classification includes facilities having service bays for vehicle service and repair. Such service and repair may include the sale of tires, batteries, and other parts and products related to the operation of a motor vehicle; minor tune-up; lubrication and parts replacement; non-mechanical car-washing, polishing, and waxing; and other light work related to preventive maintenance and upkeep, but may not include maintenance and repair of large trucks or other large vehicles, or body and fender work on any vehicles. 
    Vehicle Towing/Storage. A business establishment providing towing and/or storage of operative or inoperative vehicles. This classification includes the storage of parking tow-aways, impound yards, and storage lots for buses and recreational vehicles, but does not include vehicle dismantling. 
    Visual Obstruction. Any physical obstruction which limits the visibility of persons in motor vehicles or pedestrians approaching intersecting or intercepting streets, alleys, driveways, or other public rights-of-way. 
W 
    Wall or Fence. A structure forming a physical barrier, including, but not limited to, concrete, concrete block, wood, or other materials which are solid and are so assembled as to form a barrier. 
    Warehouse Retail. An off-price or wholesale retail/warehouse establishment exceeding 70,000 square feet of gross floor area and offering a full range of general merchandise to the public. 
    Warehouse Retail, Specialty. An off-price or wholesale retail/warehouse establishment exceeding 30,000 square feet of gross floor area and offering a limited range of merchandise, serving both wholesale and retail customers. 
    Washroom. Any building, which contains individual laundry facilities and/or bathroom facilities, but does not include kitchen facilities. 
    Wholesaling, Distribution and Storage. A business engaged in storage and distribution, and having five or fewer heavy trucks (having a rating of more than 10,000 pounds and/or an unladen weight of more than 6,000 pounds) on the premises at any one time. Wholesaling establishments may include no more than ten percent or 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is less, for the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods distributed wholesale. This classification excludes "Mini-warehouses or self-storage facilities" and "Vehicle towing/storage." 
    Wholesale Dry-Cleaning Plant. A dry cleaning establishment having at least 51 percent of its gross sales to licensed dry cleaners. 
X 
Y 
    Yard. An open space on a lot or parcel of land, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by a building from the ground upward. 
    Yard, Front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot or parcel of land. The depth of a required front yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between the front lot line, where the front lot line is coterminous with the street line, and the front elevation of the structure located on the parcel. 
    Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot or parcel of land. The depth of a required rear yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land. 
    Yard, Side. A yard extending from the required front yard, or the front lot line where no front yard is required, to the required rear yard or the rear lot line where no rear yard is required. The width of a required side yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between each side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land. Where a side yard is bounded by a street, the width of such required side yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between the side lot line on the street side, where said side lot line is coterminous with the street line of a fully-widened street or the ultimate street line of a partially-widened street, and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land. 
Z 
    Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map delineating the boundaries of zones within the City of Beaumont. 
(Ord. 977, 12/07/2010; Ord. No. 1025, § 3, 9-18-2012 ) 
Chapter 17.16 - SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY FACILITIES 

17.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The provisions of this Chapter are intended to provide opportunities for the development of permanent, affordable housing for small households and for people with special needs in proximity to transit and services, and to establish standards for these small units. 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
17.16.020 - Location. 
    A single room occupancy facility may be proposed and approved in the Commercial General (CG) or Community Commercial (CC) Zoning Districts 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
17.16.030 - Project review and approval. 
    A proposed SRO shall require the approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with Section 17.02. 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
17.16.040 - Development standards. 
A.  Single Room Occupancy Facilities: 
(1)  Density. A single room occupancy facility is not required to meet density standards of the General Plan. 
(2)  Common Area. Four hundred square feet per living unit shall be provided, with at least 200 square feet in area of interior common space, excluding janitorial storage, laundry facilities and common hallways. 
(3)  Laundry Facilities. Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and one dryer for every 20 units of fractional number thereof, with at least one washer and dryer per floor. 
(4)  Cleaning Supply Room. A Cleaning Supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO facility. 
B.  Single Room Occupancy Units: 
(1)  Unit Size. An SRO unit shall have a minimum size of 150 square feet and a maximum of 400 square feet. 
(2)  Occupancy. An SRO unit shall accommodate a maximum of two persons. 
(3)  Bathroom. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full bathroom facilities. A partial bathroom facility shall have at least a toilet and sink; a full facility shall have a toilet, sink and bathtub, shower or bathtub/shower combination. If a full bathroom facility is not provided, common bathroom facilities shall be provided in accordance with the California Building Code for congregate residence with at least one full bathroom per floor. 
(4)  Kitchen. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full kitchen facilities. A full kitchen includes a sink, a refrigerator and stove, range top or oven. A partial kitchen is missing at least one of these appliances. If a full kitchen is not provided, common kitchen facilities shall be provided with at least one full kitchen per floor. 
(5)  Closet. Each SRO unit shall have a separate closet. 
(6)  Code Compliance. SRO units shall comply with all requirements of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
17.16.050 - Accessibility. 
    All SRO units shall comply with all applicable accessibility and adaptability requirements. All common areas shall be fully accessible. 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
17.16.060 - Management. 
(1)  Facility Management. An SRO facility with ten or more units shall provide on-site management. An SRO facility with less than ten units shall provide management office on-site. 
(2)  Management Plan. A management plan shall be submitted with the development application for an SRO facility and shall be approved by the City. The management plan must address management and operation of the facility, rental procedures, safety and security of residents and building maintenance. 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
17.16.070 - Parking. 
    Off street parking shall be provided consistent with Chapter 17.05. 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
17.16.080 - Tenancy. 
    Tenancy of SRO units shall be limited to 30 or more. 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
17.16.090 - Existing structure. 
    An existing structure may be converted to an SRO facility, consistent with the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. 980, 12-07-10; Ord. 1002, 8/2011) 
Chapter 17.17 - PAROLEE/PROBATIONER HOME 

17.17.010 - Applicability and conditional use permit requirements. 
    A conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 17.02.100 of this Zoning Code, is required for the establishment of any parolee/probationer home. 
(Ord. 1009, 12-20-2011) 
17.17.020 - Development regulations. 
    Parolee/probationer home shall comply with the development, locational and all other applicable regulations of the Zoning District in which the use is proposed to locate. In addition, the parolee/probationer home shall comply with all of the following locational and operational standards: 
1.  Locational Requirements. When a conditional use permit for a parolee/probationer home is requested, the parolee/probationer home shall be located: 
a.  A minimum of 660 feet away from any existing or proposed school, university, college, student housing, child care facility, public park, religious institution, hospital, youth facility, or other similar uses, as reasonably determined by the Planning Director. The distance between the parolee/probationer home and school, university, college, student housing, child care facility, public park, religious institution, hospital, youth facility or other similar use shall be measured from the closest exterior wall of the parolee/probationer home and the nearest property line included within the school, university, college, student housing, child care facility, public park, religious institution, hospital, youth facility or other similar use, along a straight line extended between the two points, without regard to intervening structures; and 
b.  A minimum of 1,320 feet away from an existing parolee/probationer home or other similar use. The distance between parolee/probationer homes shall be measured from the closest exterior wall of one parolee/probationer home and the nearest property line included within the other parolee/probationer home, along a straight line extended between the two points, without regard to intervening structures. For the purposes of the locational requirements set forth in this subsection, "other similar use" or an "existing parolee/probationer home" shall also include any residential structure or unit, including any hotel or motel, whether owned and/or operated by an individual or for-profit or nonprofit entity, which houses at least two parolees/probationers, in exchange for monetary or nonmonetary consideration given and/or paid by the parolee/probationer and/or any individual or public or private entity on behalf of the parolee/probationer, including alcohol and/or drug-free residential recovery home, community care facility, residential care facility and other such facilities. 
2.  Operational Requirements. Parolee/probationer homes shall comply with the following operational requirements: 
a.  Each parolee/probationer home shall be limited to a maximum number of six parolees or probationers, and each bedroom in the house/home may not exceed two parolees or probationers. 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings or apartments with less than 25 units shall be limited to one parolee/probationer home. 
c.  Multiple-family dwellings or apartments with 25 or more units shall be limited to two parolee/probationer homes. 
d.  Notwithstanding the definition of parolee/probationer home in Section 17.17.070 or any other provision of the City of Beaumont Zoning Code or the City of Beaumont Municipal Code, hotels and/or motels with 14 rooms or less cannot provide transient lodging services or accommodations to more than three parolees during any 28 consecutive day period regardless of any length of their respective stays; and hotels and/or motels with 15 rooms or more cannot provide transient lodging services or accommodation to more than five parolees during any 28 consecutive day period regardless of the length of their respective stays. 
e.  As determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the property owner or a designated on-site manager must live full-time on the site of the parolee/probationer home, and the name and phone number of this individual shall be provided to the Chief of Police or his/her designee. 
f.  The Police Department shall be provided with a weekly update of the names of all parolees/probationers living at the parolee/probationer home. The updates required by this section may be in any of the following forms: in writing via electronic mail or facsimile. 
g.  Any owner/operator of an parolee/probationer home and any person designated as a house manager or other staff shall provide his or her full name, current residence and phone number, date of birth, social security number, prior employment history, education, driver's license number, history of criminal convictions, if any, and any other information the Beaumont Police Department reasonably requires to perform a criminal background check through the State Department of Justice and/or United States Department of Justice. No person shall begin employment with the Parolee/Probationer Home until this information has been provided; 
17.17.025 - Conditional use permit findings. 
    An application for a conditional use permit for parolee/probationer home may be approved and/or modified, in whole or in part, only if the findings in Section 17.02.100 of this Zoning Code are first made. Additionally, in evaluating each request for approval of a conditional use permit for a parolee/probationer home, particular attention shall be directed to the physical relationship and proximity of the proposed use to similar uses on the same or surrounding sites, the compatibility of the proposed use with neighboring uses (i.e., schools, parks, and other similar uses) and to ensuring that the proposed use will not result in harm to the health, safety or general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood or substantial adverse impacts on adjoining properties or land uses. 
(Ord. 1009, 12-20-2011) 
17.17.030 - Special noticing requirements. 
    In addition to the notice and hearing requirements required for conditional use permits, all property owners within 1,000 feet of the proposed parolee/probationer home, as measured from the subject property lines, shall be notified of the proposed conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 1009, 12-20-2011) 
17.17.040 - Public nuisance. 
    The establishment, maintenance or operation of a parolee/probationer home in violation of the regulations of this section or in violation of the conditions of approval of an approved conditional use permit is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the City pursuant to applicable provision of the City of Beaumont Municipal Code, City of Beaumont Zoning Ordinance or any available legal remedies, including but not limited to civil injunctions. 
(Ord. 1009, 12-20-2011) 
17.17.050 - Nonconforming use. 
    Any parolee/probationer home lawfully existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section is a legal nonconforming use, subject to applicable nonconforming use regulations of Chapter 17.08 of the City of Beaumont Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 1009, 12-20-2011) 
17.17.060 - Amortization. 
1.  Any parolee/probationer home regulated under provisions of this section which is a nonconforming use on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to an amortization period expiring one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
2.  Amortization-Notice. The Community Development Department shall provide written notice to the property owner or operator at least 120 days prior to the expiration of this amortization period. This notice is not mandatory and lack of notice shall not be deemed to prevent the City from initiating an action seeking declaratory or injunctive relief against the owner and/or operator of such business. However, if notice of expiration of amortization period is not given, any application by the owner or owner of the parolee/probationer home for an extension of the amortization period shall not be denied on the grounds that it is untimely. 
3.  Amortization-Application for Extension. 
a.  The property owner may file an application with the Community Development Department for an extension of the amortization period. The applicant must state: 
i.  Whether a previous extension has been requested and granted, as well as the date of the previous request; and 
ii.  The efforts that will be made to conform by the conclusion of the extended period. 
b.  The property owner's application shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by the City Council. 
c.  Any application for an extension of the amortization period shall be made prior to the expiration of the amortization period unless the Planning Community Development Director determines that good cause exists for the late filing of the application. 
4.  Amortization-Decision to Grant or Deny Extension. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing at which time it shall consider the evidence and testimony regarding the request for an extension of the amortization period. The Planning Commission shall grant or deny an application for extension of the amortization period. 
b.  In rendering its decision, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the parolee/probationer home has been provided with a reasonable amortization period commensurate with the investment involved. If the Planning Commission determines that the amortization period is not reasonable, it shall prescribe an amortization period that is commensurate with the investment involved. The burden shall be on the applicant to establish that the extension should be granted. 
c.  The Planning Commission shall consider the following factors in making its determination: 
i.  The parolee/probationer homeowner's financial investment in the renting out rooms, units, homes to parolee/probationers; 
ii.  The present actual and depreciated value of business improvements; 
iii.  The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedules; 
iv.  The remaining useful life of the rental improvements; 
v.  The remaining lease terms, if any; 
vi.  The cost of relocating the parolee/probationer home to a site conforming to the provisions of this chapter, if applicable; 
vii.  The ability of the parolee/probationer home and/or owner to change the use to a conforming use; and 
viii.  The secondary effects of the parolee/probationer home adult business on the health, safety and welfare of surrounding community, residential dwellings, businesses and/or uses if the parolee/probationer home is permitted to extend the amortization period. 
d.  The Planning Commission's decision shall be in writing, and shall be hand delivered or sent by certified mail to the applicant. 
5.  Amortization-Appeal. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the City Council in writing within 15 days after the written decision of the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of Sections 17.02.060 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
6.  Amortization-Public Nuisance. The City Council declares to be a public nuisance any parcel where a parolee/probationer home is operating and where the amortization period as a legal nonconforming use has expired and (a) no application for an extension is on file or has been granted, or (b) no application for parolee/probationer home conditional use permit is on file or has been granted. 
(Ord. 1009, 12-20-2011) 
17.17.060 - Definitions. 
1.  Parolee/Probationer. An individual as follows: 
A.  Convicted of a federal crime, sentenced to a United States federal prison, and received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a federal probation/parole officer; or 
B.  Who is serving a period of supervised community custody as defined by State Penal Code 3000, following a term of imprisonment in a State prison or County jail, and is under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Corrections, Division of Adult Parole Operations; or 
C.  An adult or juvenile individual sentenced to a term in the California Youth Authority and received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a Youth Authority parole officer; or 
D.  An adult or juvenile offender released from county jail or state prison after October 1, 2011, on Post Release Community Supervision. 
(Ord. 1009, 12-20-2011) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes relevant to California cities. They are current with all 2017 Regular Session laws. 
General Provisions 
Code adoption 
Government Code § 50022.1 et seq. 
Ordinances 
Government Code § 36900 et seq. 
Penalties for ordinance violations 
Government Code §§ 36900 and 36901 
Imprisonment 
Government Code §§ 36903 and 36904 
Citations for misdemeanors 
Penal Code § 853.5 et seq. 
Administrative fines and penalties 
Government Code § 53069.4 
Judicial review of city decisions 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6 
Expedited judicial review of First Amendment cases 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8 
Elections 
Government Code §§ 34050 and 36503 and Elections Code §§ 1301, 9200 et seq. and 10100 et seq. 
Classification of cities 
Government Code § 34100 et seq. 
General powers 
Government Code § 37100 et seq. and Cal. Const. art. XI §§ 7, 9 
Conflict of interest code 
Government Code § 87100 et seq. 
Eminent Domain Law 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1230.010 et seq. 
Administration and Personnel 
City officers generally 
Government Code § 36501 et seq. 
Legislative body 
Government Code § 36801 et seq. 
Meetings 
Government Code § 54950 et seq. 
Mayor 
Government Code § 40601 et seq. 
City clerk 
Government Code § 40801 et seq. 
City treasurer 
Government Code § 41001 et seq. 
City assessor 
Government Code § 41201 et seq. 
Chief of police 
Government Code § 41601 et seq. 
City attorney 
Government Code § 41801 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-City manager form of government 
Government Code § 34851 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-Election of legislative body by or from districts 
Government Code § 34870 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-Elective mayor 
Government Code §§ 34900 et seq. 
City records 
Government Code § 34090 et seq. 
Removal from office 
Government Code § 3000 et seq. 
Political activities of public employees 
Government Code § 3201 et seq. 
Local planning agencies 
Government Code § 65100 et seq. 
California Emergency Services Act 
Government Code § 8550 et seq. 
Fire department 
Government Code § 38611 
Peace officer standards and training 
Penal Code § 13500 et seq. 
Personnel system, merit system or civil service system 
Government Code § 45000 et seq. 
Retirement systems 
Government Code § 45300 et seq. 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial powers 
Government Code § 37200 et seq. 
Transfer of tax function to county 
Government Code § 51500 et seq. 
Property tax assessment, levy and collection 
Government Code § 43000 et seq. 
Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 
Transient occupancy tax 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280 et seq. 
Documentary Transfer Tax Act 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 
Unclaimed property 
Civil Code § 2080 et seq. 
Unclaimed money 
Government Code § 50050 et seq. 
Planning and zoning fees for specific purposes 
Government Code § 66012 et seq. 
Public works and public purchases 
Government Code § 4000 et seq. 
Local Agency Public Construction Act 
Public Contract Code § 20100 et seq. 
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act 
Public Contract Code § 22000 et seq. 
Claims against public entities 
Government Code § 900 et seq. 
Development project fees 
Government Code § 66000 et seq. 
Business Licenses, Taxes and Regulations 
Authority to license businesses 
Government Code § 37101, Business and Professions Code § 16000 et seq. 
Automatic checkout systems 
Civil Code § 7100 et seq. 
Bingo 
Penal Code § 326.4 et seq. 
Charitable solicitations 
Business and Professions Code § 17510 et seq. 
Commercial filming 
Government Code § 65850.1 
Community antenna TV systems 
Government Code § 53066 et seq. 
Gambling Control Act 
Business and Professions Code § 19800 et seq. 
Massage parlors 
Government Code § 51030 et seq. 
Private investigators 
Business and Professions Code § 7512 et seq. 
Taxicabs 
Vehicle Code §§ 16500 et seq., 21100, 21112 and Government Code § 53075.5 et seq. 
Telecommunications facilities 
Government Code § 50030 
Animals 
Animals generally 
Food and Agriculture Code § 16301 et seq. 
Dogs 
Government Code § 38792 and Food and Agriculture Code § 30501 et seq. 
Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs 
Food and Agriculture Code § 31601 et seq. 
Rabies control 
Health and Safety Code § 121575 et seq. 
Cruelty to animals and related offenses 
Penal Code §§ 596 et seq. through 600.5 
Health and Safety 
Garbage and refuse collection and disposal 
Public Resources Code § 49300 et seq. 
Nuisances and nuisance abatement 
Government Code § 38771 et seq. and Penal Code § 370 et seq. 
Weed and rubbish abatement 
Government Code § 39501 et seq. 
Littering 
Penal Code §§ 374 through 374.8 
Smoking-Places of employment 
Labor Code § 6404.5 
California Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976 
Health and Safety Code § 118875 et seq. 
Graffiti abatement 
Government Code § 38772 and Penal Code § 594.5 
Fire prevention 
Health and Safety Code § 13000 et seq. 
Fireworks 
Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq. 
Noise control 
Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. and Government Code § 65302(f) 
Hospitals 
Government Code § 37600 et seq. 
Public Peace, Morals
and Welfare 
Crimes against religion and conscience, and other offenses against good morals 
Penal Code § 302 et seq. 
Obscenity 
Penal Code § 311 et seq. 
Material harmful to minors 
Penal Code § 313 et seq. 
Indecent exposure, obscene exhibitions, and bawdy and other disorderly houses 
Penal Code § 314 et seq. 
Crimes against the public peace 
Penal Code § 403 et seq. 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Rules of the road 
Vehicle Code § 21000 et seq. 
Local traffic rules and regulations 
Vehicle Code § 21100 et seq. 
Traffic signs, signals and markings 
Vehicle Code § 21350 et seq. 
Driving on right side of road, overtaking and passing 
Vehicle Code § 21650 et seq. 
Right-of-way 
Vehicle Code § 21800 et seq. 
Pedestrians' rights and duties 
Vehicle Code § 21949 et seq. 
Turning, stopping and turning signals 
Vehicle Code § 22100 et seq. 
Vehicle speed 
Vehicle Code § 22348 et seq. 
Special stops required 
Vehicle Code § 22450 et seq. 
Stopping, standing and parking 
Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq. 
Bicycles 
Vehicle Code §§ 21200 et seq. and 39000 et seq. 
Vehicle size, weight and load 
Vehicle Code § 35000 et seq. 
Penalties 
Vehicle Code § 42000 et seq. 
Streets, Sidewalks
and Public Places 
Improvement Act of 1911 
Streets and Highways Code § 5000 et seq. 
Construction of sidewalks and curbs 
Streets and Highways Code § 5870 et seq. 
Underground utility districts 
Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq. 
Obstructions and encroachments on public ways 
Government Code § 38775 
Municipal parks 
Public Resources Code § 5181 et seq. 
Tree Planting Act of 1931 
Streets and Highways Code § 22000 et seq. 
Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972 
Streets and Highways Code § 22500 et seq. 
Charitable solicitations 
Business and Professions Code § 17510 et seq. 
Advertising displays 
Business and Professions Code § 5229 et seq. 
Public Services 
Municipal water systems 
Government Code § 38730 et seq. 
Municipal sewers 
Government Code § 38900 et seq. and Health and Safety Code § 5470 et seq. 
Water wells 
Water Code § 13700 et seq. 
Buildings and Construction 
Authority to regulate buildings and construction 
Government Code §§ 38601 and 38660 
State Housing Law 
Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq. 
Adoption of construction codes 
Health and Safety Code §§ 17922 and 17958 
California Building Standards Law 
Health and Safety Code § 18901 et seq. 
Mobilehome Parks Act 
Health and Safety Code § 18200 et seq. 
Signs 
Government Code §§ 38774 and 65850; Business and Professions Code § 5200 et seq. 
Inspection warrants 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1822.50 et seq. 
Development fees 
Government Code § 66000 et seq. 
Subdivisions 
Subdivision Map Act 
Government Code § 66410 et seq. 
Zoning 
Planning and Zoning Law 
Government Code § 65000 et seq. 
Local authority to regulate land use 
Government Code § 65850 
Local zoning administration 
Government Code § 65900 et seq. 
Open-space zoning 
Government Code § 65910 et seq. 
Family day care homes 
Health and Safety Code § 1597.30 et seq. 
Environmental Protection 
California Environmental Quality Act 
Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq. 
California Noise Control Act of 1973 
Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
Ordinance 
Number 1 Board of trustees meeting time, place (Repealed by 563) 2 Board of trustees meeting regulations (2.04) 3 Officers 4 Concealed weapons (Repealed by 563) 5 Speed Limits (Repealed by 563) 6 Sale of Liquor (Repealed by 151) 7 City Seal (1.08) 8 Business licenses (Repealed by 72) 9 Dog Licensing (Repealed 253) 10 Tax Collection (Repealed 151) 11 Number Not Used 12 Business Licenses (Repealed by 130) 13 Tree planting and trimming Repealed by 563) 14 Misdemeanors (Repealed by 37) 15 Tax Collection (Repealed by 151) 16 Electricity franchise (Special) 17 Establishes datum plane (Repealed by 41) 18 Nuisances (Repealed by 563) 19 Board of health (Repealed by 151) 20 Fire Limits (Repealed by 91) 21 Betting and wagering (Repealed by 151) 22 Sidewalk Construction (Repealed by 55) 23 Livestock running at large (Repealed by 563) 24 Building numbering (12.28) 9.12.1913 AMENDS §2 of Ord. 24, building numbering (12.28) 25 1913-1914 tax levy (Special) 26 Street excavations (Repealed by 151) 27 Water use during fire (Repealed by 563) 28 Work in lieu of fine or imprisonment (Repealed by 151) 29 Keeping dairy cows (Repealed by 201) 30 Board of health (Repealed by 151) 31 Building Permits (Repealed by 563) 32 Not Adopted 33 Sale of intoxicating liquors (Repealed by 151) 34 City Officer compensation (Repealed by 57) 35 Deposit of money collected (3.08) 36 Payment Claims (3.12) 37 Misdemeanors; repeals Ord. 14 (9.16, 9.20, 9.28, 9.32) 38 Working prisoners (Repealed by 563) 39 Fire Department (Repealed by 563) 40 Street, sidewalk and parking protection (Repealed by 563) 41 Established datum plan; repeals Ord. 17 (1.12) 42 Sidewalk width and tree planting setback (Repealed by 55) 43 Curb grades and widths (Special) 44 Property tax assessment and collection (3.16) 45 Precincts (Repealed by 563) 46 Business licenses (Repealed by 130) 47 Elections (Repealed by 563) 48 Number not used 49 Sidewalk, curb, gutter and crossing construction (Repealed by 55) 50 Petroleum storage permission (Special) 51 Bond Election (Special) 52 1914-1915 tax levy (Special) 53 Bond Election (Special) 54 Bond Issuance (Special) 55 Repeals Ords. 22, 42, and 49 (Repealer) 56 Board of Trustees and meetings time and place (Repealed by 64) 57 Officer compensation; repeals Ord. 34 (Repealed by 563) 58 1916-1917 tax levy (Special) 59 Pool rooms, billiard halls, bowling alleys, shooting galleries and skating rinks (Repealed by 563) 60 Driving on curbs and sidewalks (Repealed by 563) 61 1917-1918 tax levy (Special) 62 Street names changed (Special) 63 Amends §2 of Ord. 57, officer salaries (Repealed by 563) 64 Board of trustees meeting time and place; repeals Ord. 56 (Repealed by 563) 65 1918-1919 tax levy (Special) 66 Amends third paragraph of §4 of Ord. 23, livestock running at large 67 Amends first, third and fourth paragraph of §1 of Ord. 57 officer compensation (Repealed by 249) 68 Curfew for minors (Repealed by 249) 69 Repeals third paragraph of §1 of Ord. 67, officer compensation (Repealer) 70 Marshal salary for August, 1919 (Special) 71 1919-1920 levy (Special) 72 Business licenses (Repealed by 130) 73 Gas pipe franchise (Special) 74 1920-1921 tax levy (Special) 75 Trains blocking intersections (Repealed by 401) 76 Gas or oil drilling prohibited areas (Repealed by 115) 77 Pipe laying in street (Repealed by 151) 78 Amends third paragraph of §1 of Ord. 57, officer 79 1921-1922 tax levy (Special) 80 Building permits (Repealed by 92) 81 City Marshal compensation (Repealed by 145) 82 1922-1923 tax levy (Special) 83 Bond Election (Special) 84 Bond Issuance (Special) 85 1923-1924 tax levy (Special) 86 Recorder salary (Repealed by 563) 87 Vehicle parking (10.08) 88 Adds §25 1/2 and amends §1 and 25 Ord. 72, business licenses (Repealed by 130) 89 1924-1925 tax levy (Special) 90 Board of trustees meeting place (Repealed by 563) 91 Fire Limits and construction regulations; repeals Ord. 20 (Repealed by 151) 92 Building permits; repeals Ord. 80 (Repealed by 563) 93 Adds paragraphs 91 and 92 and amends paragraph 2 of §1 of Ord. 72, business licenses (Repealed by 130) 94 1925-1926 tax levy (Special) 95 Board of trustees meeting time (Repealed by 563) 96 City clerk compensation (Repealed by 563) 97 Boulevards designated (Repealed by 563) 98 Board of trustees meeting time (Repealed by 563) 99 1926-1927 tax levy (Special) 100 Health of officer salary 101 Health officer salary (Repealed by 151) 102 1927-1928 tax levy (Special) 103 Amends §§2 and 5 of Ord. 91, fire limits and construction regulations (Repealed by 151) 104 Limits number of pool halls (Repealed by 109) 105 Milk inspection (Repealed by 160) 106 Planning commission (Repealed by 482) 107 1928-1929 tax levy (Special) 108 Adds §8 1/2 to Ord. 72, business licenses (Repealed) 109 Repeals Ord. 104 (Repealer) 110 Number not used 111 Adopts plumbing code (Repealed by 246) 112 Recall election (Special) 113 1929-1930 tax levy (Special) 114 Boulevards designated (Repealed by 369) 115 Repeals Ord. 76 (Repealer) 116 City treasurer compensation (Repealed by 563) 117 Fire limits and construction regulations (Repealed by 563) 118 1930 weed removal notice (Special) 119 1930-1931 tax levy (Special) 120 Police and fireman duties (2.20) 121 Amends Ord. 72, business licenses (Repealed by 130) 122 Parking of commercial vehicles (10.12) 123 City judge compensation (Repealed by 563) 124 1931 weed removal notice (Special) 125 1931 weed removal authorized (Special) 126 Gasoline storage and dispensing (Repealed by 563) 127 1931-1932 tax levy (Special) 128 Amends §1 of Ord. 81, police chief compensation (Repealed by 141) 129 Business licenses (Repealed by 151) 130 Business licenses; repeals Ord. 12, amendment to Ords. 12, 46, 72, 88, 93, 108 and 121 (Repealed by 141) 131 Amends §11 of Ord. 130, business licenses (Repealed by 131) 132 Board of trustees meeting time (Repealed by 563) 133 1932 weed removal notice (Special) 134 Weed Removal procedure (Repealed by 385) 135 Adds §102 1/2 to Ord. 130, business licenses (Repealed by 191) 136 1932-1933 tax levy (Special) 137 Adds subsection (c) to #3 of Ord. 117, fire limits and building regulations (Repealed by 563) 138 Water rates (Repealed by 563) 139 Amends §1 of Ord. 117, fire limits and construction regulations (Repealed by 563) 140 Beverage sale licenses (Repealed by 563) 141 Business licenses; repeals Ords. 130 and 135 (Repealed by 191) 142 1933-1934 tax levy (Special) 143 Electrical code (Repealed by 563) 144 Building code (Repealed by 563) 145 Police chief compensation; repeals Ords. 81 and 128 (Repealed by 167) 146 Garbage collection (Repealed by 151) 147 1934-1935 tax levy (Special) 148 Amends Ord. 141 business licenses (Repealed by 191) 149 Adds subsection 6(r) to §5 of Ord. 141, business licenses (Repealed by 191) 150 Amends subsection 155 of §5 of Ord. 141, business licenses (Repealed by 191) 151 Repeals Ords. 6, 10, 15, 19, 21, 26, 28, 30, 33, 77, 91, 97, 100, 129, and 146 (Repealer) 152 City Judge compensation (Repealed by 167) 153 Health officer (Repealed by 563) 154 Adds to Ord. 144 and amends §§1 and 3 of Ord. 144, fire zones and building Regulations (Repealed by 563) 155 Reimbursement of officials' expenses Repealed by 563) 156 Street improvement revolving fund (Repealed by 563) 157 1935-1936 tax levy (Special) 158 Amends §3 of Ord. 37, misdemeanors (Repealed by 563) 159 Bond election (Special) 160 Milk sales repeals Ord. 105 (Repealed by 563) 161 Special gas tax street improvement fund (Repealed by 563) 162 City clerk compensation (Repealed by 563) 163 Boulevard stops (Repealed by 369) 164 Dancing where intoxication liquor is sold (Repealed by 541) 165 1936-1937 tax levy (Special) 166 Amends §1 of Ord. 154 and building code, fire zones and building regulations Repealed by 563) 167 Chief of police and city judge compensation; repeals Ords. 145 and 152 (Repealed by 182) 168 Planning commission (Repealed by 482) 169 1937-1938 tax levy (Special) 170 Claims against the city (Repealed by 563) 171 Stop intersection (Repealed by 563) 172 Amends subsections 128(b) and 159 of §5 of Ord. 141, business licenses (Repealed by 191) 173 Facing buildings on lots (Repealed by 563) 174 Milk regulations (Repealed by 563) 175 Property sale (Special) 176 Property conveyance (Special) 177 Property conveyance (Special) 178 1938-1939 tax levy (Special) 179 Bond election (Special) 180 Property conveyances (Special) 181 Property conveyances (Special) 182 Repeals §§1 and 2 of Ord. 167 (Repealer) 183 Property sale (Special) 184 Property conveyance (Special) 185 City Council meeting place (Repealed by 563) 186 Property sale (Special) 187 1939-1940 tax levy (Special) 188 Through highways and stop intersections (Repealed by 369) 189 Adds to Ord. 111; amends §§4 and 10 or Ord. 111; plumbing code (Repealed by 246) 190 Amends §9 of Ord. 143, electrical code (Repealed by 244) 191 Business licenses; repeals Ords. 141, 148, 149, 150 and 172 (Repealed by 333) 192 Amends §1 of Ord. 162, city clerk salary (Repealed by 563) 193 Bond Election (Special) 194 Bond Election (Special) 195 Amends §2 of Ord. 154, fire zones and building regulations (Repealed by 563) 196 Amends subsection (a) of §3 of Ord. 189, plumbing code (Repealed by 246) 197 Property acquisition (Special) 198 1940-1941 tax levy (Special) 199 Trespassing and loitering (Repealed by 563) 200 Bicycle registration (Repealed by 563) 201 Repeals Ord. 29 (Repealer) 202 Parking regulations; repeals §4 of Ord. 114 (Repealed by 369) 203 Amends §5 of Ord. 191, business licenses (Repealed by 240, 333) 204 Amends §1 of Ord. 166, fire zones (Repealed by 563) 205 Amends §1 of Ord. 9 dog licensing (Repealed by 253) 206 Railroad easement (Special) 207 1941-1942 tax levy (Special) 208 Amends ord. 2004, fire zones (Repealed by 563) 209 Air raid precautions (Repealed by 337) 210 Defense council (Repealed by 337) 211 1942-1943 tax levy (Special) 212 Adds subsection 1-x to Ord. 191, business licenses (Repealed by 333) 213 Lighting restriction (Repealed by 337) 214 Dogs running at large (Repealed by 253) 215 Unauthorized gas connection (13.12) 216 Garbage (Repealed by 232) 217 1934-1944 tax levy (Special) 218 Adds §8 to Ord. 210, civilian defense (Repealed by 337) 219 City clerk and treasurer compensation (Repealed by 313) 220 Wrecking yards and junkyards (5.48) 221 1944-1945 tax levy (Special) 222 Food and drink sales (Repealed by 563) 223 Special election (Special) 224 1945-1946 tax levy (Special) 225 Sixth street setback (Special) 226 Land use districting (Repealed by 282) 227 Special election (Special) 228 Disaster council (Repealed by 337) 229 Adopts building code (Repealed by 563) 230 Amends §5 of Ord. 191, business licenses (Repealed by 240, 333) 231 1946-1947 tax levy (Special) 232 Garbage; Repeals Ord. 216 (Repealed by 370) 233 Sales tax (Repealed by 563) 234 Amends §5 of Ord. 191, business licenses (Repealed by 240, 333) 235 Gas franchise (Special) 236 Amends §5 of Ord. 191, business licenses; repeals Ord. 203 (Repealed by 240) 237 1947-1948 tax levy (Special) 238 Bond election (Special) 239 Bond issuance (Special) 240 Amends §5 of Ord. 191, business licenses; repeals Ords. 203, 230, 234, and 236 (Repealed by 333) 241 1948-1949 tax levy (Special) 242 Fire zones (Repealed by 379) 243 Licensing of subcontractors (Repealed by 280) 244 Adopts electrical code (Repealed by 563) 245 Amends §1 of Ord. 164, dancing where intoxicating liquor is sold (Repealed by 541) 246 Adopts plumbing code; repeals Ord. 111 (Repealed by 311) 247 Adopts building code (Repealed by 563) 248 Gasoline storage container (Repealed by 563) 249 Curfew for minors; repeals Ord. 68 (9.24) 250 1949-1950 tax levy (Special) 251 Electricity franchise (Special) 252 Street vacation (Special) 253 Dog licensing; repeals Ords. 9, 205, and 214 (Repealed by 563) 254 1950-1951 tax levy (Special) 255 Amends §2 of Ord. 240, business license (Repealed by 284, 333) 256 Annexation (Special) 257 1951-1952 tax levy (Special) 258 1951-1953 tax levy (Special) 259 Adopts electrical code; repeals Ord. 244 (Repealed by 3126) 260 Burning (Repealed by 384) 261 Adopts building code (Repealed by 384) 262 1952-1952 tax levy (Special) 263 1952-1952 tax levy (Special) 264 Oil well drilling regulations (8.24) 265 Amends subsections (6) (e) and (6) (f) of §15 of Ord. 226, land use districting (repealed by 282) 266 Adds subsection (f) to §6 of Ord. 253; amends §§3 (a) and 6 (a) of Ord. 253; dog Licensing (Repealed by 563) 267 1953-1954 tax levy (Special) 268 1953-1954 tax levy (Special) 269 Gambling 9.08) 270 Amends §9 (2) of Ord. 226, zoning (repealed by 282) 271 1954-1955 tax levy (Special) 272 1954-1955 tax levy (Special) 273 Building setback (Repealed by 563) 274 Annexation (Special) 275 Registration of criminals (Repealed by 563) 276 Alley vacation (Special) 277 1955-1956 tax levy (Special) 278 Sales and use tax (Repealed by 563) 279 Annexation (Special) 280 Amends §2 of Ord. 240, business licenses; repeals Ord. 243 (Repealed by 333) 281 1956-1957 tax levy (Special) 282 Zoning; repeals Ords. 37, 226 and 264 (Repealed by 460) 283 Amends §3 of Ord. 37, misdemeanors (Repealed by 563) 284 Amends §§I-I and I-w of Ord. 191 and §2 of Ord. 280, business licenses; repeals §§IV And IV-a of Ord. 191 and Ord. 255 (Repealed by 333) 285 Adds subsection (3) to Art. 8 §1 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 286 Trees (12.20) 287 Fixes property setback (Special) 288 Sales and use tax (3.24) 289 Amends Art. 24 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 290 1957-1958 tax levy (Special) 291 Pipeline franchise (Special) 292 Adds §I (a) to Ord. 191; amends §2 of Ord. 284; business licenses (Repealed by 333) 293 Automobiles for hire (5.28) 294 Adds subsection (9) to Art. 4 §1 of Ord. 284; business licenses (Repealed by 333) 295 Subdivisions (Repealed by 296) 296 Repeals Ord. 295 (Repealer) 297 Building relocation (Repealed by 399) 298 Dwelling size in residential districts (Repealed by 460) 299 1958-1959 tax levy (Special) 300 Division of land (Repealed by 460) 301 Survey, curb and gutter requirements (Repealed by 327) 302 Rezone; adds subsection (42) to Art. 11 §1 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 303 City Council meetings (2.04) 304 Rezone; adds subsection (42) to Art. 11 §1 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 305 Annexation (Special) 306 Parking on grades (10.16) 307 1959-1960 tax levy (Special) 308 Bond election (Special) 309 Amends §3 of Art. 6 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 310 Adopts building code; repeals Ord. 261 (Repealed by 331) 311 Adopts plumbing cod; repeals Ord. 246 (Repealed by 342) 312 Fire protection code (repealed by 563) 313 Clerk and treasurer compensation; repeals Ord. 219 (repealed by 358) 314 Rezone (Special) 315 Boulevard stop (Repealed by 563) 316 Adopts electrical code; repeals Ord. 259 (Repealed by 343) 317 Dog leash required (Repealed by 563) 318 Adoption of heating, air-conditioning, ventilating, refrigeration and water Conservation code (Repealed by 428) 319 Rezone (Special) 320 Amends §6 of Art. 4 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 321 Bond issuance (Special) 322 1960-1961 tax levy (Special) 323 Food handlers (Repealed by 628) 324 Subdivisions (Title 16) 325 Official street plan (12.04) 326 Annexation (special) 327 Adds subsection (3) to Art. 4 §4 and §19 to Art. 13 of Ord. 282; amends subsection 1 of Art. 4 §4, subsection 1 of Art. 6 §4 and subsection 1 of Art. 7 §4 of Ord. 282; Repeals Ord. 301; zoning (Repealed by 460) 328 Rezone (Special) 329 Sewage discharges (13.04) 330 Amends Art. 7 §8 (a) of Ord. 282 (Repealed by 460) 331 Adopts building code; repeals Ord. 310 (Repealed by 367) 332 Annexation (Special) 333 Business licenses; repeals Ords. 191, 212, 240, 255, 280, 284, and 292 (5.04, 5.08, 5.12, 5.16, 5.20, 5.24) 334 1961-1963 tax levy (Special) 335 Rezone (Special) 336 Amends §§4 (a) (2), 5(b) (2) and 5 (b) (3) (ii) of Ord. 233; repeals §§2 (e) and 4 (b) (4) (ii) of Ord. 233; renumbers §4 (b) (4) (iii); sales and use tax (3.24) 337 Civil defense and disaster; repeals Ords. 209, 210, 213, 218, and 228 (Repealed by 411) 338 Annexation (Special) 339 Gas franchise (Special) 340 Rezone (Special) 341 Rezone (Special) 342 Adopts plumbing code; repeals Ord. 316 (Repealed by 427) 343 Adopts wiring code; repeals Ord. 316 (Repealed 456) 344 Annexation (Special) 345 Rezone (Special) 346 1962-1963 tax levy (Special) 347 Rezone (Special) 348 Annexation (Special) 349 Rezone (Special) 350 Adds Art. 7A to Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 351 Rezone (Special) 352 Amends Art 9 §§3 and 4 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 353 Amends Art. 13 §5 and 4 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 354 1963-1964 tax levy (Special) 355 Rezone (Special) 356 Peace officer training and standards (2.48) 357 Rezone (Special) 358 Clerk and treasurer compensation; repeals Ord. 313 (Repealed by 563) 359 1964-1965 tax levy (Special) 360 Fixing of fees, charges and taxes by resolution (3.32) 361 Abandoned vehicles (8.20) 362 Rezone (Special) 363 City Manager (2.12) 364 Unsafe building abatement (Repealed by 434) 365 Annexation (Special) 366 1965-1966 tax levy (Special) 367 Adopts building code; repeals Ord. 331 (Repealed by 460) 368 Not adopted 369 Stop intersections; repeals Ords. 114, 163, 188, and 202 (10.04) 370 Garbage collection; repeals Ord. 232 (8.12) 371 Amends Art. 14 § 13 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 372 Council salaries (Repealed by 373) 373 Council salaries; repeals Ord. 372 (Repealed by 460) 374 Repeals Ord. 373 (Repealer) 375 1966-1967 tax levy (Special) 376 Adoption of public works construction specifications (12.08) 377 Adopts building code; repeals Ord. 367 (Repealed by 419) 378 Employee's retirement system contract (2.44) 379 Establishes fire zones; repeals Ord. 242 (Repealed by 563) 380 1967-1968 tax levy (Special) 381 Apiaries (6.32) 382 Dog licensing (Repealed by 492) 383 Real property transfer tax (3.20) 384 Burning; repeals Ord. 260 (8.16) 385 Weed and rubbish removal; repeals Ord. 134 (8.08) 386 Annexation (Special) 387 Transient occupancy tax (3.28) 388 Adds subsections d and e to §2 of Ord. 333, business licenses (5.04) 389 Adds §2 to art. 24 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 390 Adopts sign code (Repealed by 563) 391 Adopts fire code (Repealed by 437) 392 1968-1969 tax levy (Special) 393 Amends §19 of Art. 13 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460, 473) 394 Amends §3 (c) of Art. V of Ord. 324, subdivisions (Title 16) 395 Utility undergrounding (Repealed by 563) 396 Fortunetellers (5.40) 397 Amends §3 (c) of Art. V of Ord. 297 (15.28) 398 Rezone (Special) 399 Moving buildings; repeals Ord. 297 (15.28) 400 Adds §2 to Art. V of Ord. 324, subdivisions (Title 16) 401 Fairway operation on streets; repeals Ord. 297 (15.28) 402 Community antenna television systems (Repealed by 529) 403 Adds §2 to Art. 21 of Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 404 Annexation (Special) 405 CATV franchise (Repealed by 476) 406 Amends §3 of Ord. 333, business licenses (5.12) 407 Annexation (Special) 408 Rezone (Special) 409 Rezone (Special) 410 Annexation (Special) 411 Civil defense and disaster; repeals Ord. 337 (Repealed by 461) 412 Adds. Art. 10A to Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 413 Rezone (Special) 414 Rezone (Special) 415 Amends §2 of Ord. 389, zoning (Repealed by 460) 416 Sewers (13.08) 417 Rezone (Special) 418 1970-1971 tax levy (Special) 419 Adopts building code; repeals Ord. 377 (Repealed by 448) 420 Rezone (Special) 421 Rezone (Special) 422 Rezone (Special) 423 Amends Art. 18 §§4, 5 and 13 of Ord. 282, §1 of Ord. 300 and §2 of Ord. 399, Zoning (15.28) 424 Adds art. 3 §2 (1) to Ord. 324; amends Art. 3 §2 (f) of Ord. 324; subdivisions (Title 16) 425 Adds Art. 10 B to Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 426 Adds §8 (g) and amends §8 (e) of Ord. 333, business licenses (5.20) 427 Adopts plumbing code; repeals Ord. 342 (Repealed by 487) 428 Adopts mechanical code; repeals Ord. 318 (Repealed by 488, 515) 429 1971-1972 tax levy (Special) 430 Amends subsection (a) and adds subsections (f) through (j) to §5 of Art. IV of Ord. 324, subdivisions (Title 16) 431 Adds §4 (1)(a) to Art. 4 and §§14 (a) and 22 (a) to Art. 4 of Ord. 282; zoning (Repealed by 460) 432 Signs (Repealed by 563) 433 Amends §§4-A-1 and 5-A of Ord. 288, sales and use tax (3.24) 434 Unsafe building removal; repeals Ord. 364 (Repealed by 563) 435 Conduct in parks (Repealed by 563) 436 Handbill distribution (8.28) 437 Adopts fire code; repeals Ord. 391 (Repealed by 447) 438 Massage establishments (5.44) 439 Rezone (Special) 440 Adds subsection (a) through (e) to §7-I of Ord. 333, business licenses (5.20) 441 1972-1973 tax levy (Special) 442 Adds subsections r to §7 and adds to §9 of Ord. 333, business licenses (5.08, 5.20) 443 Rezone (Special) 444 Adds to Ord. 168, planning commission (Repealed by 482) 445 Off-road use of motor vehicles (10.28) 446 1973-1974 tax levy (Special) 447 Adopts fire code; repeals Ord. 437 (Repealed by 479) 448 Adopts building code; repeals Ord. 419 (Repealed by 488, 515) 449 Adds §§4.5, 5 (b) (3.5) and 6.1 to Ord. 288; amends §4 (b) (3) of Ord. 288; sales and use tax (3.24) 450 Rezone (Special) 451 Adds Art. 6A to Ord. 282, zoning (Repealed by 460) 452 Rezone (Special) 453 Council salaries (2.08) 454 Amends §6 of Ord. 385, weed and rubbish removal (8.08) 455 Nudity (9.12) 456 Adopts electrical code; repeals Ord. 343 (15.12) 457 1974-1975 tax levy (Special) 458 Amends employees retirement system contract (Special) 459 Director of finance (2.16) 460 Zoning; repeals Ord. 282 (Repealed) 461 Emergency operations; repeals Ord. 411 (Repealed by 563) 462 Number not used 463 Amends §2 (a) of Ord. 382, dog licensing (Repealed by 492) 464 Clerk and treasurer compensation (Not codified) 465 Flood hazard areas (Repealed by 563) 466 Amends §203.1(6) of Ord. 460, zoning (Repealed by 490) 467 Amends §1 of Ord. 434, unsafe buildings (Repealed by 563) 468 Number not used 469 1975-1976 tax levy (Special) 470 Tabled 471 Adds Art. I §2, Art. III §2 (1) and Art. VIII §7 to Ord. 324; amends Art. III§§2 (c), (e), (f), (i), and 3 (c) of Ord. 324; repeals Art. III §§2 (g) and 3 (d) of Ord. 324; Subdivisions (Title 16) 472 Bicycles; repeals Ord. 200 (10.32) 473 Adds §203 to Ord. 460; repeals Ord. 394; zoning (Repealed by 490) 474 Oversize and overweight vehicles (10.32) 475 Amends §§1, 8, and 9 of Ord. 456, electrical code (15.12) 476 Repeals Ord. 405 (Repealer) 477 1976-1977 tax levy (Special) 478 Bingo (Repealed by 542) 479 Adopts fire code; repeals Ord. 447 (Repealed by 528) 480 Rezone (Special) 481 Amends Ord. 382, dog licenses (Repealed by 492) 482 Planning commission; repeals Ords. 106, 168, and 444 and res. 1976-24 (2.24) 443 Amends §2 of Ord. 471, subdivisions (Title 16) 484 Amends §6 (h) of Ord. 363, city manager (2.12) 485 Rezone (Special) 486 1977-1978 tax levy (Special) 487 Adoption of plumbing code; repeals Ord. 427 (Repealed by 526) 488 Adoption of building codes; repeals Ord. 428 and 448 (Repealed by 515) 489 Rejected 490 Zoning; repeals Ord. 460 (17.04-17.96) 491 Amends §5 of Ord. 478, bingo (Repealed by 542) 492 Animals; repeals Ord. 382 (6.04, 6.08, 6.12, 6.16, 6.20, 6.24, 6.28) 493 Repeals §522 of Ord. 416 (Repealed by 508) 494 Amends §302 of Ord. 416, sewers (13.08) 496 Flood hazard areas (15.24) 497 Utility undergrounding (12.16) 498 Rezone (Special) 499 Pipeline franchise (Special) 500 Adds §2-d (a) to Ord. 333, business licenses (5.04) 500 Amends §§401.3 and 402.3 of Ord. 490, zoning (17.32) 501 Amends §1 of ord. 456, electrical code (15.12) 502 Building permit fees (Repealed by 563) 503 General plan revision fees (15.32) 504 Amends §§304.6 and 304.8 of Ord. 490, zoning (17.32) 505 Amends employees retirement system contract (Special) 506 Building service facility fee (15.36) 507 Rezone (Special) 508 Repeals Ord. 493 (Repealer) 509 Rezone (Special) 510 Rezone (Special) 511 Destruction of records (Special) 512 Off-street parking for handicapped persons (10.20) 513 Interim urgency zoning study (Special) 514 Amends §2 of Ord. 513, interim zoning study (Special) 515 Adoption of building codes; repeals Ords. 428, and 488 (Repealed by 548) 516 Interim zoning provisions (Not adopted ) 517 Possession of alcoholic beverage containers in public places (9.04) 518 Hours of park operation (12.24) 519 Not adopted 520 Building moratorium (Special) 521 Not adopted 522 Amends §2 of Ord. 329, sewers (13.04) 523 Amends §§109 and 106 (F) (1) and (7) of Ord. 416, sewers (13.08) 524 Adds to §409, 25 and adds Art. XI to Ord., 490, zoning (Special) 525 Building moratorium (Special) 526 Adoption of plumbing code; repeals Ord. 487 (15.16) 527 Purchasing (3.04) 528 Adopts fire code; repeals Ord. 479 (15.20) 529 Cable television systems; repeals Ord. 402 (5.36) 530 Building permit fees (15.08) 531 Repeals and replaces §8-a, 8-b, 8-c, and 8-d of Ord. 333, business licenses (5.20) 532 Repeals and replaces §7-i (a) and 7-i (b) of Ord. 440, business licenses (5.20) 533 Not adopted 534 Not adopted 535 Amends §§522 and 809 of Ord. 416, sewers (13.08) 536 Adds to §4 of Ord. 525, building moratorium (Special) 537 Amends §3 of Ord. 524, interim zoning amendment (Special) 538 Amends §10 of Ord. 527, purchasing (3.04) 539 Not adopted 540 Election date (2.32) (repealed by Ordinance 787) 541 Repeals Ord. 164 and 245 (Repealer) 542 Bingo; repeals Ord. 478 (5.32) 543 Community improvement agency (Repealed by 582) 544 Excavations (12.12) 545 Abandoned vehicles (8.20) 546 Amends §303 (d) of Ord. 515, building codes (Repealed by 548) 547 Subdivision regulations (16.04-16.68) 548 Adoption of Uniform Codes; repeals Ord. 515 (15.04) 549 CATV franchise (Special) 550 CATV franchise (Special) 551 CATV franchise (Special) 552 Amends §13 of Ord. 492, wild animals and reptiles (6.04) 553 Applying certain California vehicle Code provisions of Valley Mobile Home Community (Special) 554 Adds § 13A to Ord. 370; amends §521 of Ord. 416, providing liens for garbage collection fee and sewer charge delinquencies (8.12, 13.08) 555 Amends Part IV of Resolution 1972-17, heavy commercial vehicle on residential Streets (not codified) 556 Rezone (Special) 557 Laundries and Laundromats water discharge; repeals Article I of Ord. 523 (13.08) 558 Amends Ord. 361, abandoned vehicles (8.20) 559 Adopts Beaumont Community Improvement Plan and Project Area (Repealed by 571) 560 Permit streamlining (15.40) 561 Adopts state conflict of interest plan (2.36) 562 Parking restrictions (10.24) 563 Amends §13 (b) of Ord. 542, deleting reference to §13 (a); repeals Ord. 1, 4, 5, 13, 18, 23, 31, §1, of Ord. 36, §§2, 4-20, 21-26, 27, 28, 30-33, 35-38 of Ord. 37, 38, 39, 40, 45, 47, 57, 59, 60, 63, 64, 66, 67, 78, 86, §§4, 6 of Ord. 87, 90, 92, 95, 96, 98, 101, 116, 117, 123, 126, 132, 137, 138, 139, 140, 144, 153, 154, 155, 156, 158, 160, 161, 162, 166, 170, 171, 173, 174, 185, 192, 195, 199, 204, 208, 222, 229, 233, 247, 248, §3 of Ord. 249, 253, 266, 273, 275, 278, 283, §§4 (b), 5 (b), (3) and 6.1 of Ord. 288, 312, 315, 317, §7 of Ord. 325, §8-d of ord. 333, 432, 434, 435, 461, 465, 467, §8 of Ord. 472, 502, §13 (a) of Ord. 542, general repealing ordinance (3.24, 5.32) 564 Right of entry (2.40) 565 General penalty (1.16) 566 General provisions (1.04) 567 Not adopted 568 Prezone (Special) 569 Not adopted 570 Amends §4 of Ord. 3, §10 of Ord. 293, §§5 and 6 of Ord. 383, §4 of Ord. 472 and §2 of Ord. 496, general amending ordinance (2.08, 3.20, 5.28, 10.36, 12.16) 571 Repeals Ord. 559 (Repealer) 572 Property nuisance abatement (8.32) 573 Sewer service charge collection (Not codified) 574 Alarm system monitoring fee (8.36) 575 Not adopted 576 Prezone (Special) 577 Use of another's property or container for disposal of debris (8.12) 578 Amends §4 (e) of Ord. 333, business license enforcement authority (5.04) 579 Amends of Ord. 492 §§3 and 72, animal control (6.04) 580 Repeals §600.5-7 (a, b, c) of Ord. 490, zoning (Repealed by 590) 581 Amends retirement system contract (2.44) 582 Repeals Ch. 2, 52 (Repealer) 583 Not adopted 584 Prezone (Special) 585 Utility user tax 586 Prezone (Special) 587 Code adoption (1.01) 588 Prezone (Special) 589 Amends §§3.24.040(B), (3, 4) and 3.24.050(B), (3, 4), sales and use tax (3.24) 590 Repeals and replaces Ord. 490, zoning (Not codified) 591 Prezone (Special) 592 Creates Ch. 2.14, code enforcement officer (2.14) 593 Prezone (Special) 594 Amends zoning map (Special) 595 Repeals and replaces §2.04.040, council meeting rules of procedure; repeals §§ 2.40.050 through 2.04.300 (2.04) 596 Adds §15.04.020, penalty for violation of uniform codes; amends §1.16.030, general Penalty; repeals §15.16.130 (1.16, 15.04) 597 Adds Ch. 2.54, environmental review (2.54) 598 Not adopted 599 Adds Ch. 15.38, building inspector (15.38) 600 Adds §§17.30.200 through 17.30.220, zoning (Repealed by 590) 601 Amends zoning map (Special) 602 Adds Ch. 13.16, mobile home rent review (13.16) 603 Adds Ch. 17.38, mobile homes (Repealed by 590) 604 Rezone (Special) 605 Amends §§17.08.480 and 17.32.030, zoning (Repealed by 590) 606 Amends zoning map (Special) 607 Amends Title 17, zoning (Repealed by 590) 608 Not adopted 609 Rezone (Special) 610 Rezone (Special) 611 Rezone (Special) 612 Rezone (Special) 613 Adds Ch. 9.30, discharge of firearms (9.30) 614 Adds §12.12.155, utility fee waiver (12.12) 615 Amends zoning map (Special) 616 Not adopted 617 Amends Title 17 to add Section 17.40.325-8, display of merchandise in the General-Commercial (C-G) Zone (17.40) 618 Amends §§17.14.025-1, 17.70.005 (d) (2) (a), 17.70.015 (3) and 17.90.015-1, to Provide ten (10) day notice for public hearings (17.14, 17.70, 17.90) 619 Rezone (Special) 620 Rezone (Special) 621 Rezone (Special) 622 Rezone (Special) 623 Amends §§17.20.210-10, 17.20.310-10. 17.35.010-3, 17.35.025-1 and 2 (17.20, 17.35) 624 Rezone (Special) 625 Revoked 626 Adds §13.16.080 (E), mobile home rent review (13.16) 627 Adds Ch. 13.20, sewers (13.20) 628 Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.04, food handlers (8.04) 629 Utility tax (13.14) 630 Rezone (Special) 631 Amends §16.40.110, subdivisions (16.40) 632 Rezone (Special) 633 Amends §17.55-020-g.3 (17.55) 634 Amends Ch. 8.20, abandoned vehicles (8.20) 635 Cable television franchise (Special) 636 Rezone (Special) 637 Rezone (Special) 638 Repeals and replaces §§17.20.300 through 17.20.310, 17.20.115-9 and 17.65.105-3; Adds §17.20.210-11, requirements for residential zones (17.20, 17.65) 639 Adds Subsection C §8.20.190, making violations of Ch. 8.20 infractions (8.20) 640 (Not codified) 641 Rezone (Special) 642 Rezone (Special) 643 Rezone (Special) 644 Repeals and replaces Subsection 17.60.020 A.1, on site advertising structures and Signs (17.60) 645 Repeals and replaces §§17.50.100, 17.50.105 and 17.50.205, poultry processing as a Permitted use in M-C and M-L zones (17.50) 646 Rezone (Special) 647 Rezone (Special) 648 Repeals and replaces §§13.08.180 through 13.08.390 and 13.08.440, 13.08.660, Procedure for setting charges for construction review of, connection to, and the use of public sewers by resolution of the City Council of the City of Beaumont (13.08) 649 Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.24 and repeals §§17.04.070 through 17.04.090, Planning Commission and Community Development (2.24, 17.04) 650 Amends Title 17 by adding a portion to V 17.40.305 to comply with the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act (17.40) 651 Rezone (Special) 652 Repeals and replaces §17.55.005 through 17.55.200 and repeals §17.80.105 (d) (5), off-street parking and loading (17.55, 17.80) 653 Repeals and replaces §17.65.205, general landscaping provisions (17.65) 654 Rezone (Special) 655 Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.24, curfew for minors (9.24) 656 Rezone (Special) 657 Rezone (Special) 658 Repeals and replaces §17.80.010 and modifies §17.60.200 (17.80, 17.60) 659 Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.24, flood hazard prevention (15.24) 660 Adds Ch. 5.26 to Title 5, solicitation (5.26) 661 Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.90 and §17.14.005; adds §§17.12.170 through 17.12.200, zoning amendments, change of zone and general plans (17.90, 17.14, 17.12) 662 Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.14, general and specific plans (17.14) 663 Rezone (Special) 664 Repeals and replaces Ch. 10.20, parking for disabled persons (17.14) 665 Cable television franchise (Special) 666 Adds Ch. 17.36 to T. 17, specific planning area zone (17.36) 667 Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.28, moving buildings (15.28) 668 Repeals And replaces §17.60.005, advertising regulations (17.60) 669 Prezone (Special) 670 Penal Code Requirements (Special) 671 Amending Contract with PERS (Special) 672 Prezone (Special) 673 Change of zone (Special) 674 Prezone (Special) 675 Rezone (Special) 676 Prezone (Special) 677 Adds Ch. 16.61 to T. 16, contiguous parcels (16.61) 678 Repeals and replaces §§2.08.100 and 2.08.110 and repeals §§2.08.120, 2.08.130 and 2.08.140, City Council Member salaries 679 Adds §§17.20.121, 17.20.121 and 17.20.122, R-LM Zone (17.20) 680 Repeals and replaces CH. 6.16 and §6.20.110 and adds §6.24.050, dogs-licenses, tags and fees (6.16, 6.20, 6.24) 681 Adds Ch. 5.38, filming permits 682 Amending Contract with PERS (Special) 683 Cable television franchise (Special) 684 Adds Ch. 6.21, vicious dogs (6.21) 685 Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.32, nuisances (8.32) 686 Prezone (Special) 687 Prezone (Special) 688 Repeals and replaces §17.60.200 and adds §17.60.210, non-conforming signs (17.60) 689 Adds §17.60.015 (A) (9), temporary outdoor advertising display (17.60) 690 Prezone (Special) 691 Repeals and replaces §13.12.010, claims against the City (13.12) 692 Repeals and replaces §17.40.325-8, outdoor merchandise displays (17.40) 693 Prezone (Special) 694 Adds §8.32.425, right of entry to abate (8.32) 695 Adds Ch. 15.42, earthquake hazard reduction (15.42) 696 Prezone (Special) 697 Prezone (Special) 698 Approve Development Agreement (Special) 699 Rezone (Special) 700 Prezone (Special) 701 Rezone (Special) 702 Repeals and replaces utility user tax (13.14) 703 Adds Ch. 8.40, Mobile source air pollution reduction (8.40) 704 Massage Ordinance, WITHDRAWN,NOT ADOPTED 705 Repealing and replacing §1.08.010, City Seal (1.08) 706 Adding Ch. 8.44, prohibiting public urination and defecation (8.44) 707 Repealing and replacing §5.28.030 and §5.28.100, permit application fee and Insurance requirements for automobile for hire (5.28) 708 Repealing and replacing Ch. 15.04, 15.08, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20, 15.24 (Also Adding Ch. 15.17) uniform codes and standards for building and construction (15.04, 15.08, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20, 15.24) 709 Adding Ch. 17.67, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs (17.67) 710 Declaring a need for a Redevelopment Agency to Function in the City of Beaumont and Declaring the Legislative Body of the Community to be the Agency (uncodified) 711 Repealing §17.65.300 of Title 17 Entitled Swimming Pool Spas and Similar. 712 Adds Ch. 10.42, Transportation Demand Management Requirements 713 Repealing and replacing Ch. 8.32, Nuisances 714 Repealing and replacing §2.12.070, pertaining to administration and personnel 715 Pre-Zoning (93-ANX-1-52) (uncodified) 716 Repealing and replacing §§8.32.160(c), Unlawful, unsafe or out-of-date signs; 8.32.345, Request for hearing before nuisance abatement hearing officer; 8.32.350, Nuisance abatement hearing board; 8.32.420, Abatement to city; 8.32.430, Immediate hazards; 8.32.480; Costs-collection-recorded lien; 8.32.530, Judicial review 717 Authorizing the Execution and Delivery of an Installment Sale Agreement and Authorizing and Directing Certain other Actions with respect. (uncodified) 718 Repealing and replacing §§8.20.010, Scope of article; 8.20.040, Abandoned vehicles hearing board-established-membership; 8.20.080, Administration and enforcement; 8.20.090, Right to enter on private property; 8.20.120, Abatement and removal-Notice of intention; 8.20.130, Abatement and removal-request for public hearing; 8.20.140, Abatement and removal-conduct of public hearings-decision; 8.20.150, Abatement and removal-appeals; 8.20.190, Penalties 719 Repealing and replacing §12.08.010, adoption of standard specifications 720 Rezoning (uncodified) 721 Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of Special Tax within Community Facilities District (uncodified) 722 Declaring a need for an Industrial Development Authority and Declaring that such Authority Shall Function (uncodified) 723 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and ICI Orangewood (uncodified) 724 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Hirair Hovnanian (uncodified) 725 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Loma Linda University (uncodified) 726 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Heartland Beaumont California L.T.D. (uncodified) 727 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and High Sixty Associates L.P. A Limited Partnership (uncodified) 728 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Coscan/Stewart Partnership (uncodified) 729 Rezone - Uncodified 730 Pre-zone - (uncodified) (92-ANX-2-53) 731 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Lockheed Corporation (uncodified) 732 Authorizing the Execution and Delivery of an Installment Sale Agreement and Authorizing and Directing Certain other Actions with respect. (uncodified) 733 Pre Zoning - (uncodified) (93-ANX-2-54) 734 Pre Zoning - (uncodified) (93-ANX-3-55) 735 Repealing and replacing § 8.32.495A, appeal to city council 736 Repealing and replacing §§9.24.010, Curfew established; 9.24.020, Responsibility of parent of guardian; 9.24.030, Violation and penalty 737 Adopting a School Facilities Mitigation Policy (uncodified) 738 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Leonard B. Olinger PHD (uncodified) 739 Re Zoning (uncodified) 740 Authorizing Police Officer to Remove Unattended Motor Vehicles on City Street, Highways and Alleys within the City Limits (uncodified) 741 Approving and Adopting the Redevelopment Plan for the Beaumont Redevelopment Project (uncodified) 742 Adds §3.24.060, Credit Against Taxes Due and Payable to Redevelopment Agency. 743 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Omega Homes (uncodified) 744 Adds Ch. 8.01, Regulation of Food Establishments and Food Facilities (superseded by Ord. 747) 745 Pre Zoning (uncodified) (91-ANX-3-51) 746 Repealing and replacing Ch. 17.60, Sign Regulations 747 Adds Ch. 8.01, Regulation of Food Establishments and Food Facilities 748 Amending Zoning Map - (uncodified) 749 Amending Certain Limitations with respect to the Redevelopment Plan for the Beaumont Redevelopment agency (uncodified) 750 Pre-Zoning (uncodified) 751 Re-Zoning (uncodified) 752 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 13 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 753 Pre-Zoning (uncodified) 754 Adds §3.28.030, Establishing transient occupancy tax rate 755 Adds Ch. 17.37, Bed and breakfast Overlay Zone 756 Amends §§17.40.210, 17.40.315, 17.40.505-2, 17.40-510, pertaining to conditional permit uses (C-N Zone) 757 Adds Ch. 10.38, Skateboarding and Roller-skating 758 Adds Ch. 13.21, Mobile Home Park Rent Stabilization 759 Adopting a CMP Land Use Coordination Process (uncodified) 760 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 3, 9, 10 and 11 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 761 Authorizing the Execution and Delivery of an Installment Sale Agreement and/or Amendment to an Installment Sale Agreement and Authorizing and Directing Certain other Actions with respect. (uncodified) 762 Establishing a Water Facilities Fee within the Southwest Properties Benefit District to Finance the Cost of Construction of Water Improvements (uncodified) 763 Establishing Stormwater/Urban Runoff Management and Discharge Controls (uncodified) 764 Zone Change (uncodified) 766 Requiring the Fire Chief to Designate Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones (uncodified) 767 Granting Arco Pipeline Company A Franchise Agreement (uncodified) 768 Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.24, Curfew for minors 769 Temporarily Prohibiting the Issuance of Use Permits for Hospitals, Nursing Homes, and Group Homes for the Treatment of General Hospital or Nursing Home Patients and for the Psychiatric Care and Treatment of Patients, both Inpatient and outpatient. (uncodified) 770 Urgency Ordinance Temporarily Prohibiting the Issuance of Use Permits for Hospitals, Nursing Homes, and Group Homes for the Treatment of General Hospital or Nursing Home Patients and for the Psychiatric Care and Treatment of Patients, both Inpatient and outpatient. (uncodified) 771 Withdrawn by Applicant 772 Requiring Conservation of Water in Accordance with the Adopted Beaumont Cherry Valley Water District Urban Water Plan and Recycled Water Master Plan (uncodified) 773 Requiring use of Recycled or Reclaimed Water in Accordance with State Law (uncodified) 774 Authorizing the Execution and Delivery of an Installment Sale Agreement and/or Amendment to an Installment Sale Agreement and Authorizing and Directing Certain other Actions with respect. (uncodified) 775 Establishing Service Charges and Fees for Recycled or Reclaimed Water in the City of Beaumont and the City Sphere of Influence (uncodified) 776 Temporarily Prohibiting the Issuance of Conditional Use Permits and other Discretionary Permits for Adult Oriented Businesses (uncodified) 777 Rescinding Ordinance No 731 (uncodified) 778 Zone Change (uncodified) 779 Zone Change (uncodified) 780 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Oak Valley Partners LLP (uncodified) 781 Repeals and replaces §3.24.060, Uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the City 782 Repeals §§8.36.010, and 8.36.020, pertaining to alarm system monitoring fees 783 Repeals §17.80.110, Adult Entertainment, and Adds Ch. 5.60, Adult-Oriented Businesses 784 Amends §§17.20.015-4, 17.20.010-4, 17.20.121-4, 17.20.205-4, 17.20.305-4, 17.40.515, pertaining to zoning regulations applicable to the regulation of residential care facilities and half-way houses 785 Repeals and replaces Ch. 6.32, Apiaries 786 Repeals §3.24.060, Uniform local sales and sue tax ordinance of the city 787 Consolidating of General Municipal Elections with the Statewide General Elections Held in November of Even Numbered Years (uncodified) 788 Establishing Speed Limits on Certain Streets in the City of Beaumont (uncodified) 789 Zone Change (uncodified) 790 Adopting a Development Agreement between the City of Beaumont and Stratford & Graham Developers, Inc. (Willow Springs) (uncodified) 791 Declaring unlawful the Failure to Maintain Private Landscaping and Establishing Criminal Penalties therefor (uncodified) 792 Zone Change (uncodified) 793 Repeals and replaces §§15.04.010, 15.12,010, 15.16.010, 15.1710B, and 15.20.010A, Adoption of Uniform Codes 794 Establishing Traffic Signal and Railroad Crossing Mitigation Fees (uncodified) 795 Establishing a Fire Station Development Fee (uncodified) 797 Declaring Intentions to require payment of Development Impact Fees for Sewer Trunk Main and Bridge and Major Thoroughfare Facilities (uncodified) 798 Contract with city and Cal PERS (uncodified) 799 Repeals and replaces §5.24.010 Penalty 800 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 14 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 801 Contract with city and Cal PERS (uncodified) 802 Repeals and replaces §10.28.050, Penalty 803 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 3 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 804 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 11A of 11 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 805 Repeals and replaces Ch. 6.16, Dog and Kennel Licenses 806 Adding Chapter 10.30 Regulating the Parking of Vehicles, Vessels and Other Personal Property for Sale 807 Amending Chapter 6.16 of the BMC Entitled "Dogs-Licenses and Tags 809 Adds Ch 9.10, Restrictions on the Public Display of Harmful Materials to Minors 810 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 9 & 10 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 811 Contact between the City and CAL PERS (uncodified) 812 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 1 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 813 Adds Ch. 10.44, Temporary Street Closures 814 Adds Ch. 3.36, Emergency Preparedness Facilities Fee 815 Adds Ch. 3.00, Purchasing and Personal Property; 3.01 Procurement of Professional Services; 3.02, Public Works Contracts, 3.03, Disposal of Surplus Personal and Real Property; Rescinds Ch. 3.04, Purchasing, in its entirety 816 Assuming the responsibility for the Enforcement of Division 13, Part 2.1 of the California Health and Safety Code and Related California Code of Regulations, Mobile home Parks Act (uncodified) 817 Zone Change (uncodified) 818 Amends Ch. 9.30, Dangerous Weapons 819 Amending Chapter 9.10 of the BMC Entitled Restrictions of the Public Display of Harmful Materials to Minors 820 Amends Ch. 5.36, Cable Television Franchises, in its entirety 821 Zone Change (uncodified) 822 Zone Change (uncodified) 823 Amends Ch. 8.32.025, Littering and public Property; 8.32.135, Landscape and Vegetation; 8.32.140, Infested Trees or Shrubs; 8.32.160, Unlawful, Unsafe, or Out-of-Date Signs; 8.32.180, Premises Maintenance; 8.32.270, Overgrown Plants 824 Zone Change (uncodified) 825 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 8 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 826 Adds Ch. 3.22 Road and Bridge Facility Fee 827 Amending Chapter 12.08 Public Works Standards 828 Amending Ch. 1.16, General Penalty 829 Amendment to Cal PERS (uncodified) 830 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 15 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 831 Zone Change (uncodified) 832 Pre Annexation Development Agreement Oak Valley Partners (uncodified) 833 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 1A of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 834 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 4A & 12A of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 835 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 10A of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 836 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 14B of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 837 Adds Ch. 3.22, Road and Bridge Facility Fee Program 838 Adds Ch. 9.02 Noise 839 Adds Ch. 3.23, Western Riverside County Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Program 840 Zone Change (uncodified) (Lowes Distribution Center) 841 Adds Ch. 1.20, Claims Against the City 842 Adopting Development Agreement Pulte Homes (uncodified) 843 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 12A of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 844 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 8 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 846 Establishing Compensation Received by City Council Members (uncodifed) 847 Adds 8.32.035, Portable Basketball Hoops 848 Adds Ch. 10.10, Recreational Vehicle and Utility Trailer Parking and Storage 849 Adds Ch. 3.26, San Timoteo Sewer Facility Fee 850 Adopting Development Agreement with LB/L Suncal Oak Valley LLC 851 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 17A of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 852 Amending Certain Time Limitations with Respect to Redevelopment Plan (uncodified) 853 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 18 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 854 Repealing Chapter 17.60 of the BMC (Urgency) 855 Repealing Chapter 17.60 of the BMC - TABLED 856 Repeals Ch. 17.60, Sign Regulations; Adds Ch. 17.61, Sign Regulations 857 Development Agreement Beaumont Retail Partners (uncodified) 858 Zone Change (uncodified) 859 Cal PERS Survival Benefits (uncodified) 860 Zone Change (uncodified) 861 Development Agreement Home Depot (uncodified) 862 Zone Change (uncodified) 863 Development Agreement Fellowship in the Pass Church (uncodified) 864 Development Agreement Rolling Hills Industrial (uncodified) 865 Development Agreement K. Hovnanians - Four Seasons (uncodified) 868 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 16 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 869 Development Agreement Pardee Homes (uncodified) 870 Adds Ch. 13.22, Regulation of City-Owned Railroad Track 871 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 8A of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 872 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 19A through 19F of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 873 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 6A1 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 874 Zone Change (uncodified) 875 Amending 3.23.040, Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Schedule 876 Urgency - Adds Ch. 8.50, Outdoor Lighting (uncodified) 877 Zone Change (uncodified) 878 Adds Ch. 8.50, Outdoor Lighting 879 Adds Ch. 12.30, Maintenance and Repair of Sidewalks 880 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 7A of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 881 Zone Change (uncodified) 882 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 7B of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 883 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 7C of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 884 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 7D of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 885 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 7E of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 886 Adds Ch. 3.34, Regional Park, Multipurpose Trail and Open Space Facility Fee 887 Zone Change (Annexation 05-ANX-05) 888 Zone Change (Annexation 05-ANX-03) 889 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 20 of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 890 Zone Change (uncodified) 891 Zone Change (uncodified) 892 Adding chapter 8.46 to the BMC Prohibiting Installation of Certain Water Softening Appliances" 893 Amendment to Contract with Cal PERS (uncodified) 894 Amends 3.23-010-3.23-090, Western Riverside County Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Program 895 Adds Ch. 8.36, Alarm Systems 896 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 8B of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 897 Acting as the Legislative Body of Community Facilities District 93-1, Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 8C of CFD 93-1 (uncodified) 898 Adds 10.08.050 through 10.08-100, Parking 903 Repeals and amends 13.14.040D 906 Adds Ch. 5.68, Tobacco Retailers 907 Amends 2.24.030, Members-Numbers; Amends 2.24.040, Members-Appointment Term 910 Adds Ch. 5.62, Graffiti Implement Sales License; Adds Ch. 9.34, Graffiti and related Vandalism 912 Adds Ch. 8.46, Permitting the installing Certain Water Softening Appliances 914 Amends. Ch. 9.02, Noise 919 Adds Ch. 5.64, Commercial Peddlers, Solicitors and Itinerant Merchants 920 Repeals Title 17, Zoning; Adds Title 17, Zoning 921 Amends Ch. 8.12, Mandatory Solid Waste Collection and Disposal 923 Amends Ch. 9.04, Alcoholic Beverage Containers in Public 926 Adds Ch. 9.22, Juvenile Daytime Loitering and Truancy 927 Adds Ch. 9.26, Repeat Curfew/Daytime Loitering Violators 928 Repeals and Adds Ch. 15.24, Flood plain Management 929 Amends 10.36.010-10.36.040, Bicycles 930 Amends Chapters 15.03, 15.04, 15.08, 15.10, 15.11, 15.12, 15.13, 15.16, 15.17, and 15.19 - Uniform Codes and Standards for Building and Construction 931 Amending Chapter 15.20-Reference County of Riverside fire Ordinance No. 787.3 932 Adding Chapter 5.35-Regulating State-Issued Franchises to Provide Video Services 933 Amending section 1.16.030 of Chapter 1.16 -"Violation-Infraction-Penalty" 934 Adding Section 8.12.025 - Unauthorized Disposal-Penalty " 935 Amending Title 6 - Animals 936 Adding Chapter 17.06 entitled Water Efficient Landscape Requirements 937 Adding Chapter 9.03 Entitled Regulation of Special Events 938 Amending Section 9.02.030 Regarding Prohibited Noise in Residential Zones 939 Gold Cart Transportation Plan 940 Adding Chapter 1.17 entitled Administrative Code Enforcement Remedies 942 Adding Chapter 8.54 entitled Regulation of Abandoned Residential Properties 943 [Adding Chapter 9.36 entitled] Panhandling, Soliciting and Aggressive Solicitations 944 Zone Change (uncodified) 945 Tabled (TUMF) 946 Adding Chapter 5.52 entitled Private Patrol Operators 947 Amending Section 1.17.250A of the BMC 10.06.09 949 Add Chapter 15.44 - Building Occupancy Placards 5/5/09 950 Amending Section 8.32.495D - Appeals to the City Council 5/5/09 951 Adding Chapter 5.62 Establishment of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries 5/5/09 952 Adding Chapter 9.32 Possession of Firearms on City Property Prohibited 6/2/09 953 Amending Title 10 - Vehicles & Traffic 9/1/09 954 Establishing 45 Day Moratorium on Collective Cultivation and Distribution of Medical Marijuana - Not Codified 955 Interim Urgency Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 954 - Not Codified 956 Urgency Ordinance Extending for 10 Month 15 Days the Terms and Conditions of Ordinance No. 954, as Amended by Ordinance No. 955 - Not Codified 957 Amending Chapter 8.32 Sections 8.32.300 through 8.32.350 and 8.32.495 10/06/09 958 Amending Sections 13.04.020 and 13.08 of the BMC Unlawful Discharge 10/20/09 959 Adding Chapter 13.09 Regulating Fats, Oils, and Grease (F.O.G.) Management in Food Service Establishments - 10/20/09 960 Amending Title 6 in its Entirely "Animals" - 10/20/09 961 Amending Chapter 17.09 of the BMC - Animal Keeping - 11/03/09 962 Repealing Chapter 3.23 Western Riverside County Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee Program - 10/20/09 963 Amending Chapter 17.06 of the Municipal Code Entitled "Landscape Standards" 11/17/09 964 Zone Change - 7/6/10 965 Zone Change - 04/06/10 966 Moratorium on Collective Cultivation and/or Distribution and Prohibition of Medical Marijuana within the City - 3/16/2010 967 Amending Section 17.07.030.G of the Beaumont Municipal Code Regarding Billboard Policy - 4/20/10 968 Adopting Chapter 3.38 regarding Exhaustion of Remedies with Respect to Claims Against the City - 04/20/10 969 Amending Chapter 10.50, Golf Cart Transportation Plan - 06/01/10 970 Amending Chapter 10.50, Golf Cart Transportation Plan - 06/15/10 971 Amending Section 17.04.080 Entitled Regulating "Enclosures for Solid Waste and Recycled Materials" - 10/05/10 972 Requiring payment of development impact fees for recycled water facilities, appointing time and place of a public meeting and of a public hearing and directing notice thereof, describing proposed boundaries of benefit area - March, 2011 973 Un-Codified - Adopting a Zone Change to Pre-Zone 38.25 Acres of Land from County of Riverside W-2 (Controlled Development) to City of Beaumont P-F (Public Facilities) (Annexation No. 10-ANX-04) - 12/07/10 974 Adding Section 9.03.155 Entitled "Special Events Recycling" - 10/05/10 975 Adding Chapter 8.13 Entitled "Mandatory Recycling of Construction and Demolition Waste" - 10/05/10 976 Adding Chapter 8.14 Entitled Mandatory Recycling Requirements for Commercial Facilities - 10/05/10 977 Amending Chapter 17.14 "Definitions" of the Beaumont Municipal Code - 12/07/10 978 Amending Chapter 17.03.120 "Permitted Uses for Base Zone Districts" of the Beaumont Municipal Code - 12/07/10 979 Amending Chapter 17.05.04 "Parking Requirements for Land Uses" of the Beaumont Municipal Code - 12/07/10 980 Adding Section 17.15 of Title 17 of the Beaumont Municipal Code to Address Single Room Occupancy Facilities - 12/07/10 981 Adding Chapter 15.24 of the Beaumont Municipal Code to assure Fair Housing Protections for Individuals with Disabilities - 12/07/10 982 Revising Regulations Applicable to the Granting of Density Bonuses and Related Incentives, and Amending Title 17 of the Beaumont Municipal Code - 12/07/10 983 Amending Chapter 8.08 of the Beaumont Municipal Code to Authorize Summary Abatement of Combustible Vegetation - 11/06/10 984 Amending Section 17.07.080.C of the Beaumont Municipal Code regarding "Special Event Signs" - 12/07/10 985 Amending Chapter 1.17 of the Beaumont Municipal Code Entitled "Administrative Code Enforcement" - 1/1/2011 986 Adding Section 10.10.025 to Chapter 10.10 Restricting RV Parking on Commercial, Retail and Shopping Center Properties 987 Adding Chapter 17.15 to Title 17 (Zoning) of the Beaumont Municipal Code to Prohibit the Establishment and the Operation of Medical Cannabis Cooperatives and Collectives in the City; or, in the Event a Ban is Held Unlawful by the Judiciary, to Regulate the Establishment of Cooperatives and Collectives - 3/15/2011 (and repeals Code Section 5.62) 988 Added Chapter 2.30 of the Beaumont Municipal Code Entitled, Establishing the "Board of Administrative Appeals" 3/1/2011 989 Amending Chapter 17.03.130 "Sixth Street Overlay" of the Beaumont Municipal Code - 3/1/2011 990 Amending Chapter 17.30.130 "Urban Village Specific Plan Overlay" of the Beaumont Municipal Code - 3/1/2011 991 Amending Title 5 of the Beaumont Municipal Code by Adding Chapter 5.63 Regarding Medical Cannabis Dispensaries - 3/15/2011 992 Repealing Section 5.26 and Amending Section 5.64 "Solicitation" of the Beaumont Municipal Code - 5/3/2011 994 Adding Section 8.12.023 of the Beaumont Municipal Code Re: "Unauthorized Disposal-Prohibited" - 4/19/2011 995 Amending Section 1.16.030 of Chapter 1.16 of the Beaumont Municipal Code Entitled "Violation-Infraction-Penalty" - 4/19/2011 996 Amending Chapter 15 of the Beaumont Municipal Code Re: Buildings and Construction - 5/3/2011 997 Amending Sections 8.08.130, 8.28.020, 8.23.520, 8.36.140, 8.46.050, 8.50.100.5B, 9.02.090, 9.04.040, 9.10.050, 9.12.060, 9.22.050, 9.30.030, 9.32.050, 9.36.060, 12.16.120, 12.24.030, 12.28.040, 13.04.160, 13.08.650 and 13.12.020 of the Beaumont Municipal Code - 5/17/2011 998 Beaumont Municipal Code Entitled "Prohibition on Reapplication after Revocation" - 7/19/2011 999 Amending Section 2.08.100 Regarding City Council Salaries 1000 Amending Section 17.07.070.a.12 regarding Flags 1001 Un-codified Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Beaumont, California, Determining It Will Implement Part 1.9 of Division 24 of the California Health and Safety Code to Permit the Continued Existence and Operation of the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Beaumont 1002 Renumbering Section 17.15 of Title 17 Entitled "Single Room Occupancy Facilities" to Section 17.16 1003 Amending Section 17.11.100 Regarding "Swimming Pools, Spa and Similar 1004 Adding Chapter 6.05 regarding the Disposal of Dog and Horse Feces on Public and Private Property - 11/4/11 1005 Amending Chapter 6.10 and 6.12 regarding Potentially Dangerous Dogs and Vicious Animals - 11/4/11 1006 Adding Section 10.08.075 to Chapter 10.08 Prohibiting Camping or Sleeping in Motor Vehicles 11/4/11 1007 Amending Table 17.03-3 and Table 17.03-4 of Chapter 17 of the Beaumont Municipal Code Entitled Zoning - 12/20/11 1008 Amending Chapter 5.32 Entitled "Bingo" - 12/20/11 1009 Adding Chapter 17.16 "Parolee/Probationer Home" - 12/20/11 1010 Adding chapter 13.24 Entitled "Storm Water and Urban Runoff Management and Repealing Ordinance No. 763 - 2/7/12 1011 Un-codified - Establishing Speed Limits - 2/21/12 1012 Amending Section 6.04.080 regarding Annoying or Barking Dogs Constitutes a Nuisance - 2/21/12 1013 Adding Chapter 9.38 to include Residency Requirements for Sex Registrants - 3/20/12 (Repealed by Ord. 1055) 1014 Amending Chapter 8.50 "Outdoor Lighting" - 5/1/12 1015 Un-codified - Establishing the amount of compensation received by members of the City Council - 4/3/12 1016 Adding Chapter 17.03.95 Commercial, Light Manufacturing Zone (C-M)," Amending Chapter 17.03.020 "Establishment of Zone District," Amending Chapter 17.03.120 "Permitted Uses For Base Zone Districts," and Amending the Official Zoning Map within Title 17 "Zoning" of The Beaumont Municipal Code (12-RZ-01) - 5/15/12 1017 Amending Chapter 17.03.060D "Guest Units" - 4/17/12 1018 Repealing Chapter 5.63 "Medical Cannabis Dispensaries" and Chapter 17.15 "Prohibition or, Alternatively, Regulation of Medical Cannabis Cooperatives or Collectives" of the Beaumont Municipal Code and Establishing a 45-day Moratorium on the Approval of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries, Collectives and Cooperatives within the City of Beaumont to allow the City Council time to Study and Consider Enactment of Development Standards and Definitions - 5/1/12 1019 Amending Chapter 9.03.020I and 9.03.050B of 9.03 "Regulation of Special Events" - 5/15/12 1020 Amending Sections 6.02.005k, 6.16.040d, and 17.09.030c - Adopted 05/05/12 1021 Un-Codified - Extending for 10-Months 15 Days the terms and conditions of Ordinance No. 1018, Declaring a Moratorium on the Approval of Medical Marijuana dispensaries, Collectives and Cooperatives within the City of Beaumont to Allow the City Council Time to Study and Consider Enactment of Development Standards and Definitions - Adopted 06/05/12 1022 Un-Codified - Authorizing the Levy of a Services Special Tax and a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 17C of Community Facilities District No. 93-1- Adopted 08/21/12 1023 Establishing the Salt Mitigation Facility Development Impact Mitigation Fee Program TABLED 12/04/12 1024 Un-Codified - Establishing the Fourth street Extension Mitigation Fee Program Adopted 10/02/12 1025 Amending Section 17.03.120 "Permitted Uses for Base Zones", Amending Section 17.03.150 "Permitted Uses for Overlay Zone Districts", and Amending Section 17.14.030 "Definitions (A through Z) - Adopted 09/18/12 1026 Amending Chapter 5.40 entitled "Fortune Telling" - Adopted 10/02/12 1027 Repealing Section 1.16.050 ET SEQ of Chapter 1.16 Entitled "Administrative Fines and Penalties" - Adopted 10/16/12 1028 Amending Section 17.09.050 "Development Standards for Pens, Stables, and other Animal Keeping uses", and Amending Section 17.09.030.B "Small Animals" - Adopted 12/18/2012 1029 Amending Section 8.50.070.2 "Maximum Wattage and Shielding", Section 8.50.090.10 "Layout of Poles", Section 8.50.090.11 "Layout of Poles at Pedestrian Conflict Areas for Residential Neighborhoods" and Adding Section 8.50.095 "Diagram and Exhibits" within Chapter 8.50 "Outdoor Lighting" - Adopted 12/18/12 1030 An Uncodified Ordinance Establishing Speed Limits on Certain Streets in the City of Beaumont - adopted 2-5-13 1031 Adding Chapter 9.40 "Psychoactive Bath Salts, Psychoactive Herbal Incense and Other Synthetic Drugs" to Title 9 of the Beaumont Municipal Code Prohibiting the Distribution and Sale of Certain Intoxicating Chemical Compounds Known as Synthetic Drugs - Adopted 2.19.2013 1032 Urgency Ordinance Extending for 12 months the terms and conditions of Ordinance No. 1021, Declaring a Moratorium on the Approval of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries, Collectives and Cooperatives within the City of Beaumont to Allow the City Council time to study and Consider Enactment of Development Standards and Definitions. Adopted 5-7-13 1032 Urgency Ordinance Extending for 12 months the terms and conditions of Ordinance No. 1021, Declaring a Moratorium on the Approval of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries, Collectives and Cooperatives within the City of Beaumont to Allow the City Council time to study and Consider Enactment of Development Standards and Definitions. Adopted 5-21-13 1033 Adding Chapter 5.62 to Title 5 of the Beaumont Municipal Code to Prohibit the Establishment and the Operation of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries, Cooperatives and Collectives in the City 1034 Adding Section 8.32.007 to Chapter 8.32 "Nuisances" Authorizing Summary Abatement Power 1035 Amending Chapter 6.10.030 of Chapter 6.10 RE: Procedures for Declaring a Dog Potentially Dangerous 1036 Adding Section 8.42 to Title 8 of the Beaumont Municipal Code - Smoking in Public Parks 1037 Amending the Beaumont Municipal Code Adding Chapter 5.70 to Prohibit Mobile Marijuana Dispensaries Necessary for Preserving Public Peace, Health, and Safety 1038 Amending Section 9.30.020 of the Beaumont Municipal Code RE: Dangerous Dogs 1039 Adding Section 6.02.142 to the Beaumont municipal Code Prohibiting the Sale of Animals as Swap Meets 1040 Adding Section 10.22 to the Beaumont Municipal Code Entitled Regulation of Parking for Street Sweeping 1041 Amending Chapter 17.03.120 Permitted Uses for Base Zones, Amending Chapter 17.03.150 Permitted Uses for Overlay Zone Districts 1042 Amending Chapter 15.20 Fire Code Fire Code of the Beaumont municipal Code 1043 Amending Section 5.62 of the Beaumont Municipal Code RE: The Prohibition of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries, ETC in the City 1044 Repealing Chapter 8.13 of the Beaumont Municipal Code Entitled Mandatory Recycling of Construction and Demolition Waste 1045 Repealing Ordinance 762 Providing for a Water Facilities Fee 1046 Amending Chapter 9.38 of the Beaumont Municipal Code (Residency Restrictions for Registered Sex Offenders) 1047 Amending Section 8.36 of the Beaumont Municipal Code (False Alarm Response Fines) 1048 Amending chapter 17.09 of the Beaumont Municipal Code (animal Keeping) 1049 Un-Codified Amending Ordinance no. 884 and Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax Within Improvement Area 7Dof Community Facilities District 1050 Adding Chapter 5.27 "Application Process" of the Beaumont Municipal Code 1051 Amending Section 9.38 of the Beaumont Municipal Code 1052 Un-Codified - Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 25 of Community Facilities District No. 93-1 of the City of Beaumont Pursuant to the Approved Rate and Method of apportionment of Special Tax 1053 Un-Codified - Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 7A1 of Community Facilities District No. 93-1 of the City of Beaumont 1054 Amending Chapter 8.50 of the Beaumont Municipal Code (Outdoor Lighting) 1055 Repealing Chapter 9.38 of the Beaumont Municipal Code (Residency Restrictions for Registered Sex Offenders) 1056 Un-Codified - Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 8E of Community Facilities District No. 93-1 of the City of Beaumont Pursuant to the Approved Rate and Method of apportionment of Special Tax 1057 Un-Codified - Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 8F of Community Facilities District No. 93-1 of the City of Beaumont Pursuant to the Approved Rate and Method of apportionment of Special Tax 1058 Un-Codified - Authorizing the Levy of a Special Tax within Improvement Area No. 17D of Community Facilities District No. 93-1 of the City of Beaumont Pursuant to the Approved Rate and Method of apportionment of Special Tax 1059 Amending Chapter 2.04 of the Beaumont Municipal Code (City Council Meetings) 1060 Amending Chapter 3.01 of the Beaumont Municipal Code (Procurement of Professional Services)  
    Beginning with the 2018 Republication, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 1025  9-18-2012 1 17.03.120 2 17.03.150 3 17.14.030 1061  9- 1-2015 3       Added 2.08.160 1062  9-15-2015 3       Added 2.35.010-2.35.070 1063 10- 6-2015 1(Exh. A)       Added 15.46.010-15.46.070 1064 10- 6-2015 3       Added 2.08.120 1065  1- 5-2016 1(Exh. A) 12.30.010-12.30.130 1066 10- 6-2015 3 3.12.020 1067  1-19-2016 1(Exh. A) 9.02.010-9.02.160 1068  1- 5-2016 1 12.20.060 2 12.20.070 1069  1-16-2016 4(Exh. A) 17.06.010-17.06.130 1070  5- 3-2016 4 2.12.070 1071  5-17-2016 4(Exh. A) 17.07.070 A.15. 5(Exh. B) 17.07.070 B. 6(Exh. C)       Added 17.07.080 F. 1074  7- 5-2016 4 17.03.120 5, 6 17.03.150 1075  7- 5-2016 4(Exh. A) 17.11.110 1076  7- 5-2016 3 2.35.010-2.35.070 1078 12- 6-2016 4(Exh. A)       Added 5.51.010-5.51.100 1079 12- 6-2016 4(Exh. A) 15.03.010-15.03.025 5(Exh. B) 15.04.010-15.04.030 6 15.08.010, 15.08.020 7 15.10.010, 15.10.020 8 15.11.010, 15.11.020 9 15.12.010, 15.12.020 10 15.13.010, 15.13.020 11 15.15.010, 15.15.020 12 15.16.010, 15.16.020 13 15.17.010, 15.17.020 14 15.19.010, 15.19.020 15 15.20.010-15.20.030 16 15.22.010, 15.22.020 1080 12-20-2016 4 17.03.060 D. 5       Added 17.03.070 G. 1087  6-20-2017 1 13.08.250 1089  8-15-2017 4(Exh. A)       Added 15.48.010-15.48.070 1090  8-15-2017 5 5.62.010-5.62.050 6 5.70.010-5.70.050 1091  9- 5-2017 1       Added 3.39.010-3.39.100 1092  9- 5-2017 4(Exh. B) 3.22.010-3.22.110 1093 10- 3-2017 3(Exh. A) 13.24.010-13.24.200 1094 11- 7-2017 13.20.100, 13.20.105, 13.20.200-13.20.296, 13.20.300-13.20.340, 13.20.400-13.20.470, 13.20.500-13.20.510 1096 11-21-2017 3(Exh. A) 3.02.010-3.02.090 1097 11-21-2017 3(Exh. A) 3.00.010-3.00.040 3.01.010-3.01.120 1100  5-15-2018 4, 5 17.03.150 1101  6-19-2018 3(Exh. A)       Added 9.41.010-9.41.050 1102  8-21-2018 3       Added 2.08.150 1106  5- 7-2019 4 17.03.120 5 17.03.150 1107  5-21-2019 4 5.62.010-5.62.050 5 5.70.010-5.70.050 1109  6-18-2019 2       Rpld 8.12.010-8.12.090       Rpld 8.14.010-8.14.030 2(Exh. A)       Added 8.12.010, 8.12.020, 8.12.100-8.12.160, 8.12.200-8.12.240, 8.12.300-8.12.320, 8.12.400-8.12.420, 8.12.500-8.12.600, 8.12.700-8.12.750  
