BLYTHE - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Blythe, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 9, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

PREFACE\ 
    The Blythe Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1978, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of J. Scott Zundel, city attorney. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 9, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 891, passed September 11, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE\ 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06 can be added between Chapter 2.04 and Chapter 2.08. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 9, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 9, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 838 1-26-10 Include 10 839 1-26-10 Include 10 840 1-26-10 Include 10 841 1-26-10 Include 10 842 3-23-10 Include 10 843 2-9-10 Include 10 845 6-8-10 Include 10 846 12-14-10 Include 10 847 1-11-11 Include 10 848 3-8-11 Include 10 849 7-12-11 Omit 10 850 7-26-11 Include 10 851 7-26-11 Omit 10 852 9-13-11 Omit 10 853 10-25-11 Include 11 854 9-11-12 Include 11 855 1-8-13 Include 12 856 2-12-13 Omit 12 857 2-12-13 Omit 12 858 2-12-13 Omit 12 860 9-10-13 Include 13 861 9-10-13 Include 13 862 10-8-13 Include 13 863 11-12-13 Include 13 864 8-12-14 Include 13 865 1-27-15 Include 14 867 1-27-15 Include 14 868 2-10-15 Include 14 869 5-12-15 Include 14 870 5-12-15 Include 14 871 5-26-15 Include 14 872 8-25-15 Include 15 873 1-12-16 Include 15 874 2-23-16 Omit 15 875 2-23-16 Omit 15 876 2-23-16 Omit 15 878 7-12-16 Include 16 879 11-8-16 Include 16 880 1-10-17 Omit 16 881 4-11-17 Omit 16 882 5-9-17 Include 16 883 6-13-17 Include 16 884 8-8-17 Include 17 885 10-10-17 Include 17 886 11-14-17 Omit 17 887 11-28-17 Omit 17 888 4-24-18 Include 17 890 8-14-18 Include 17 891 9-11-18 Include 17  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption of code. 
    There is adopted that certain codification of certain ordinances of the city entitled "Blythe Municipal Code," published by order of the city council and bearing the date of 1978, and amended as of October 1, 1981. Three copies of the code are on file in the office of the city clerk and are open for public inspection. The Municipal Code and the secondary codes adopted by reference in the Municipal Code are adopted by reference under the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the state. 
(Ord. 591 (part), 1982) 
1.01.020 - Effect of adoption. 
    The adoption of the Municipal Code and the repeal of ordinances by the Municipal Code do not affect the following matters: 
A.  Actions and proceedings which began before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
B.  Prosecution for ordinance violations committed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
C.  Licenses and penalties due and unpaid at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the collection of these licenses and penalties; 
D.  Bonds and cash deposits required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance; 
E.  Matters of record which refer to or are connected with an ordinance the substance of which is included in the Municipal Code. These references shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 591 (part), 1982) 
1.01.030 - Continuation of existing law. 
    Where it is substantially the same as existing law, the Municipal Code shall be considered a continuation of existing law and not a new enactment. 
(Ord. 591 (part), 1982) 
1.01.040 - Repeal of existing ordinances. 
    Every ordinance which is not excluded from the Municipal Code by Section 1.01.050 or which is not specifically continued in force by this code is repealed, except Ordinances 588, 589, and 590. This section does not revive an ordinance which was repealed before the adoption of the code. 
(Ord. 591 (part), 1982) 
1.01.050 - Exclusions from code. 
    Every ordinance governing the following subject matter is excluded from the Municipal Code and is not affected by the repeal provisions of it: 
A.  Alteration of city boundaries; 
B.  Contracts to which the city is a party; 
C.  Elections to which the city is a party; 
D.  Fixing the rate and making a levy of city taxes; 
E.  Granting, altering or withdrawing a franchise; 
F.  Land use classifications of specific property; 
G.  Naming roads and streets. 
(Ord. 591 (part), 1982) 
1.01.060 - Maintenance and distribution of the code. 
A.  Not less than three copies of the Municipal Code, certified by the city clerk, shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk for examination and use by the public. Amendments to this code shall be noted, by ordinance number, on the appropriate pages of all three copies of the Code, and three complete files of amendatory ordinances, indexed for ready reference, shall be maintained in the office of the clerk for use and examination by the public. 
B.  Distribution or sale of additional copies of the code shall be made as directed by the city council. 
(Ord. 591 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specially defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City" and "town" each mean the city of Blythe, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Blythe, California, and such territory outside of the city of Blythe over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Council" means the city council of the city of Blythe. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen holding office. 
C.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of Blythe, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
E.  "May" is permissive. 
F.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
G.  "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
H.  "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
I.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
J.  "Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust or organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
K.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
L.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
M.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
N.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
O.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
P.  "State" means the state of California. 
Q.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state. 
R.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
S.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
T.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 513 § 1, 1978) 
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city. 
(Ord. 513 § 2, 1978) 
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 513 § 3, 1978) 
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply in this code, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 513 § 4, 1978) 
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
    When an act is required by this code, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 513 § 5, 1978) 
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
    Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 513 § 6, 1978) 
1.04.070 - Computation. 
    Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 513 § 7, 1978) 
1.04.080 - Construction. 
    The provisions of this code and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 513 § 8, 1978) 
1.04.090 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 513 § 9, 1978) 
Chapter 1.08 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Adoption-Description. 
A.  A seal is adopted for the city. 
B.  The seal shall be circular in form with a diameter of one and seven-eighths inches, and in the center thereof shall be a cut showing a cotton boll, and around the outer edge of the seal shall be the words "City of Blythe, Incorporated July 21, 1916." 
(Ord. 2 § 1, 1916) 
Chapter 1.10 - FISCAL CONTROL 
Sections: 

1.10.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter, to be known as the fiscal control ordinance of the city of Blythe, California, is to provide for a system of financial administration, accounting, fiscal and budgetary control which conforms with generally accepted accounting practices. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.011 - Definitions. 
    Definitions applicable to this chapter will be based on the standard definitions accepted by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) with some modifications made to simplify the definitions. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.012 - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year shall begin on July 1st and shall end on June 30th. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.013 - Adoption of the budget. 
    An annual budget will be adopted by the city council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than forty-five days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget is not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, a resolution authorizing the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city shall be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. The proposed budget shall be prepared by the city manager and transmitted to the city council for its review a minimum of forty-five days before the required date of adoption. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.014 - Expenditure of funds. 
    No expenditure in any fund shall be legal or proper unless appropriations adequate to meet that expenditure have been made in the budget. Purchases shall be made only after a bona fide competitive bidding, and bids shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. Purchases in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars shall be on the basis of sealed bids, unless the purchase is determined to be an emergency affecting the health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.015 - Budget a public record. 
    At the time the preliminary budget is transmitted to members of the city council by the city manager, a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for public inspection during regular office hours in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.016 - Budget adoption. 
    No earlier than seven days after the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the city council and no later than the time that the budget is adopted by the city council, a public hearing shall be held to give the public the opportunity to comment upon the proposed budget. Notice of such public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city no more than twenty days and no less than five days in advance of the hearing. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.017 - Final adoption of the budget. 
    The adoption of the budget shall be accomplished by the approval of a budget resolution which specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories and the appropriated expenditures for each department and each nondepartmental expense and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget shall be approved by resolution. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.018 - Budget modification. 
    Any increase in appropriation in a departmental budget or in a nondepartmental expense category, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments and nondepartmental expenses, shall require the approval of the city council in the form of an amendment to the budget resolution. The transfer of appropriations among the various accounts within a departmental budget or within a nondepartmental expense category shall only require the approval of the city manager except that any transfer of appropriations within the departmental budget so as to increase the salary appropriation for the purpose of employing additional personnel shall require the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.019 - Fund transfer. 
    No appropriation shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund until all legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.020 - Revenue estimates. 
    The city manager shall present the statement of anticipated revenues on the basis of the ordinary and reasonable revenues which can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue estimates shall be based upon the Riverside statement of original charge. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.021 - Unencumbered fund balance. 
    All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become a part of the unencumbered fund balance which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.022 - Fund structure. 
    The following funds may be established and shall be used as necessary to provide for the proper accounting of all financial activities of the city: 
A.  General Fund. The general fund to account for the general governmental operations and all financial transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
B.  Special Revenue Funds. Special revenue funds to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources or to finance specified activities as required by law or administrative regulation. 
C.  Debt Service Funds. Debt service funds to account for the payment of interest and principal on long-term debt other than special assessment and revenue bonds. 
D.  Capital Projects Funds. Capital projects funds to account for the receipt and disbursement of moneys including bond proceeds used for the acquisition of capital facilities other than those financed by special assessment and enterprise funds. 
E.  Enterprise Funds. Enterprise funds to account for the financing of services to the general public where all or most of the costs involved are paid in the form of charges by users of such services. 
F.  Trust and Agency Funds. Trust and agency funds to account for assets held by a governmental unit as trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations and other governmental units. 
G.  Internal Service Funds. Internal service funds to account for the financing of special activities and services performed by a designated organization unit within a governmental jurisdiction for other organization units within the same governmental jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.023 - Self-balancing accounts. 
    A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions and to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.024 - Additional accounts. 
    Additional accounts, as follows, shall be maintained: 
A.  A fixed assets account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which (1) are of tangible nature; (2) have a life of longer than two years; and (3) have a significant value (or have a value greater than five thousand dollars). General fixed assets shall be recorded at original cost, shall not be depreciated and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. Enterprise funds fixed assets may be depreciated. 
B.  A long-term debt account for the purpose of accounting for a long-term debt and for recording and fairly representing liability for long-term debt at any time from date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.025 - Basis of accounting. 
    To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on long term debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect property the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.026 - Financial reporting. 
    Financial statements and reports showing the current conditions of budgetary and proprietary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the city council at least every three months. Not later than six months after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared and published. A summary of this report, containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the close of the preceding fiscal year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.027 - Annual independent audit. 
    All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the city shall be subjected to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant. The audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards (GAAS) promulgated by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.028 - Implementation responsibility. 
    The responsibility for the proper execution of the provisions of this chapter shall be with the city manager except where the responsibility is explicitly given to the city council. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
1.10.029 - Severability. 
    In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrases so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1993) 
Chapter 1.12 - DATUM PLANE 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - Declared. 
    The mean sea level, as determined by the United States Geodetic Survey, is the datum plane or base line of the city. 
(Ord. 46 § 1, 1920) 
1.12.020 - Bench mark. 
    The official city bench mark or datum plane monument within the city shall be that certain nailhead embedded in a lead plug located in the center of the curb return at the northwest corner of the intersection of Hobsonway and Broadway in the city. Said official city bench mark or datum plane monument shall be known as Bench Mark Number 0, and the elevation of the bench mark shall be accepted as being 266.12 feet above the mean sea level as fixed by the United States Geodetic Survey. 
(Ord. 46 § 2, 1920) 
Chapter 1.20 - IMPRISONMENT 
Sections: 

1.20.010 - Certain jails designated. 
    Any and all persons convicted of a misdemeanor or breach of any ordinance of the City, and sentenced to imprisonment in jail, shall be confined in one of the branches of the Riverside County Jail, when the judgement of the court so directs. 
(Ord. 752 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 12 § 1, 1916) 
Chapter 1.24 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.24.010 - Violation deemed misdemeanor-Exception. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the violation is made an infraction by ordinance. 
A.  Any provision or requirement of this code or otherwise as referred to above, the violation of which or the failure to comply with which, is designated as an infraction, may be prosecutable as a misdemeanor after a third conviction, nolo contendere plea, or final determination on an administrative or civil citation. 
B.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, a violation of any provision of this code or any code adopted by reference by this code, or any other city ordinance or permit condition may be charged as an infraction at the discretion of an enforcement official or his designee and may be the subject of a civil citation pursuant to Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
    An enforcement official as defined in this section is the city manager, city attorney, chief of police, planning director, public works director and chief building inspector. 
(Ord. 514 § 1(a), 1978) 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 5-12-09) 
1.24.020 - Penalty-Misdemeanor. 
    Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by this code, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of this code is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 752 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 514 § 1 (b), 1978) 
1.24.030 - Penalty-Infraction. 
    Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of this code is punishable by: 
A.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(Ord. 752 § 5, 1998: Ord. 514 § 1(c), 1978) 
1.24.040 - Each day deemed separate violation. 
    Each convicted person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 514 § 1(d), 1978) 
Chapter 1.26 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections: 

1.26.010 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply to the use of these terms for the purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "Appellant" means a citee who has submitted a valid and timely request for hearing to contest an administrative citation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  "Citee" means the person given an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for a code violation. 
C.  "City" means the city of Blythe or the area within the territorial city limits of the city of Blythe, and such territory outside of this city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional provision or any law. 
D.  "City manager" means the city manager or his/her successor as chief executive officer of the city of Blythe, or his/her designee. 
E.  "Enforcement officer" means any of the following: (1) the city manager, or city officers or employees designated by him/her; (2) any peace officer pursuant to California Penal Code Section 832; (3) any city public safety officer; (4) any city code enforcement officer; (5) any Riverside County Health Care Agency inspector; (6) any city building inspector; (7) any Riverside County Fire Agency inspector; (8) any city animal control officer; and (9) any state or federal employee or officer authorized by statute to enforce applicable state and federal laws. 
F.  "Hearing officer" means the person designated by the city manager to conduct hearings on contests of administrative citations. 
G.  "Issue" means giving a citation to the citee and issuance occurs on the date when a citation is personally served on the citee, the date it is mailed to the citee, or the date it is posted on real property where a property related violation occurs. 
H.  "Land use approval" means any approval required for a particular use of land, including but not limited to permits, licenses, conditional use permits, variances, or subdivision maps. 
I.  "Owner" means the record owner of a parcel according to the County's latest equalized property tax assessment roll, and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or a part of parcel. 
J.  "Person" includes a natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustee, general partners of a legal entity. 
K.  "Responsible person" means any individual who is the owner or occupant of real property, owner of authorized agent of any business, company, or entity, or the parent of the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who causes or maintains a violation of the Blythe Municipal Code or applicable state codes. For the purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for any one code violation. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.020 - Administrative citations. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of the Blythe Municipal Code, or applicable state code, may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Every person who applies for and receives any type of land use approval shall comply with all conditions imposed upon the issuance of said land use approval. Violation of any condition of such land use approval may be subject to an administrative fine or penalty as provided under the provision of this chapter. 
C.  Each day a violation of this code exists shall be a separate violation and be subject to a separate fine. An administrative citation may charge a violation for one or more days on which a violation exists, and for violation of one or more code sections. 
D.  An administrative citation shall be on a form approved by the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of the responsible person; 
2.  Date, time and address or definite identification of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
3.  The code section(s) violated and a description of the violation(s); 
4.  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
5.  The amount of any processing fees, if applicable; 
6.  A description of the fine payment process, including a specified time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid to avoid a late payment penalty; 
7.  Notification of the right to appeal, including the time within which the administrative citation may be appealed in writing, and the place to submit a written request for appeal. 
8.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer; 
9.  Date the citation was issued; 
10.  Designation of the building violation (if applicable), date the thirty day correction period expires, and how to request an extension of that period, and designation of a notice of noncorrection when the building violation has not been corrected; 
11.  Designation of prior citations issued for the same code violations, if known by the code enforcement officer; 
12.  Description of the procedure for requesting a hardship mitigation waiver of fine deposit and/or an administrative review to contest a citation; 
13.  A notice that the code violation is a nuisance and the process for the collection of unpaid fines and/or nuisance abatement costs as more specifically set forth in Section 1-48; 
14.  A self-addressed envelope in which the citee can send to the city the fine or a request for a hardship mitigation waiver of fine deposit and/or an administrative review; 
15.  Any other information deemed necessary by the director for enforcement or collection purposes. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.030 - Service procedures. 
    An administrative citation may be issued to a citee by an enforcement officer for violation(s) of the municipal code or applicable state codes in the following manner: 
A.  Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. If a responsible person refuses to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
B.  Mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to serve the responsible person by personal service, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, return receipt requested and by regular, first class mail. Service by mail shall be deemed effective as of the date of deposit in the U.S. Mail. 
C.  Posting Notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, by certified mail or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the City, in which the enforcement officer has knowledge that the responsible person has legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service on the date of posting. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.040 - Amount of administrative fines. 
    The amount of fines imposed for code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be established by separate resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.050 - Payment of administrative fines. 
A.  The fine shall be paid in full within fifteen days from the date of service of the administrative citation, as indicated on the citation. 
B.  A late payment fine of fifty percent of the citation amount shall accrue if the fine is not paid within fifteen days from the date of service of the citation. 
C.  The requirement for paying the administrative fine, and any penalties that would otherwise accrue, will be stayed if the citee files a request for a hardship mitigation waiver in accordance with Section 1.26.070. The stay shall commence at the time the request is filed and shall terminate once the city manager or his/her designee serves a written determination on the request for a hardship mitigation waiver on the citee. 
D.  Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to this section shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.26.090 if it is determined, after a hearing, that the citee was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citations. 
E.  Payment of a fine shall not excuse the citee from correcting the code violation. The issuance of a citation and/or payment of a fine does not bar the City from taking other enforcement action regarding a code violation that is not corrected, including but not limited to, issuing additional administrative citations. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.060 - Request for administrative hearing. 
A.  Any citee may contest the citation by submitting a written request to the city for an appeal hearing, clearly stating the reasons for the appeal, within fifteen days from the date of service of the administrative citation, together with an advanced deposit of the fine and the hearing fee which shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council. The hearing fee shall not exceed the reasonable cost to the city of conducting the hearing. 
B.  In lieu of the deposit of the fine and payment of the hearing fee, the citee may submit an approved hardship mitigation waiver in accordance with Section 1.26.070. A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen, nor more than sixty days from the date the request for hearing is filed. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.070 - Hardship mitigation. 
A.  Hardship Mitigation Waiver. Any citee who is financially unable to pay and/or deposit the administrative fine and/or the hearing fee may file a request for a hardship mitigation waiver with the city manager within seven days following the date of service of the citation. 
B.  The request shall be in writing and shall describe why the fine and/or fee cannot be paid, and shall include supporting documents. The request shall be made under penalty of perjury. 
C.  Once filed the requirement for deposit and/or payment of the administrative fine and/or hearing fee shall be stayed unless or until the city manager makes a determination not to grant the hardship mitigation waiver request. 
D.  If the city manager does not grant the request for hardship mitigation and waive the deposit and/or payment of the fine and/or hearing fee or establish a payment plan, the administrative fine and/or hearing fee shall be paid and/or deposited as required under this chapter, within fifteen days of the date of service of the city manager's decision. 
E.  The city managers decision to grant or deny the request for a hardship mitigation waiver shall be final and in writing with stated reasons for granting or denying the request. The city manager shall cause the decision to be served on the citee. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.080 - Administrative hearing process. 
A.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held until a written request for hearing form has been timely submitted, the appropriate hearing fee has been paid, and the fine has been deposited. However, an approved hardship mitigation waiver acquired in accordance with Section 1.26.070, may be submitted in place of the deposit and hearing fee. 
B.  The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the appellant is the responsible person who caused and/or maintained the violation(s) of the municipal code or other applicable state code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation. 
C.  The appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and any relevant evidence concerning the charges set forth in the administrative citation. 
D.  The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. All relevant evidence may be considered, and the hearing officer has the discretion to exclude evidence if he/she finds such evidence to be irrelevant or needlessly repetitive. The hearing officer has the authority to cut off presentation of evidence if he/she reasonably believes that the evidence being presented is irrelevant or needlessly repetitive. 
E.  1.  The failure of the appellant to appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and shall be considered a concession that the citation was properly issued. 
2.  Notwithstanding the above, upon a showing of good cause by the appellant, the hearing officer may excuse the appellant's failure to appear at the hearing and reschedule the hearing. Under no circumstances shall the hearing be rescheduled more than one time. 
F.  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
G.  Neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative of the city shall be required to attend the hearing, nor shall be hearing officer require that there be submitted any evidence, other than the citation, that may exist among the public records of the city on the violation. However, any such appearance and/or submission may be made at the discretion of the enforcement officer or any city employee or agent. 
H.  If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, than a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the appellant at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
I.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the appellant shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports, and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer. No other discovery disclosure is required, although formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
J.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.090 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written decision to uphold, modify or revoke the fine amount of the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
B.  If the decision is to uphold the citation, the city shall retain the fine deposited. If the decision is to revoke the citation, then the city shall refund the fine deposit to the appellant within thirty days of the service of the decision. 
C.  The hearing officer's decision shall include that an aggrieved party may file a petition for review with the California Superior Court, county of Riverside, pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
D.  The hearing officer's written decision shall be served on the appellant within five days from the date of the hearing by mailing to the appellant by certified mail, return receipt requested, via the U.S. mail. Service of the hearing officer's decision shall be deemed to have been completed on the date of mailing. 
E.  The hearing officer shall not be a city employee. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of the fine or number of administrative citations upheld by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.100 - Right to judicial review. 
    If the hearing officer's decision is in favor of the city, the appellant may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision by doing one of the following: 
A.  Any party aggrieved by a decision of the hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the hearing officer's decision by filing a petition for review with the California Superior Court, County of Orange, in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4; or 
B.  File a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.110 - Collection of unpaid fines. 
A.  The city, at its discretion, may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines and penalties. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines and penalties owed by a person under this chapter have been collected. 
B.  Any citee who has unpaid and/or delinquent fines may be refused the issuance of a land use approval or other city approval pertaining to the property, real or personal, that is the subject of the citation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
1.26.120 - Notices. 
    Except as specifically provided herein, all notices to be given pursuant to this chapter shall be served on the citee in accordance with the provision set forth in Section 1.26.030 of the Blythe Municipal Code. Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted herein. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 3-8-11) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - CITY MANAGER 

2.04.010 - Office created. 
    The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 356 § 1, 1967) 
2.04.030 - Eligibility restriction. 
    No person elected as a councilman of the city shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member has ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. 356 § 3, 1967) 
2.04.040 - Bond. 
    The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond, to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 356 § 4, 1967) 
2.04.050 - Compensation. 
    The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council from time to time determines and fixes by resolution, and said compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council designates. 
    The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified, itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the city council for approval. 
(Ord. 356 § 6, 1967) 
2.04.060 - Temporary manager. 
    In case of the absence of the city manager, or his temporary disability to act as such, the council shall appoint a manager pro tempore, who shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the city manager during such absence or disability only; provided, however, that a manager pro tempore shall have no authority to appoint or remove any city officer or employee except with the concurrence of the council. 
(Ord. 356 § 5, 1967) 
2.04.070 - Powers and duties-Generally. 
A.  The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. 
B.  In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth in the Sections 2.04.080 through 2.04.320. 
(Ord. 356 § 7 (part), 1967) 
2.04.080 - Powers and duties-Law enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(a), 1967) 
2.04.090 - Powers and duties-Authority over employees. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority, control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(b), 1967) 
2.04.100 - Powers and duties-Power of appointment-Department head contracts. 
A.  Subject to prior approval of the council, it shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, including department heads. Nothing in this section shall give the city manager the power to appoint, remove, promote, demote or execute contracts with the city clerk, the city attorney or the city treasurer. 
B.  All department heads are at-will employees, and may be removed or suspended by the city manager accordingly. Prior to assuming a position, all department heads shall enter into a written agreement with the city, signed by the city manager. The contract shall affirm the department head's at-will status, establish compensation, the term of the agreement, and the means of termination. The contract shall be prepared by the city attorney, and approved by the city council. This section shall only apply prospectively, to persons filling department head positions from the effective date of this ordinance. 
    For purposes of this section the term "department head" shall include each of the following positions: 
1.  Chief of police; 
2.  Finance director; 
3.  Public works director; 
4.  Planning director; 
5.  City engineer; 
6.  Any future position determined at the time to have "department head" status. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(c), 1967) 
(Ord. No. 855, § 1, 1-8-13) 
2.04.110 - Powers and duties-Reorganization. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(d), 1967) 
2.04.120 - Powers and duties-Recommendation of ordinances. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(e), 1967) 
2.04.130 - Powers and duties-Attendance at council meetings. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council, except when his removal is under consideration. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(f), 1967) 
2.04.140 - Powers and duties-Financial reports. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. 
(Ord. 584 § l (part), 1981: Ord. 356 § 7(g) (1) , 1967) 
2.04.150 - Powers and duties-Budget. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(h), 1967) 
2.04.160 - Powers and duties-Purchasing agent. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(i), 1967) 
2.04.170 - Powers and duties-Investigations. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(j), 1967) 
2.04.180 - Powers and duties-Investigation of complaints-Supervision of franchises and permits. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises and permits granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(k), 1967) 
2.04.190 - Powers and duties-Supervision of public buildings. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(l), 1967) 
2.04.200 - Powers and duties-Hours of employment. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his entire time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(m), 1967) 
2.04.210 - Powers and duties-Performance of additional duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(n), 1967) 
2.04.220 - Powers and duties-Council-manager relations. 
    The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(o), 1967) 
2.04.230 - Powers and duties-Departmental cooperation. 
    It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(p), 1967) 
2.04.240 - Powers and duties-Attendance at commission meetings. 
    The city manager may attend any and all meetings of any commissions, boards or committees created by the city council upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(q), 1967) 
2.04.250 - Powers and duties-Perpetual inventory. 
    The city manager shall have the duty to have maintained a perpetual inventory of all city property. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(r), 1967) 
2.04.260 - Limitation of powers. 
    The city manager shall act as agent for the city in the discharge of its administrative functions, but shall not exercise any policy-making or legislative functions nor attempt to commit or bind the council to any action, plan or program requiring action by the council. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(s), 1967) 
2.04.270 - Method of discharging duties. 
    In the discharge of his duties, the city manager shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience and courtesy in his contacts with the public and with all city officers and employees, to the end that the highest possible standards of public service be continuously maintained. 
(Ord. 356 § 7(t), 1967) 
2.04.280 - City manager agreement. 
    The city manager shall enter into a written agreement with the city wherein his compensation, the term of his agreement and means of termination shall be set forth. Such agreement shall be signed by the city manager, approved by a majority of the city council and thereafter signed by the city. Nothing contained in said agreement shall supersede this Chapter 2.04 of the Blythe Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 683 § 2 (part), 1991) 
2.04.290 - Removal of city manager. 
    The city manager shall serve at the will and discretion of the city council. In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof. Unless otherwise provided in the agreement with the city manager, the city manager shall be entitled to no hearing nor shall he be entitled to a statement of reasons for his termination. 
(Ord. 683 § 2 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 2.08 - CITY COUNCIL-COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONERS* 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Appointment. 
A.  At the beginning of each term, and following reorganization of the city council, the mayor shall appoint the following committees and/or commissioners: 
1.  Commissioner of streets and sidewalks, which committee shall consist of one or more members; 
2.  Commissioner of parks and recreation, which committee shall consist of one or more members; 
3.  Commissioner of lights and water, which committee shall consist of one or more members; 
4.  Commissioner of health and safety, which committee shall consist of one or more members; 
5.  Commissioner of fire and police, which committee shall consist of one or more members; 
6.  Commissioner of finance, which committee shall consist of one or more members. 
B.  The mayor shall serve as ex officio commissioner of each of the committees provided for in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 139 § 1, 1941) 
2.08.020 - Apprisal of matters to come before council. 
    One hour before each regular meeting of the city council, or at such other times as may be convenient, the members of the committees described in Section 2.08.010 shall assemble informally at the city hall for the purpose of being apprised by the mayor of the various matters coming before the next succeeding meeting, and receiving such detailed information in regard thereto as will enable the city council to dispose of said matters most intelligently when they come up for official consideration at the regular meeting to follow. 
(Ord. 139 § 2, 1941) 
2.08.030 - Referral of business-Recommendation may be required to be in writing. 
A.  All business brought before the city council shall be referred to the appropriate commissioners and/or committees for investigation, report and recommendation in reference thereto, before any action is taken by the city council as a whole, except when the business in question is of special urgency or of such nature as may be disposed of immediately. 
B.  Upon a majority vote of the city council, any commissioner and/or committee may be required to report his or their recommendation in writing. 
(Ord. 139 § 3, 1941) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY COUNCIL-MEETINGS 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Time and place designated. 
    Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesday of each and every month except as may be exempted by direction of the city council. The meetings shall be held at six p.m., in the City Hall; provided, however, that when Tuesday coincides with a holiday, the regular meeting shall be postponed to the next succeeding day which is not a holiday, at the time and place aforesaid. 
(Ord. 751 § 1, 1998: Ord. 589 § 2, 1982: Ord. 136 § 1, 1940) 
Chapter 2.14 - TRANSPARENCY IN CITY GOVERNMENT ON CITY WEBSITE 
Section: 

2.14.010 - Transparency in city government on city website 
    In accordance with the city of Blythe's commitment to transparency in city government, the city manager shall cause to be created a database "transparency in city government" within the city's website. The database shall make available certain public reports, forms, city documents, and city financial information. The city manager shall determine those materials which shall be available in the database provided however, that such materials shall include at a minimum, those public reports, forms, city documents, and city financial information specified by a resolution of the city council, as such resolution may be amended from time to time. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the disclosure of documents, records, and information which is exempt from disclosure under state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 1, 1-11-11) 
Chapter 2.16 - CITY INSPECTOR 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Created-Appointment and compensation. 
    The office of the city inspector is created, and all appointments to said office shall be by resolution of the city council which shall also fix salary to be paid to the appointee to the office. 
(Ord. 180 § 1 (part), 1948) 
2.16.020 - Duties. 
    The city inspector shall issue all building, electrical and plumbing permits and shall be responsible for all building, electrical and plumbing inspection, as well as inspections which have for their objective elimination of fire hazards. 
(Ord. 180 § 1 (part), 1948) 
Chapter 2.18 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
Sections: 

2.18.010 - Office established. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state of California, there is created and established the office of director of finance of the city. 
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 356 § 7(g)(2), 1967) 
2.18.020 - Appointment. 
    The director of finance shall be under the jurisdiction of the city manager, and shall be appointed by the city manager subject to approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 356 § 7(g)(3), 1967) 
2.18.030 - Bond required. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of Section 37209 of the Government Code, the director of finance before entering upon the duties of his office shall execute a bond in the penal sum of one hundred thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 356 § 7(g)(4), 1967) 
2.18.040 - Duties in general. 
    The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk are transferred to the director of finance. He shall maintain all records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city and all of its departments. 
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 356 § 7(g)(5), 1967) 
2.18.050 - Additional duties. 
    In addition to the duties set forth in Section 2.18.040, the director of finance shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Compile all financial information necessary for preparation of the city's budget and make such information available to the officer whose responsibility it is to prepare the budget; 
B.  Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the city and each of its departments; 
C.  Handle the issuance of all licenses for the city; 
D.  Supervise and be in charge of all payroll records; 
E.  Maintain a record of all insurance policies and keep the city manager or city administrative officer informed of their expiration dates; 
F.  See that all taxes, assessments, license fees and other revenues of the city, or for whose collection the city is responsible, and all money receivable by the city from the county, state or federal government, or from any court, department or agency of the city, are collected; 
G.  Perform such other duties as are from time to time assigned to him by the city manager or city administrative officer. 
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 356 § 7(g)(6), 1967) 
Chapter 2.20 - WATERWORKS SUPERINTENDENT* 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Office created-Duties. 
A.  The office of waterworks superintendent is created, the incumbent of which shall be appointed by and serve during the pleasure of the city council. 
B.  The waterworks superintendent shall have charge of the operation, maintenance and repair of the city waterworks system, subject to the provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. 51 § 1, 1920) 
Chapter 2.22 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 

2.22.010 - Purposes. 
    The California Industrial Development Financing Act, Title 10 (commencing with Section 91500), Government Code (the "Act"), has established an industrial development authority of this city for the achievement of specified public purposes. The public purposes are the increasing of opportunities for useful employment or otherwise contributing to economic development. The need for the establishment of an industrial development authority in the achievement of such purposes is based upon findings that industry requires the new and alternative method of capital finance that such authorities can provide in order for it to undertake the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities the use of which will serve those public purposes. 
(Ord. 580 § 1, 1981) 
2.22.020 - Findings. 
    There is a need in the city for the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities for the use of industry which will increase employment opportunities or otherwise contribute to economic development, and further, the new and alternative method of capital finance that industrial development authorities can provide will aid in satisfying that need. 
(Ord. 580 § 2, 1981) 
2.22.030 - Declaration of necessity. 
    There is a need in the city for an industrial development authority to provide industry with an alternative and additional method of finance in accordance with state policy as set forth in the Act. 
(Ord. 580 § 3(a), 1981) 
2.22.040 - Organization. 
    The industrial development authority of this city established by the Act is declared organized and shall function under the name: Blythe industrial development authority and be authorized to transact business and exercise all of the powers and other authority conferred upon industrial development authorities by such Act. 
(Ord. 580 § 4(b), 1981) 
Chapter 2.28 - COMPENSATION[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
For provisions on the compensation of the city manager, see § 2.04.050 of this code. 

2.28.010 - City clerk. 
    For performing those duties prescribed by general laws of the state, the salary of the city clerk shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city council from paying additional compensation for work performed in addition to the legal duties of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 581 § 1, 1981: Ord. 252 § 1, 1957) 
2.28.020 - City treasurer. 
    For performance of those duties prescribed by the general laws of the state, the salary of the city treasurer shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 581 § 2, 1981: Ord. 496 § 1, 1977: Ord. 286 § 1, 1962: Ord. 252 § 2, 1957) 
2.28.030 - City council. 
A.  Purpose. The ordinance codified in this section is enacted pursuant to Section 36514 of the Government Code, as added by Chapter 286 of the Statutes of 1965, authorizing the city council to provide by ordinance that each member of the city council shall receive a prescribed salary, the amount of which is based upon the population of the city as determined by estimates made by the State Department of Finance. 
B.  Population. As of the date of passage of the ordinance codified in this section, the latest estimate of population of the city made by the Department of Finance is seven thousand one hundred twenty-five. 
C.  Salaries. Each member of the city council shall receive, as a salary, the sum of three hundred dollars per month, as described in Section 36516 for cities, as set forth in subsection (a) of Section 36516, of the Government Code, being cities over five thousand up to and including thirty-five thousand in population, which shall be payable from and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this section, at the same time and in the same manner as its salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the city. 
D.  Increase or Decrease. Following any new and later estimate of population made by the Department of Finance placing the city in a population group other than that set forth in subsection C of this section, the salary payable to each member of the city council shall be increased or decreased accordingly to equal the sum prescribed for that population group in Section 36514 of the Government Code, as added by Chapter 286 of the Statutes of 1965; provided, however, that the salary as so increased or decreased shall become payable only on and after the date upon which one or more members of the city council become eligible therefor by virtue of beginning a new term of office following the next succeeding general municipal election held in the city. 
E.  Reimbursement. The salaries prescribed in this section shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the city council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of official duties for the city. 
(Ord. 667 § 1, 1990: Ord. 506 § 1, 1978; Ord. 340 §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 1966) 
Chapter 2.32 - OFFICIAL BONDS 
Sections: 

2.32.010 - City clerk. 
    The amount of the official bond to be given by the city clerk is fixed at five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 3 § 1, 1916) 
2.32.020 - City treasurer. 
    The amount of the official bond to be given by the city treasurer is fixed at five thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 89 § 1, 1926: Ord. 3 § 2, 1916) 
2.32.030 - Marshal. 
    The amount of the official bond to be given by the marshal of the city is fixed at five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 3 § 3, 1916) 
2.32.040 - Sureties. 
    The sureties on the bonds required by this chapter may be either personal or corporate and the same must be approved by the city council. The bonds of the city treasurer and marshal shall be filed with the city clerk, and the clerk's bond shall be filed with the president of the council. 
(Ord. 3 § 4, 1916) 
Chapter 2.36 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Notice-Required. 
    The city council of the city, unless otherwise provided by law, shall give notice of each election to be held in the city in the manner set forth in Section 2.36.020. 
(Ord. 23 § 1 (part), 1917) 
2.36.020 - Notice-Contents-Posting and publication. 
    The city council shall cause notices of the election, signed by the president of the city council and by the city clerk, and setting forth the time and place or places for holding the election, the purpose thereof and the names of the election officers appointed therefor, and the time for the opening and closing of the polls, to be posted in three public places in the city, at least two weeks before such election. The board of trustees shall cause a like notice to be published once a week for two successive weeks before the election in some newspaper published and circulated in the city, if there is such a newspaper. The first publication of the notice shall be not fewer than ten days before such election. 
(Ord. 23 § 1 (part), 1917) 
Chapter 2.40 - RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 
Sections: 

2.40.010 - Declaration. 
    The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 306 § 1, 1963) 
2.40.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
    Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code, the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 306 § 2, 1963) 
Chapter 2.42 - SELECTION AND TRAINING OF PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHERS 
Sections: 

2.42.010 - Declaration. 
    The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 642 § 1, 1988) 
2.42.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
    Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1 of the California Penal Code, the city will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). 
(Ord. 642 § 2, 1988) 
2.42.030 - Authority of Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training to make inquiries. 
    Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the city public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 642 § 3, 1988) 
Chapter 2.44 - ADVERTISING, PRINTING AND POSTING 
Sections: 

2.44.010 - Payment of expenses incurred by city. 
    Whenever an application or petition is made to the city council for vacation of a street, alley or highway, or for the offering for sale of a franchise, or for the doing of any other act, other than street work, that is not mandatory for the city council to do, requiring the expenditure of money by the city for printing, posting, advertising and other incidental expenses connected therewith, the city clerk shall estimate the probable expense which the city will incur for such printing, posting, advertising and incidental expenses upon the granting of such application or petition, until the applicant has deposited with the city clerk the amount of such estimated expenses. Such deposit shall be either by cash or certified check payable to the city, and shall be applied in payment of the expense of printing, posting, advertising and other incidental expenses necessitated by the filing of the petition or application. Any overplus remaining after the payment of costs shall be refunded to the depositor thereof. 
(Ord. 26 § 1, 1917) 
Chapter 2.48 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 

2.48.010 - Storage. 
    The police department shall store unclaimed property that comes into its possession at such place or places as the chief of police designates. 
(Ord. 310 § 1, 1964) 
2.48.020 - Holding period designated. 
    All unclaimed property that comes into the possession of the police department shall be held by the police department for a period of at least three months. 
(Ord. 752 § 6 (part), 1998: Ord. 310 § 2, 1964) 
2.48.030 - Public auction-Authorized. 
    After the property has remained unclaimed for a period of three months, such property may be sold at public auction to the highest bidder by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 752 § 6 (part), 1998: Ord. 310 § 3, 1964) 
2.48.040 - Public auction-Notice. 
    Notice of the sale authorized by Section 2.48.030 shall be given by the chief of police, at least five days before the time fixed therefor, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in Riverside County. 
(Ord. 310 § 4, 1964) 
2.48.050 - Public auction-Disposition of unsold property. 
    If any of the property regulated by this chapter remains unsold after the holding of the public auction, as aforesaid, the chief of police may destroy or give away the unsold property, or dispose of such unsold property in any manner that he deems proper. 
(Ord. 310 § 5, 1964) 
Chapter 2.52 - DISASTER RELIEF 
Sections: 

2.52.010 - Purposes. 
    The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of the emergency or disaster conditions referred to in Section 2.52.020, the direction of the disaster organization, and the coordination of the disaster functions of the city with the county of Riverside and with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 441 § 1.1, 1973) 
2.52.020 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this chapter, conditions or degrees of emergency or disaster shall be defined as follows: 
1.  "Local emergency" means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
2.  "State of emergency" means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a "state of war emergency," which conditions, by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single county, city and county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat. 
3.  "State of war emergency" means the condition which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the Governor, whenever the state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent. 
B.  Other terms used in this chapter shall have meanings as used in the California Emergency Services Act. 
(Ord. 441 §§ 2.1, 2.2, 1973) 
2.52.030 - Office of disaster preparedness. 
    There is created the office of disaster preparedness, which shall consist of such positions as may be established by the city council. 
(Ord. 441 § 6.1, 1973) 
2.52.040 - Disaster corps-Membership. 
    The disaster corps consists of all officers and employees of the city and its agencies, together with all volunteers and all groups, or organizations and persons commandeered under the provisions of the California Emergency Services Act and this chapter, with all equipment and material publicly owned, volunteered, commandeered or in any way under the control of the personnel mentioned in this section, for the support of said personnel in the conduct of disaster operations. 
(Ord. 441 § 3.1, 1973) 
2.52.050 - Disaster corps-Activated under certain conditions. 
    The disaster corps shall be activated, and shall function as a disaster relief body, only upon: 
A.  The existence of a state of war emergency; 
B.  The declaration of the Governor of the state, or of persons authorized to act in his stead, of a state of emergency affecting and including the city; 
C.  The declaration of a local emergency by the board of supervisors of Riverside County, or by persons authorized to act in its stead, affecting and including the city; or 
D.  Upon the declaration of a local emergency by the city council, or by persons authorized in this chapter to act in its stead. 
(Ord. 441 § 3.2, 1973) 
2.52.060 - Disaster corps-Composition-Planning. 
A.  The disaster corps shall be composed of such elements as are provided for in the disaster operations plan of the city. 
B.  The officers of the city shall have the authority and duty to plan for the mobilization, operation and support of that segment of the disaster corps for which each is responsible as provided for in the disaster operations plan of the city, and to conduct the activities thereof. 
(Ord. 441 § 3.3, 1973) 
2.52.070 - Disaster corps-Authority during emergency. 
    During the existence of a state of war emergency, or of a proclaimed state of emergency or local emergency affecting the city, each member of the city disaster corps shall have authority to require that all persons follow reasonable orders given by him within the scope of his functions in order to execute the disaster operations plan of the city, and the willful failure of any person to follow such reasonable order or orders shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. 441 § 9.1, 1973) 
2.52.080 - Disaster council-Membership. 
    The disaster council consists of the following persons: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be its chairman, and shall also be a member of the Riverside City disaster council; 
B.  The chief of police; 
C.  The city attorney; 
D.  The fire chief; 
E.  The public works director; 
F.  A medical doctor, to be nominated by the Palo Verde Valley branch of the Riverside County Medical Association and appointed by the city council; 
G.  One member to be nominated by the Palo Verde branch of the American National Red Cross and appointed by the city council; 
H.  Such additional residents of the city as the city council may appoint to be "member at large"; 
I.  The assistant disaster director, who shall be the secretary, but without vote. 
(Ord. 441 § 4.1, 1973) 
2.52.090 - Disaster council-Powers. 
    The disaster council shall have power to: 
A.  Elect a vice-chairman and such other officers as it deems necessary; 
B.  Enact its own rules of procedure; 
C.  Review and recommend for adoption to the city council disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions, rules and regulations as it deems necessary to implement such plans and agreements. 
(Ord. 441 § 4.2, 1973) 
2.52.100 - Disaster council-Meetings. 
    The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence or inability to call such a meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman, not less frequently than biennially. 
(Ord. 441 § 4.3, 1973) 
2.52.110 - Disaster director-Mayor designated. 
    The mayor shall be the disaster director. 
(Ord. 441 § 5.1, 1973) 
2.52.120 - Disaster director-Powers and duties. 
A.  The disaster director shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To make key appointments, subject to the approval of the city council, with the disaster corps; 
2.  To request the city council to proclaim the existence of a local emergency, if the council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
3.  During the existence of a state of war emergency, or the proclaimed existence of a state of emergency or a local emergency affecting the city, to: 
a.  Control and direct the activities of the city disaster corps, 
b.  Use all city resources for the preservation of life and property and to reduce the effects of disaster, 
c.  Resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise in disaster operations, 
d.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment and other resources needed for the preservation of life and property either by binding the city for the fair value thereof or by commandeering same, 
e.  Delegate to elected and appointed officials of the city such duties and authorities as he deems necessary, 
f.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by any conditions proclaimed as provided in this chapter, 
g.  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and to command the aid of as many citizens of the city as he thinks necessary in the execution of his duties, 
h.  Exercise complete authority over the city and exercise all police power vested in the city by the Constitution and general laws; 
B.  In addition to the powers granted in this section, the director shall have such powers incidental to the performance of his duties as director as shall be necessary to allow him to carry out the disaster operations plan of the city, it being the intent of this chapter that the powers enumerated in this section are not intended to be limitations upon his powers. 
(Ord. 441 § 5.3, 1973) 
2.52.130 - Disaster director-Order of succession. 
    In the absence, or inability to act, of the mayor, he shall automatically be succeeded as disaster director by the following officials, in the order named: 
A.  Vice-mayor; 
B.  Remaining city councilmen in the order of their seniority, as members of said council; 
C.  Chief of police; 
D.  Public works director; 
E.  Street superintendent. 
(Ord. 441 § 5.2, 1973) 
2.52.140 - Assistant disaster director-Position established. 
    There is established the position of assistant disaster director which position shall be filled by appointment by the city council. 
(Ord. 441 § 7.1, 1973) 
2.52.150 - Assistant disaster director-Duties-Prior to emergency. 
    The assistant disaster director, prior to the existence of a state of war emergency, state of emergency or local emergency, shall: 
A.  Develop and coordinate basic disaster planning for the city to provide for the use of all government entities, resources and equipment; all commercial and industrial resources, and all such special groups, bodies and organizations as may be needed to support disaster operations; 
B.  Develop and coordinate such disaster training programs and exercises as may be needed; 
C.  Develop and coordinate a public information program designed for basic self-protection; 
D.  Coordinate planning and training with the Riverside County office of disaster preparedness and with other federal, state, county and city disaster or emergency agencies, and with appropriate elements of the armed forces; 
E.  Recommend to the disaster director for referral to the disaster council matters for consideration with the purview of said council's responsibilities; and 
F.  Recommend to the disaster director matters of policy for consideration by the city council insofar as they relate to disaster. 
(Ord. 441 § 7.2, 1973) 
2.52.160 - Assistant disaster director-Duties-During emergency. 
    During a state of war emergency, state of emergency or local emergency affecting the city, the assistant disaster director shall: 
A.  Serve as executive officer to the director; and 
B.  Provide for the mobilization and deployment of all personnel and material resources as directed by said commander; and 
C.  Perform such duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 441 § 7.3, 1973) 
2.52.170 - Succession to office-Line of succession. 
    The line of succession for key personnel of the government of the city shall be: 
A.  For the Mayor. Vice-mayor followed by the remaining city councilmen, in the order of their seniority, excluding standby successors; 
B.  For City Councilmen. Pursuant to Section 8638 of the Government Code, the city council shall appoint three standby successors for each member of the council; 
C.  For Other Elected Officials. In order of descending authority among existing subordinates, and thereafter as provided by the city council. 
(Ord. 441 § 10.1, 1973) 
2.52.180 - Succession to office-Powers. 
    Each person who succeeds to each position or office as provided in this chapter, and as provided in the disaster operations plan of the city shall succeed to all the powers and duties of the office succeeded to immediately upon such successions. 
(Ord. 441 § 8.1, 1973) 
2.52.190 - Emergency operations center. 
    Two emergency operations centers shall be maintained within the city. One of these shall be located at the city hall, with the police station designed as the alternate emergency operations center. 
(Ord. 441 § 10.2, 1973) 
2.52.200 - Penalty for violation. 
    It is a misdemeanor, and is punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24, for any person during a disaster to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the disaster corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon them by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter, if such rule, regulation or order is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil life or property, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of persons or property; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the civil defense and/or disaster agencies of the federal or state governments. 
(Ord. 441 § 11.1, 1973) 
Chapter 2.56 - PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
Sections: 

2.56.010 - Contract-Authorized. 
A.  A contract between the city council and the Board of Administration of the California State Employees' Retirement System is authorized. A copy of said contract attached to the ordinance codified in this section, marked "Exhibit A," and by such reference is made a part of this section, as though set out in full in this section. 
B.  The mayor of the city council is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute said contract for and on behalf of said agency. 
(Ord. 389 §§ 1, 2, 1969) 
2.56.020 - Contract-Amendment authorized. 
A.  An amendment to the contract between the city council of the city of Blythe and the Board of Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System is authorized a copy of such amendment being attached hereto, marked "Exhibit A," and by such reference is made a part of this section, as though set out in full in this section. 
B.  The vice mayor of the city of Blythe is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute such amendment for and on behalf of such agency. 
(Ord. 775 §§ 1, 2, 2001: Ord. 681 §§ 1, 2, 1991: Ord. 669 §§ 1, 2, 1990: Ord. 615 §§ 1, 2, 1985: Ord. 608 §§ 1, 2, 1984: Ord. 588 §§ 1, 2, 1982: Ord. 450 §§ 1, 2, 1974) 
Chapter 2.60 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 

2.60.010 - Finding-Authority. 
    It is found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the California Health and Safety Code, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the city. Said agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law, and shall be known as the "Blythe Redevelopment Agency." 
(Ord. 604 § 1, 1984) 
2.60.020 - Council designated as agency. 
    Pursuant to Section 33200 of the California Health and Safety Code, the city council does declare itself to be the agency, and all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities, vested by law in a redevelopment agency, shall be vested in the city council except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 604 § 2, 1984) 
Chapter 2.64 - PLANNING COMMISSION* 
Sections: 

2.64.010 - Office created. 
    Pursuant to Section 65100 et seq. of the California Planning and Zoning Law, the functions of the planning agency are assigned to the department, division or office of the city which carries out the responsibilities of a planning department, and to a planning commission. The office of the city planning commission is created and established. The planning commission shall be known as or referred to as the "Planning Commission of the City of Blythe" or as the "Planning Commission." 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.020 - Membership-Appointment. 
    The planning commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the city council. Three members of the commission shall reside within the corporate limits of the city and two members may reside either within the corporate limits or within the sphere-of-influence. Members may receive compensation as is prescribed by resolution of the city council. The planning commission shall have the powers and functions and duties prescribed in Section 65100 et seq. of the California Planning and Zoning Law, and in the city ordinances concerning land use issues. 
(Ord. 787 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.030 - Term of office. 
    The term of office of each planning commissioner shall be for two years. However, the formulation of the planning commission shall stagger the appointments so that no more than three members' terms shall expire in the same year. Members of the planning commission shall serve until the earlier of: 
A.  Their office becomes vacant pursuant to Section 2.64.040; 
B.  They are removed from office pursuant to Section 2.64.050. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.040 - Vacation of office. 
    A planning commission member vacates the office before the expiration of their term by: 
A.  Resignation; 
B.  Ceasing to reside within the corporate limits of the city if both available sphere-of-influence seats are filled; and/or 
C.  Ceasing to reside within the sphere-of-influence; 
D.  Ceasing to discharge the duties of a member of the commission by failing to attend three consecutive regular meetings unless he/she is prevented from attending by illness or is excused from attending by action of the commission; 
E.  Unexcused absence from twenty-five percent or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the commission during any fiscal year. 
(Ord. 787 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.050 - Removal from office. 
    The city council may remove any member of the planning commission from office at any time during their term with or without cause. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.060 - Selection of officers. 
A.  A chair and vice-chair shall be elected annually at the regular meeting in January from among the membership of the commission. Nominations on elections shall be by members of the commission. The chair and vice-chair shall assume office at the next regular meeting. 
B.  The vice-chair shall succeed the chair if they vacate the office before his/her term is completed. A new vice-chair shall be elected at the next regular meeting. 
C.  In the absence of the chair and vice-chair, any other member shall be elected from the members present to preside over the present meeting. 
D.  The chair or vice-chair may be removed by a four-fifths vote of the planning commission at any time during the term of the chair or vice-chair for just cause. A new chair and vice-chair shall immediately thereafter be elected by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.070 - Responsibilities of officers. 
    The responsibilities and powers of the officers of the planning commission shall be as follows: 
A.  Chair. 
1.  Preside at all meetings of the commission, 
2.  Call special meetings of the commission in accordance with legal requirements and the rules of procedure, 
3.  Sign documents of the commission, 
4.  See that all actions of the commission are properly taken; 
B.  Vice-Chair. During the absence, disability or disqualification of the chair, the vice-chair shall exercise or perform all the duties and be subject to all the responsibilities of the chair. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.080 - Secretary, staff support. 
    The department head over the planning in the city shall appoint a secretary to the commission and shall be responsible for providing staff support to the commission. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.090 - Duties and powers. 
A.  The planning commission shall advise the city council on all matters pertaining to land use planning in the city. 
B.  The commission shall advise the city council on those matters falling within its charged responsibilities in a manner reflecting concern for the overall development and environment of the city as a setting for human activities. 
C.  The planning commission shall have and exercise the power to recommend to the city council, after a public hearing thereon, the adoption, amendment or repeal of the general plan, or any part thereof, for the physical development of the city. 
D.  The planning commission shall have and exercise the power to recommend to the city council, after a public hearing thereon, the adoption, amendment or repeal of the zoning ordinance, or any part thereof. 
E.  The planning commission shall have and exercise the power to recommend to the city council, after a public hearing thereon, the adoption of zone changes. 
F.  The planning commission shall have and exercise the power to recommend to the city council, after a public hearing thereon, the adoption of major variances, conditional use permits and plot plans requiring an environmental analysis. 
G.  The planning commission shall have and exercise the power to recommend to the city council, after a public hearing thereon, the adoption of with conditions tentative tract maps, and tentative parcel maps. 
H.  The planning commission shall have and exercise the power to approve, upon a finding of compliance with the conditions of approval as adopted by council final tract maps. 
I.  The planning commission shall exercise such other functions with respect to land subdivision, planning, and zoning as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.100 - Rules of order. 
    Except as otherwise provided in these rules of procedure, "Robert's Rules of Order" shall be used as a guide to the conduct of the meetings of the planning commission; provided, however, that the failure of the commission to conform to the rules of order shall not, in any instance, be deemed to invalidate the action taken. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.110 - Public meetings. 
A.  A regular meeting shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month, commencing at six p.m. in the council chambers of the city hall. 
B.  Whenever a regularly scheduled meeting falls on a public or city holiday, no regular meeting shall be held on that day. Such regular meeting may be rescheduled to another business day, by motion adopted by the planning commission. 
C.  In matters relating to the holding of regular and special meeting, and adjourning meetings to a date certain, the commission is bound by the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act of the state. 
(Ord. 787 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.120 - Quorum. 
    A quorum shall consist of three planning commission members. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.130 - Study sessions/workshops. 
A.  The commission may be convened as a whole or as a committee of the whole for the purpose of holding a study session and/or workshop; provided, however, that no official action shall be taken and no quorum shall be required. Study sessions shall be part of the agenda of regular or special meetings. Such meetings shall be open to the public. Those items noted on the agenda under study session may not be voted upon unless noted on the agenda later in the meeting for action. 
B.  Committees. 
1.  The chairman may appoint ad hoc advisory committees with the concurrence of a majority vote of the commission. 
2.  Responsibilities and objectives of the ad hoc committee shall be specified at the time of the creation of the committee. 
3.  The committee shall be dissolved upon the completion of their responsibilities and objectives. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.140 - Agenda. 
A.  An agenda and staff report for each meeting of the commission shall be prepared by the planning staff. 
B.  The planning department cannot guarantee that applicants meeting filing deadlines will be placed on the agenda of the first meeting thereafter. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.150 - Order of meetings. 
    The planning commission shall adopt rules concerning order of meetings consistent with this code and the state codes. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.160 - Motions. 
A.  Voting Requirements. 
1.  A quorum shall consist of three members. 
2.  Any member of the commission may make motions including the chairman. 
3.  The affirmative vote of the majority of the quorum is necessary for the commission to take action. 
4.  When a member of the commission abstains from voting on any matter before it, that vote will not constitute nor be considered as either a vote in favor of or in opposition to the matter being considered. A deadlock vote shall constitute no action. Such final deadlock vote shall be referred to the city council with no recommendation. 
B.  Recording of Votes. The minutes of the commission's proceedings shall show the vote of each member, including if they were absent or failed to vote on a matter considered. 
C.  Disqualification from Voting. A member shall disqualify himself from voting in accordance with the state of California Conflict of Interest Code. When a person disqualifies himself, he shall state prior to the consideration of such matter by the commission that he is disqualifying himself due to a possible conflict of interest and shall then leave the voting area. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.170 - Appeal of action. 
    Any determination or action taken by the director may be appealed to the commission. In a similar manner, any action taken by the commission to approve or disapprove an application or any action on an appeal to the commission may be appealed to the council. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.180 - Filing of appeals. 
    An appeal may be filed by any resident of the city, the applicant or any person having an interest therein. All appeals shall be submitted to the city clerk's office, on a city application form, and shall specifically state the basis of the appeal. An appeal of a director action shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days following the date of action for which an appeal is made. An appeal of a commission decision shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within ten days following the date of action for which an appeal is made. Appeals shall be accompanied by a filing fee as specified by council resolution. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.190 - Effective date of appealed actions. 
    An action of the director and an action of the commission including action on a matter appealed from the director, shall not become final until the earlier of the expiration of the appeal period with no appeal having been undertaken or the action of the body having final appellate authority. 
(Ord. 719 § 1 (part), 1995) 
2.64.200 - Temporary suspension of planning commission. 
    The powers and duties of the planning commission are suspended from the effective date of this ordinance until June 30, 2011. Pursuant to Section 65100 et seq. of the California Planning and Zoning Law, during said time period, the Blythe city council shall carry out all the functions of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 845, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Chapter 2.65 - PURCHASING CONTROL SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 878, § 1, adopted July 12, 2016, repealed the former Chapter 2.65, §§ 2.65.010-2.65.090, and enacted a new Chapter 2.65 as set out herein. The former Chapter 2.65 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 773, 2001. 

2.65.010 - Definition of terms. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  "Facility" means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, real property, street, highway or other public work improvement. 
B.  "Maintenance work" is defined in Public Contract Code Section 22002. 
C.  "Professional services" includes financial, economic, accounting, engineering, legal or administrative services that require specially trained and experienced persons, firms, or corporations to perform them. 
D.  "Public project" is defined in Public Contract Code Section 22002. 
E.  "UPCCAA" shall mean the Uniform Public Constructing Cost Accounting Act, Public Contract Code 22000 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.020 - Adoption of purchasing system. 
A.  A purchasing system is adopted, pursuant to the requirements of the UPCCAA and Government Code Section 54202, in order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services, and equipment, to secure for the city supplies, services, and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases. 
B.  The requirements of the UPCCAA shall be applicable to all contracts and purchases on public projects. 
C.  The requirements of the UPCCAA shall also be applicable to the city's purchase of all goods, equipment or services and contracts for "maintenance work," except as may be specifically provided under state or local law to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.030 - Centralized purchasing system. 
    The purchasing system is intended to be centralized within the administrative services function of the city. The city manager may authorize, in writing, any department to purchase specified supplies and equipment independent of the purchasing agent, however such purchases shall be made in conformity with the established procedures. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.040 - Purchasing agent. 
A.  The city manager is the purchasing agent and may appoint a designee to administer the purchasing system. The designated purchasing agent's authority and responsibilities shall be in accordance with all applicable resolutions and administrative regulations established by the city. 
B.  The purchasing agent shall: 
1.  Purchase or contract for the supplies, services and equipment required by any city department in accordance with the purchasing procedures and such other rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the city council; 
2.  Negotiate and recommend the execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment; 
3.  Recommend to the city council, rules governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment; 
4.  Supervise the inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications; 
5.  Supervise the sale of surplus or unused supplies and equipment or transfer between departments as needed; 
6.  Recommend the sale of surplus real property; and 
7.  Maintain a bidder's list of vendors, catalog file and such other records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. 
C.  In connection with these activities, the purchasing agent shall endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases, and shall keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and products. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.040 - Requisitions. 
    Rules governing the purchasing system, either by resolution or administrative regulation, shall provide procedures that require every department to submit requests and estimates for supplies, equipment and services to the designated purchasing agent in a prescribed requisition process at least annually. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.050 - Encumbrance of funds. 
    Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order or approve any written agreement, unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.060 - Inspection and testing. 
    The purchasing agent, in his or her discretion, shall have the authority to inspect supplies and equipment delivered, or services rendered, to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the original contract or order. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.070 - Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act adopted. 
A.  The city council hereby adopts the UPCCAA for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing all purchases and contracts awarded by the city. In accordance with the terms of the UPCCAA, the city may utilize the Act's procedures when contracting for "public projects" as defined in Public Contract Code Section 22002. Pursuant to Public Contract Code Section 22003, the city may also use the Act's procedures for any other work which does not fall within the definition of a "public project." 
B.  Nothing shall preclude the city from utilizing more restrictive procedures. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.080 - Bidding, contracting and purchasing procedures. 
A.  Small Purchase Procedures. Public projects, maintenance work, and the purchase of any supplies, equipment and services, which are in accordance with the limits established in Public Contract Code Section 22032(a), may be performed by the employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. 
B.  Informal Procedures. Public projects, maintenance work, and any purchases of supplies, equipment and services in the amount set forth in Public Contract Code Section 22032(b) may be let to contract by following the Act's informal procedures. The informal procedures include the following: 
1.  Contractors List. A list of contractors, identified according to categories of work, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 22034, together with any criteria promulgated by the Commission from time to time. 
2.  Notice Inviting Bids. At least ten calendar days before bids are due, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors on the list for the category of work being bid, and to all construction trade journals specified pursuant to the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 22036; provided however: 
a.  Additional contractors and trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the purchasing agent. 
b.  For public projects, if there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent to the construction trade journals specified by the commission. 
c.  For circumstances not involving public projects, where there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the supplies, equipment, services or maintenance work to be procured, the notice inviting bids shall be made in conformity with procedures established by the purchasing agent from time to time. Whenever possible, bids should be solicited from at least three qualified bidders. 
d.  If the product or service is proprietary in nature, such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to those contractor(s). 
3.  In situations where a contract was originally presumed to fall within the informal bid limits set forth in Section 2.65.090(B) but where all bids received are in excess of those limits, the city council may still award the contract if the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 22034(f) have been met. 
C.  Formal Procedures. Public projects, maintenance work, and any purchases of supplies, equipment and services in the amount set forth in Public Contract Code Section 22032(c) shall be let to contract pursuant to the formal procedures set forth in the UPCCAA and as described in this Article. Except as provided in this code or under law to the contrary, contracts for maintenance work, and any purchase of supplies, equipment and services greater than $100,000 may also be let to contract pursuant to the formal procedures in this section. 
1.  Notice Inviting Bids. 
a.  Formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. The notice shall be published at least fourteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation pursuant to the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 22037. 
b.  The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail, and mailed to all construction trade journals specified in Public Contract Code Section 22036. For circumstances not involving a public project, where there is no construction trade journal for the supplies, equipment, services or maintenance work to be procured, the notice inviting bids shall instead be made in conformity with established procedures. All notices under this paragraph shall be sent at least fifteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids. 
c.  In addition to notice required by this chapter, the city may give such other notice as it deems proper. 
2.  The city council shall adopt plans, specifications and working details for all public projects requiring the formal bid procedure. 
3.  All public projects shall be awarded as provided in the UPCCAA. 
D.  Contract Approval. 
1.  The city's purchasing agent has authority to execute all contracts or purchase orders valued at fifteen thousand dollars or less or purchase orders for recurring operating expenses that do not exceed the amount appropriated by the city council. 
2.  All contracts or purchase orders over fifteen thousand dollars shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.090 - Bid acceptance or rejection. 
A.  Processing Bids. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. It is the responsibility of the bidder to ensure receipt of the bid document by the city clerk by the designated hour. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. 
B.  Bid acceptance or rejection. 
1.  Rejection of All Bids. In its discretion the city council may reject all bids presented, if city, prior to rejecting all bids and declaring that the project can be more economically performed by city employees, furnishes a written notice to the apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the bidder of the city's intention to reject the bid, and shall be mailed at least two business days prior to the hearing where the bid will be rejected. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city may: 
a.  Abandon the project or re-advertise for bids; or 
b.  Following passage of a resolution of the city council by a four-fifths vote stating the project can be performed more economically by the employees of the city, the city may have the project done by force account without further complying with the requirements of the Act. 
2.  All contracts for public projects shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder as provided in the UPCCAA. All other informally or formally bid contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, unless otherwise provided in this code. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city may accept the one it chooses. 
3.  If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the city by force account or negotiated contract without further complying with this article. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.100 - Exceptions to bidding requirement. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by law, the following purchases of services, supplies and equipment shall be by negotiated contract without requiring a bidding process: 
1.  Contracts for professional services, including but not necessarily limited to contracts with accountants, auditors, attorneys, plan checkers, inspectors, surveyors, architects, engineers, CEQA consultants, information systems consultants, financial consultants, election services consultants, public relations consultants and related activities, negotiation for or acquisition of land, insurance, bonds, and other similar contracts, subject to the requirements in Sections 4526 through 4529.5 and Section 37103 of the Government Code. 
2.  Contracts where a commodity or service is offered by only one vendor, or when only one vendor is able to supply a commodity within the time frame or under terms and conditions which reasonably meet the needs of the city (sole source). 
3.  Contracts where the purchase is procured pursuant to a competitively bid contract awarded by another public entity. 
4.  Where the services, supplies and equipment are procured under a contract set forth on the California Multiple Award Schedule (CMAS). Contracts under this exception must be approved by the city council upon a finding that the proposed contract offers the best pricing. Whenever possible, the proposed contract should be based on at least three bids. City's agents shall attempt to negotiate a lower price from the CMAS contractor(s) whenever possible. 
5.  The day-to-day operation of the city's self-insurance, or insurance retention, programs are exempt from these requirements, when performed in cooperation with the city's risk manager. 
6.  Other exceptions authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.110 - Emergencies; procedure. 
A.  In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the city council, by contractor, or by a combination of the two. 
B.  In case of emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the city shall comply with Chapter 2.5 of the Public Contract Code, commencing with Section 22050. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.120 - Professional services. 
    All persons or entities rendering professional services to the city shall render such services pursuant to a professional services agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney. All persons rendering professional services pursuant to a professional services agreement shall not be subject to the city's municipal code as it relates to employees of the city. Such persons shall be considered independent contractors and not employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.130 - Petty cash procedures. 
    The finance department's petty cash fund may be used to provide advances or reimbursements of up to one hundred dollars to city employees for the direct purchase of goods and services needed for city operations. Petty cash purchases must be documented the time they are made on a petty cash voucher. Petty cash purchases may include, but are not limited to the following: 
A.  Freight and postal changes due upon delivery of goods; 
B.  Purchases of goods needed for immediate use; 
C.  Reimbursement of employees' travel expenses for city business trips of one hundred dollars or less; 
D.  Reimbursement of employees' expenses for city business meetings of one hundred dollars or less. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.140 - Local preference. 
    The city of Blythe shall give local preference to Blythe business establishments furnishing materials, supplies and/or services to the city. If the materials, supplies and/or services furnished by a Blythe business is of equal or higher quality than a non-Blythe business, the city will accept the Blythe business's bid and pay a premium or additional price to a local business of not more than five percent on purchases of five thousand dollars or less; two percent on purchases of five thousand one dollars to ten thousand dollars; and one percent on purchases of ten thousand one dollars to fifty thousand dollars. There shall be no local preference consideration for purchases or contracts over fifty thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.150 - State procured vendors or contractors. 
    Bidding procedures shall not be required when purchases for supplies and/or equipment are made through a vendor that is contracted through the state of California Procurement Division. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.160 - Procedure for receipt of goods. 
    The designated department purchasing authority will determine that packing slips are checked against the items received and the items ordered. If the order is complete, the department purchasing authority will initial the packing slip, indicating the receipt of the goods. Any discrepancies will be immediately resolved with the vendor. The original packing slip, invoice and completed purchase order shall be sent to the finance department for payment processing. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.170 - Payment requirements. 
    All purchases shall be made by purchase order, or other prescribed document, signed by the department purchasing authority, department head and the director of finance or the deputy director of finance. All purchases shall be paid by warrant and signed by the city manager and director of finance. Payment will only be made upon the finance department receiving the properly completed accounting documents such as purchase orders, packing slips and vendor invoices. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
2.65.180 - Payment dates. 
    Warrants shall be released only after they have been approved by the city council at a regular council meeting. The release of warrants shall be the second and fourth Wednesday of each month. In the case that council should go dark on a regularly scheduled meeting, due to holidays, warrants shall be released and then submitted for approval at the next meeting. In some cases the director of finance may be required to issue a warrant prior to the approval by city council. A warrant register will be submitted to council for review and approval of all those prepaid warrants issued on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 7-12-16) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.04 - ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Duties transferred to county officers. 
    It is the intention of the city and the city council does elect that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector of the county of Riverside, in accordance with an act of the legislature of the state of California, entitled "An Act to Provide for the Levy and Collection of Taxes by and for the Use of Municipal Corporations and Cities Incorporated Under the Laws of the State of California, except Municipal Corporations of the First Class, and to Provide for the Consolidation and Abolition of Certain Municipal Offices, and to Provide that Their Duties May Be Performed by Certain Officers of the County, and Fixing the Compensation to Be allowed for Such Officers for the Services so Rendered to Such Municipal Corporations." 
(Ord. 4 § 1, 1916) 
Chapter 3.08 - CLAIMS AND DEMANDS 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Filing-Generally. 
    All demands against the city shall be presented and audited by the city council in the manner set forth in Sections 3.08.020 through 3.08.040. 
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1916) 
3.08.020 - Filing-Contents-Affidavit. 
    Every demand against the city shall be itemized to show the details of the claim made, with the dates and the prices of the respective items, and shall be accompanied by an affidavit by or in behalf of the claimant that the same is true and correct, that no part thereof has been previously paid, and the amount is justly due the claimant. 
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1916) 
3.08.030 - Action by city council. 
    All demands against the city shall be filed with the city clerk, and presented by him to the city council. Before such demands are acted upon by the council, they shall be submitted to the finance committee. If any demand is for work done or material furnished under the supervision or direction of any committee or member of the council, or any official of the city before being allowed by the council, the demand shall be approved by the chairman of such committee or by such member of the council, or official of the city. 
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1916) 
3.08.040 - Warrant. 
    Upon a claim being allowed by the city council, and ordered paid, the president of the council shall draw a warrant upon the city treasurer for the amount of the claim as allowed, which warrant shall be countersigned by the city clerk and sealed with the seal of the city, and shall specify for what purpose the warrant is drawn and out of what fund it is to be paid. 
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1916) 
Chapter 3.12 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance. 
(Ord. 440 § 1, 1973) 
3.12.020 - Purpose. 
    The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California, insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 440 § 4, 1973) 
3.12.030 - Rate. 
    The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be at the rates shown in the following schedule: 
Operative Date Rate July 1, 1973 .93% July 1, 1974 .94% July 1, 1975 .95% July 1, 1976 .96% July 1, 1977 .97% July 1, 1978 .98% July 1, 1979 .99% July 1, 1980 1.00%.  
(Ord. 440 § 2, 1973) 
3.12.040 - Operative date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Ord. 440 § 3, 1973) 
3.12.050 - Sales tax imposed. 
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.030 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 440 § 6, 1973) 
3.12.060 - Use tax imposed. 
    An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property, purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in the city, at the rate stated in Section 3.12.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 440 § 8, 1973) 
3.12.070 - Place of sale. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state, or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 440 § 7, 1973) 
3.12.080 - Contract with state. 
    Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided that, if the city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and, in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract, rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 440 § 5, 1973) 
3.12.090 - State law-Adoption. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 440 § 9, 1973) 
3.12.100 - State law-Limitations. 
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California. The substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from the tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose the tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of the code. The substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 440 § 10, 1973) 
3.12.110 - State law-Amendments. 
    All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 440 § 15, 1973) 
3.12.120 - Additional permit not required. 
    If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 440 § 11, 1973) 
3.12.130 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 599 § 1, 1983: Ord. 440 § 13, 1973) 
3.12.131 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 599 § 2, 1983) 
3.12.132 - Operability. 
A.  Section 3.12.130 shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
B.  Section 3.12.131 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Ord. 599 §§ 3, 4, 1983) 
3.12.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 440 § 16, 1973) 
3.12.150 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24. 
(Ord. 440 § 17, 1973) 
Chapter 3.16 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Title-Authority. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Blythe." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 358 § 1, 1967) 
3.16.020 - Imposed. 
    There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city are granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 358 § 2, 1967) 
3.16.030 - Person liable for tax. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.040 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 358 § 3, 1967) 
3.16.040 - Exemptions-Instrument in writing to secure debt. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 358 § 4, 1967) 
3.16.050 - Exemptions-Transfer to political body. 
    Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Ord. 525 § 1 (part), 1978: Ord. 358 § 5, 1967) 
3.16.060 - Exemptions-Deeds resulting from or in lieu of foreclosure. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration, under penalty of perjury, for tax purposes. 
(Ord. 525 § 1 (part), 1978: Ord. 358 § 5(A), 1967) 
3.16.070 - Exemptions-Certain plans of reorganization or adjustment. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subdivisions 1 to 4 inclusive, subsection A of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Ord. 358 § 6, 1967) 
3.16.080 - Exemptions-Conveyance in compliance with Securities and Exchange Commission. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchanges Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 358 § 7, 1967) 
3.16.090 - Exemptions-Realty held by partnership. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of any interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 358 § 8, 1967) 
3.16.100 - Administration of provisions. 
    The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 358 § 9, 1967) 
3.16.110 - Claims for refund. 
    Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 358 § 10, 1967) 
Chapter 3.20 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 

3.20.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 316 § 1, 1964) 
3.20.020 - Definitions. 
    Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of a hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustees, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax administrator" means the city clerk or the Riverside County tax collector, if the city and the county of Riverside agree that the Riverside County tax collector shall be the tax collecting agency. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy, by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement, for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. 
(Ord. 316 § 2, 1964) 
3.20.030 - Tax imposed. 
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to, and shall pay, a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. Transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel the tax administrator, as herein defined, may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator, as herein defined. 
(Ord. 704 § 1, 1994: Ord. 550 § 1, 1979: Ord. 438 § 1, 1973: Ord. 366 § 1, 1968: Ord. 316 § 3, 1964) 
3.20.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter; 
2.  The privilege of renting a mobile home located inside a mobile home park; 
3.  The privilege of renting any mobile home when the tenant is an employee of the owner or operator of the mobile home. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim thereof, made at the time rent is collected and, under penalty of perjury, upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator as defined in Section 3.20.020. 
(Ord. 524 § 1, 1978: Ord. 348-A § 1, 1966: Ord. 316 § 4, 1964) 
(Ord. No. 832, § 1, 2-10-09) 
3.20.050 - Operator's duties. 
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in Section 3.20.120. 
(Ord. 316 § 5, 1964) 
3.20.060 - Registration. 
    Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the tax administrator, as defined in Section 3.20.020, and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate, to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator, as herein defined, for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator, as herein defined. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 316 § 6, 1964) 
3.20.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
A.  Each operator who has obtained a transient occupancy registration certificate as of the date that the ordinance codified in this section becomes effective, shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, as defined in Section 3.20.020, file a return with the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, reporting the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancy. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be paid to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish other reporting periods for any certificate holder or may require a deposit or bond for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax, and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessations for any reason. All taxes collected by the operator shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
B.  Each operator who has obtained a transient occupancy registration certificate after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall file a return, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar month or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, as defined in Section 3.20.020, to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancy. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish other reporting periods for any certificate holder or may require a cash deposit bond for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of tax, and he may require further information in the return. The return and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this section shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
C.  Returns and tax collection remittances shall be either: 
1.  Postmarked by the United States Postal Service on or before the twenty-fifth day of the month it is due; or 
2.  Deposited in the city finance office by five p.m. on or before the last business day of the month it is due. 
(Ord. 718 § 1, 1995; Ord. 550 § 2, 1979: Ord. 316 § 7(a), (b), 1964) 
3.20.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator, as defined in Section 3.20.020, determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by this chapter. 
(Ord. 316 § 8, 1964) 
3.20.090 - Failure to collect and report tax. 
    If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator, as defined in Section 3.20.020, shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator produces such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not fewer than five days' written notice, in the manner prescribed in this chapter, to the operator to show cause, at a time and place fixed in the notice, why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person, in the manner prescribed in this chapter, of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.20.100. 
(Ord. 316 § 9, 1964) 
3.20.100 - Appeal. 
    Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator as defined in Section 3.20.020, with respect to the amount of tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in Section 3.20.090 for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 316 § 10, 1964) 
3.20.110 - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax the collection and payment to the city of which he may have been liable, which records the tax administrator, as defined in Section 3.20.020, shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 316 § 11, 1964) 
3.20.120 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator as defined in Section 3.20.020, within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator, that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subparagraph A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, as herein defined, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator, as herein defined, that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 316 § 12, 1964) 
3.20.130 - Actions to collect. 
    Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 316 § 13, 1964) 
3.20.140 - Violations deemed misdemeanor-Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, as defined in Section 3.20.020, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24. 
C.  Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24. 
(Ord. 316 § 14, 1964) 
Chapter 3.24 - WATERWORKS OPERATING FUND 
Sections: 

3.24.010 - Created. 
    A fund, to be known as the city waterworks operating fund, is created, into which shall be paid all moneys received in connection with the operation and maintenance of the city waterworks system and out of which all expenses and cost of operation and maintenance of the system shall be paid, unless otherwise authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. 51 § 2, 1920) 
Chapter 3.28 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 

3.28.010 - Created. 
    To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund, to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. 
(Ord. 114 § 1, 1936) 
3.28.020 - Source of moneys. 
    All moneys received by the city from the state, under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code, for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of, streets and highways, other than state highways, shall be paid into the special gas tax street improvement fund. 
(Ord. 114 § 2, 1936) 
3.28.030 - Expenditures. 
    All moneys in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of, Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 114 § 3, 1936) 
Chapter 3.32 - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION FUNDS 
Sections: 

3.32.010 - Declaration of need. 
    The city council finds and determines that the development and construction of new residential living units and of new commercial and industrial structures within the city create an immediate and urgent need for funds because of the increased demand placed upon public services, including police and fire protection, public utilities, water drainage, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage, parks, and leisure oriented facilities. 
(Ord. 536 § 1, 1979) 
3.32.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the words and phrases contained in this section shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Dwelling unit" includes each single-family dwelling and each habitation unit of an apartment duplex or multiple-dwelling structure designed as a separate place for habitation of a family. 
B.  "Person" includes every person, firm, or corporation engaging in construction activities itself or through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor. 
C.  "Trailer space" means each space, area or building, in a trailer park or mobile home park or other place, designed as a place to accommodate any mobile home, trailer, van, bus, or other vehicle or mobile structure, at a time when the same is being used as a living or sleeping quarters for human beings. 
(Ord. 536 § 4, 1979) 
3.32.030 - Fees-Designated. 
    In addition to any other fee or fees prescribed by the city ordinances, every person constructing any new building or trailer space in the city shall pay to the city a sum appropriately computed as follows: 
A.  For each dwelling unit in a single-family structure, condominium, apartment duplex, or multiple-family structure, five hundred dollars per each dwelling unit; 
B.  For each trailer space five hundred dollars, with no additional sum for any directly accessory structure; 
C.  For new industrial and commercial buildings five hundred dollars for the first five thousand square feet of gross building area under roof, and thereafter ten cents per square foot of gross building area under roof; 
D.  For any other construction not falling within the definition of "dwelling unit," "trailer space," "commercial building," or "industrial building," five hundred dollars for the first dwelling unit and twenty cents per square foot of living area in each additional unit. 
(Ord. 536 § 2, 1979) 
3.32.040 - Fees-Payment. 
    Such fees shall be due and payable upon application to the city for a building permit for the construction of any such dwelling unit or building; provided, however, that there shall be a refund of such fees in the event that the building permit is not approved, or is not used, for such construction. 
(Ord. 536 § 3, 1979) 
3.32.050 - Restriction on use of funds. 
    All proceeds from the fees collected under this chapter shall be paid into a special fund of the city and shall be used solely for capital outlay and expenditures, as authorized from said fund, for purposes such as, but not limited to the following: 
A.  Purchase of land and interests in land; 
B.  Development of parks, and buildings for use thereon; 
C.  Acquisition and development of other varieties of open space; 
D.  Acquisition and development of parkways and median islands; 
E.  Acquisition and development of bicycle trails, riding trails, and other types of trails for recreational use; 
F.  Constructing buildings and improvements; 
G.  Purchasing machinery, equipment and other capital type facilities which the city may develop or approve; 
H.  Expanding public parks, public services, police and fire protection, public utilities, including water drainage and sewage treatment. 
    In expending said funds for said purposes, the city may act alone or may exercise its powers directly with any other public entity to accomplish any of the foregoing purposes for the benefit of the whole, or any portion, of the city. 
(Ord. 536 § 5, 1979) 
3.32.060 - Fees-Commencement. 
    The fees provided for in this chapter, and the fees required to be paid, shall be applicable with respect to fees in this code to building permits for construction activities issued on or after June 20, 1978. Any person constructing one or more dwelling units, or otherwise engaging in construction taxable under this code, pursuant to a building permit applied for on or after said date, or applied for before said date, but not actually issued until on or after said date, shall be liable for payment of said fees irrespective of whether said fees were collected at the time of building permit application or issuance. No occupancy permit shall be issued with respect to any completed structure or construction taxable under this chapter, unless and until the proper tax has been paid. 
(Ord. 536 § 7, 1979) 
Chapter 3.34 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE 
Sections: 

3.34.010 - Purpose. 
    The city council finds and determines that the development and construction of new residential, commercial and industrial structures within the city and the rehabilitation of existing residential, commercial and industrial structures create an immediate and urgent need for funds because of the increased demand placed upon public facilities including public safety facilities, park and recreation facilities, government service facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, public amenities facilities, storm-drain facilities and transportation facilities; and, in order to implement the goals and objectives of the city of Blythe general plan and redevelopment plan(s) and to mitigate the impacts caused by new and anticipated residential, commercial and industrial development a development impact fee is needed to finance public facilities and to pay for new development's fair share of the acquisition and improvement construction costs and other costs necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan and redevelopment plan(s). 
(Ord. 801 § 1 (part), 2006) 
3.34.020 - Development impact fee. 
A.  A development impact fee is established on issuance of all development permits for development in the city to pay for public facility improvements to implement the general plan, redevelopment plan(s), capital improvement plan and projects identified on the needs list identified in the development impact fee justification study. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact areas on which the development impact fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment. To the extent that the development impact fee includes components for financing projects already included in fees collected under other city ordinances (i.e., sewer connection, water connection), such other fees, when paid, shall be a credit against the appropriate components of the development impact fee. To the extent that some or all of the projects financing or to be financed by the development impact fee are financed through a community facilities district, special assessment district or other financing mechanism, participation in such other financing mechanism shall be a credit against the appropriate component of the development impact fee. As described in the fee resolution, this development impact fee shall be paid by each developer either prior to issuance of a building permit or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy of the commercial or industrial project or the respective dwelling units in a residential project, or at such earlier time permitted by law, as set forth in, if applicable, Government Code Section 66007. On a bi-annual basis, the city council shall review the fees to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the burden of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. 
B.  As used in this section "development permit" means any building permit or other permit for construction or reconstruction. 
(Ord. 801 § 1 (part), 2006) 
3.34.030 - Limited use of fees. 
    The revenue raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on the account, shall be used solely to: 
A.  Pay for the city's future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 3.34.020 above, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other resources; or 
B.  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 3.34.040 to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity. 
(Ord. 801 § 1 (part), 2006) 
3.34.040 - Developer construction of facilities. 
    Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of project approval to construct a public facility described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.34.020, which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. 
(Ord. 801 § 1 (part), 2006) 
3.34.050 - Fee adjustment. 
    A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 3.34.020 may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction or adjustment is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the adjustment or reduction of the fee. 
(Ord. 801 § 1 (part), 2006) 
Chapter 3.36 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX 

3.36.010 - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in Chapter 5.10 of this code shall apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 888, § 1, 4-24-18) 
3.36.020 - Tax on commercial cannabis activity. 
A.  Every person cultivating cannabis for commercial purposes in the city shall pay an annual maximum tax of three dollars per square foot of space used as a cultivation area. This tax shall be due and payable annually for the preceding year on or before the close of the last business day in January. 
B.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis activity except cultivation shall pay a maximum tax of two percent of gross receipts due and payable monthly. 
C.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis activity shall pay an annual business license fee of five thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 888, § 1, 4-24-18) 
3.36.030 - Operation. 
A.  Failure to pay the taxes set forth in this chapter shall be subject to penalties, interest charges, and determinations of tax due as the city council may establish. The city may use any or all other enforcement remedies provided for in this code or pursuant to state law. 
B.  The city council may impose the taxes authorized by this chapter at a lower rate and may establish exemptions, incentives, or other reductions and penalties and interest charges or determinations of tax due for failure to pay the tax in a timely manner as otherwise allowed by this code or state law. No action by the city council under this section shall prevent it from later increasing the taxes or removing any exemption, incentive or reduction and restoring the maximum tax specified in this chapter. 
C.  The payment of the taxes required pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. 
D.  The taxes required in this chapter are not sales or use taxes and shall not be calculated or assessed as such. The taxes shall not be separately identified or otherwise specifically assessed or charged to any individual member, consumer or customer; rather the taxes are imposed upon the cannabis operation. 
E.  The city manager shall promulgate rules, regulations and procedures to implement and administer this chapter to ensure the efficient and timely collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter, including without limitation, formulation of penalties and interest to be assessed for failure to pay the taxes as provided. 
(Ord. No. 888, § 1, 4-24-18) 
3.36.040 - Enforcement. 
A.  The city manager shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager, with the assistance of the city attorney, may promulgate administrative rules and regulations. 
C.  The city manager shall have the power to audit and examine all books and records of commercial cannabis businesses as well as persons engaged in commercial cannabis activity, including state and federal income tax returns, California sales tax returns, logs, receipts, bank records, and other evidence documenting the gross receipts of the commercial cannabis business or person, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax, if any, required to be paid under this chapter, and for the purpose of verifying any statements or any item thereof when filed by any person pursuant to this chapter. If a commercial cannabis business or a person engaged in commercial cannabis activity, after written demand by the city, refuses or fails to make available for audit, examination or verification of such books, records, or information as the city manager requests, the city manager may make a determination of tax due after full consideration of any and all information available. 
D.  The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action to collect the tax debt unpaid at the time of conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any state law requiring the payment of all taxes. 
E.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation passed in accordance herewith, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any city officer or employee any material fact shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 888, § 1, 4-24-18) 
3.36.050 - Debts, deficiencies, determinations, hearings. 
A.  The amount of any tax, penalties and interest imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and any commercial cannabis business or a person engaged in commercial cannabis activity without also making payment to the city of the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be liable in an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the tax, penalties and interest imposed on such commercial cannabis business or a person engaged in commercial cannabis activity. 
B.  If the city manager is not satisfied that any statement filed as required by this chapter is correct, or that the amount of the tax is correctly computed, the city manager may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information available. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a given period or periods may be made. When a commercial cannabis business or a person engaged in commercial cannabis activity, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from the commercial cannabis activity whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. 
C.  Under any of the following circumstances, the city manager may make and give notice of a determination of the amount of a tax or taxes owed under this chapter: 
1.  If the commercial cannabis business or person engaged in commercial cannabis activity has not filed any statement or return required under this chapter. 
2.  If the commercial cannabis business or person engaged in commercial cannabis activity has not paid any tax due under this chapter. 
3.  If the person has not, after demand by the city manager, filed a corrected statement or return, or furnished to the city adequate substitution of the information contained in a statement or return previously filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under this chapter. 
D.  Within ten days of service of a determination of the amount of tax owed under this chapter, a commercial cannabis business or person engaged in commercial cannabis activity may apply in writing to the city manager for a hearing on the determination. If such an application is not made, the tax assessed by the city shall become final. 
(Ord. No. 888, § 1, 4-24-18) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: The business license fees as set by resolution of the city council can be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 

Chapter 5.02 - BUSINESS LICENSES 
Sections: 

5.02.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Business" means professions, trades, occupations and all and every kind of calling carried on for a profit or livelihood. 
B.  "Employee" means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner's family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in such business. 
C.  "Place of business" means a place of business in the city regularly kept open, for the transaction of the particular business engaged in during the hours customary to transacting such business. 
D.  "Retail business" means every business conducted for the purpose of selling, or offering to sell, any goods, wares or merchandise, other than as a part of wholesale business as defined in this section. 
E.  "Vehicle" means and includes every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
F.  "Wholesale business" means every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling goods, wares or merchandise in wholesale lots to retail merchants for resale at retail to the trade by such retail merchant. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.020 - Revenue measure. 
    This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.030 - Not a substitute for other revenue provisions. 
    Persons required to pay a license fee for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license fee for the privilege of doing such business required under any other provision of this code or ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part) , 1986) 
5.02.040 - Effect of chapter on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect the prosecution for violation of any other provision of this code or ordinance committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond, or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.050 - Unlawful businesses. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.060 - License required. 
A.  There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this chapter license fees in the amount hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city so to do, or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
B.  This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.080 - Licenses for branch establishments. 
    A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.090 - Joint licenses for multiple businesses. 
    If two or more businesses are conducted on the same premises by the same person and such businesses are within the same classification as designated hereafter in Section 5.02.300 only one license shall be required. Conversely, if the businesses are within several classifications, one license shall be required for each business not within the same classification. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.100 - Exemptions by law. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States of America or of the state of California from payment of such fees as are herein prescribed. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.110 - Exemptions-Franchised public utilities. 
    No public utility, making franchise payments to the city under the provisions of an unexpired franchise, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter with respect to the business or activity conducted pursuant to the terms of such unexpired franchise. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.120 - Local exemptions. 
    Exemptions from business licensing requirements and fees are granted to residents who market handmade craft items and food items while participating in festivals and bazaars sponsored by nonprofit and service organizations. 
(Ord. 732 § 1, 1996) 
5.02.130 - License nontransferable. 
    No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable; provided, however, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular location, such licensee may upon written application therefor, and after paying a fee for location transfer as set by resolution of the city council, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on such business under such license at the location to which the business has transferred. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.140 - License duplicates. 
    A duplicate license may be issued by the finance director, or his assistant(s) to replace a license which has been previously issued and which license has been lost or destroyed or if a particular business requires a second copy, provided a written statement is filed stating such fact and upon payment of a duplicate license fee as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.150 - License posting. 
A.  A license which is issued for the transacting of business at a fixed location must be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which it is issued. 
B.  A license which is issued for the transacting of business for other than a fixed location must be kept in the possession of the person transacting business for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.160 - Classification determination. 
A.  The determination of which business(es) or class of business(es) in which a licensee or applicant for a license is engaged shall be an administrative function of the finance director or his assistant(s). 
B.  If an applicant for a license believes that he is placed in the incorrect classification he may, within three months from the date of issuance of a license, file an appeal with the finance director who will cause an investigation to take place and shall notify the person filing the appeal within thirty days of his decision. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.170 - Overpayment. 
    Should it appear that a licensee has overpaid the amount of business license fee to which the city is entitled under the provisions of this chapter, such overpayment shall be applied against any subsequent liability hereunder, or at the written request of the licensee such overpayment may be refunded. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.200 - License-Application and issuance. 
A.  Every person, firm, corporation or company required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for same on a form provided by the license department and upon approval of the application shall pay the prescribed fees as determined by the finance director or his assistant. The license shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the business licensed; 
2.  The address where the business will be transacted; 
3.  The date of expiration of such license; and 
4.  Such other information as the finance director deems necessary and appropriate. 
B.  No license shall be issued until all required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.210 - New business-License fee prorated. 
    Upon application for the first license to be issued for a new business the license fee shall be divided by twelve and the fee for the new business shall then be determined by multiplying that number by the number of months remaining in the calendar year. There shall be no other prorating of fees. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.220 - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the finance director or his assistant(s) with respect to the classification of such person's business, or with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license, may appeal to the city manager in writing for a review and decision. Said appeal must be filed within thirty days of either the issuance of a license or, in the case of denial, within thirty days of notice of the denial is placed in the mail. If further appeal is required the person shall file a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the city manager's decision. The city clerk shall present the notice to the city council and the council shall set a time and place for hearing such appeal. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.230 - License fees-How and when payable. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, all license fees required under the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable as follows: 
A.  Annual license fees shall be due on January 2nd of each year; provided, however, that license fees for new businesses starting operation after January 2nd shall be due and payable prior to the start of business of said new business. 
B.  Monthly license fees shall be due the first day of the month for which they are issued. 
C.  Daily license fees shall be due prior to or on the day for which it is issued and prior to the commencement of business. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.240 - Delinquent penalty. 
    If said license fees as provided by this chapter are not paid within thirty days from the due date there shall be added a ten percent penalty on the thirty-first day after the date due and an additional ten percent penalty on the first of each month thereafter until paid provided that such combined penalty shall not exceed fifty percent of the license fee to which it is added. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.250 - License fees-Set by resolution. 
    License fees which are required by this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.300 - Classification of businesses. 
    For the purpose of determining the license fee payable businesses, trades and professions are classified as follows: 
    Class A. Personal services, professional services, medical services; 
    Class B. Print shops; 
    Class C. Building trade contractors; 
    Class D. Equipment sales, car sales, lumber yards, building materials sales, hardware stores; 
    Class E. Entertainment and recreational facilities, except skating rinks; 
    Class F. Skating rinks; 
    Class G. Mobile home, recreational vehicle spaces; 
    Class H. Hotels, motel, boarding houses; 
    Class I. Retail sale businesses unless expressly provided for elsewhere in this section including restaurants, cocktail lounges; 
    Class J. Pharmacy/drug stores; 
    Class K. Taxicabs, human transportation services; 
    Class L. Card tables; 
    Class M. Pool tables; 
    Class N. Vending machines, amusement games and devices when not owned by a firm whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines as provided for elsewhere in this code; 
    Class O. Juke boxes when not owned by a firm whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines as provided for elsewhere in this code; 
    Class P. Circuses, carnivals, arcades, tent shows and similar events; 
    Class Q. Secondhand stores/dealers; 
    Class R. Amplifier installation or television multipliers; 
    Class S. Transient merchants except meat and fish sales; 
    Class T. Transient merchants-meat and fish sales; 
    Class U. Photographers; 
    Class V. Bankruptcy/fire sales; 
    Class W. Businesses not otherwise classified; 
    Class X. Transient single amusement ride operators; 
    Class Y. Special event facility. 
(Ord. 762 § 1, 2000; Ord. 733 § 1, 1997; Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.310 - License fee a debt to the city. 
    The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city so to do shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, and for the amount of the license fee and penalties imposed upon such business. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.320 - Evidence of liability for license. 
    A sign or advertisement kept, exhibited or published indicating that any person is engaged in a business, trade or profession for which a license is required hereunder, or shall hereafter be required or for the performance of services for which a charge is made or compensation accepted, shall be prima facie evidence that such person is engaged therein. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.330 - Suspension, revocation of license. 
    The city council may suspend, revoke, withdraw or discontinue any license granted under the provisions of this chapter whenever it has reason to believe that the business conducted thereunder by the licensee, his, their or its servants or employees, is a nuisance, a menace to public health, or detrimental to the peace and morals of the city, or that violations of the laws of the state or the city have been committed or are being permitted to be committed upon the premises where such business is being conducted. Such suspension, revocation, withdrawal or discontinuance shall be by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.340 - Remedies cumulative. 
    All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
5.02.350 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the finance director to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the finance director and/or the city council. 
B.  The finance director, his assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein and demand an exhibition of its license. Any person having such license in his possession, or having access to such license, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 629 § 4 (part), 1986) 
Chapter 5.08 - AMUSEMENT GAMES AND PHONOGRAPH MACHINES 
Sections: 

5.08.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Amusement machine" or "game machine" means and includes any machine or device offered for use within the city which machine or device is or will be operated, or which is offered or played, as a game or a test of skill, for the operation of which a charge is made, or which is conducted for profit. 
B.  "Person" means and includes both the singular and the plural, and also means and includes any person, individual, firm, corporation, copartnership, association, club, society or any other organization. 
C.  "Phonograph machine" means and includes any machine or device playing phonograph records reproducing voice, music or sound, which machine or device is operated by inserting therein a coin or token of any value or by payment of a valuable consideration. 
(Ord. 143 § 1, 1941) 
5.08.020 - License-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage, operate or carry on the business of any amusement machine or game machine, or any other device of any character whatsoever, not otherwise provided for in this code without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(Ord. 143 § 2, 1941) 
5.08.030 - License-Application. 
    Every person desiring to conduct, manage, operate or carry on the business of amusement machines or phonograph machines within the city shall first make written application for a license therefor upon forms to be provided by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 143 § 3, 1941) 
5.08.040 - License-Term and payment. 
    All licenses granted under this chapter shall be annual licenses, payable in advance, and shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of each year. 
(Ord. 629 § 5, 1986: Ord. 143 § 4, 1941) 
5.08.050 - License-Fees-Amusement machines and games. 
A.  Every person engaged in the business of leasing, renting or maintaining any amusement machine or game within the city shall pay an annual license fee therefor as follows: 
1.  For each of the first ten amusement machines or games for the operation of which a license is issued to any one person, said person shall pay an annual fee as set by resolution of the city council. 
2.  For each additional license issued to said person, for the operation of such machines, in excess of the initial ten machines provided for in subdivision 1 of this subsection, said person shall pay an annual license fee as set by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Separate licenses shall be issued for each machine so licensed; and the fees prescribed in this section shall be applicable regardless of the location of the machines. 
(Ord. 571 § 2 (part), 1980; Ord. 467 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 143 § 5, 1941) 
5.08.060 - License-Fees-Phonograph machines. 
    Every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or maintaining any phonograph machine within the city shall pay an annual license fee as set by resolution of the city council for each and every phonograph machine so licensed. 
(Ord. 571 § 2 (part), 1980; Ord. 467 § l (part), 1975; Ord. 143 § 6, 1941) 
5.08.070 - License-Fees-Required regardless of operation with other business. 
    The license fees provided for in Sections 5.08.050 and 5.08.060 shall be paid whether or not the machines are operated in conjunction with any other business. 
(Ord. 143 § 7, 1941) 
5.08.080 - Registration and labeling of amusement machines and games. 
A.  All such amusement machines or game machines mentioned in this chapter shall be registered in the office of the chief of police. Such registration shall indicate the serial number, the owner, and the place at which such machine is to be located. 
B.  All machines so maintained in the city shall bear a stamp or label or sign indicating the serial number thereof, the true owner, the principal place of business of the owner, the number of the license issued by the city covering the maintenance of said machine, together with the expiration date of said license. 
(Ord. 143 § 8, 1941) 
5.08.090 - Substitution of machine on unexpired license. 
    In the event any person discontinues maintaining any machine or game licensed under this chapter, during the period when such machine is licensed for an unexpired period, the licensee may substitute a game or machine in place of said machine the use of which is so discontinued, and may maintain such substituted machine without the payment of an additional license fee for the unexpired period of the license carried on said discontinued machine; provided, however, that such person must surrender the unexpired license of the discontinued machine to the city clerk, who may thereupon issue a new license for the unexpired term of the discontinued machine, and provided, further, that the new machine shall be registered with the chief of police as provided in Section 5.08.080. 
(Ord. 143 § 10, 1941) 
5.08.100 - Seizure of unlabeled machines. 
    Any machine operated in violation of the provisions of Section 5.08.080, or maintained without having displayed thereon, in a clearly visible place, the required label or sign indicating that the license fee therefor is unexpired, shall be seized and held by any duly qualified police officer of the city, whereupon said machine shall be redeemable by the true owner within a period of not to exceed sixty days, upon the payment of the reasonable value for the safekeeping of said machine, together with the license fee, as provided for in this chapter, for the period during which the machine was improperly maintained. 
(Ord. 143 § 9, 1941) 
5.08.120 - Machines prohibited on public ways and in public buildings. 
    No license contemplated in this chapter shall be issued for the renting, leasing or maintaining of any amusement machine, game machine or phonograph machine upon any public street, way, court or alley, or in or upon any publicly owned building within the city. 
(Ord. 143 § 11, 1941) 
5.08.130 - Provisions not to permit machines prohibited by city or state law. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as giving or granting any authority or privilege, or as providing for the granting or giving of any authority or privilege, to any person to rent, lease or maintain any game or machine which is prohibited by either the ordinance of the city or by the law of the state. 
(Ord. 143 § 14, 1941) 
5.08.140 - Destruction of machines used in gambling. 
    If, in any proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction, it is established that any machine or machines licensed as provided in this chapter shall have been employed for gambling purposes, then, and in such event, the machine or machines shall be summarily confiscated and destroyed upon an order made by said court. 
(Ord. 143 § 13, 1941) 
Chapter 5.10 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY 

5.10.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to accommodate the needs of medically-ill persons in need of marijuana for medical purposes, as advised and recommended by their health care provider(s), and to implement the Adult Use Marijuana Act which was passed by the voters of California and more specifically the voters of Blythe while imposing regulations on the use of land to protect the city's neighborhoods, residents, and businesses from negative impacts. It is a further purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the cultivation, manufacturing, processing, testing, transporting, delivery, and distribution of medical/nonmedical cannabis and medical/nonmedical cannabis-related products in a manner which is responsible, which protects the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Blythe, and to enforce rules and regulations consistent with state law. In part to meet these objectives, an annual permit shall be required to own and/or to operate a commercial cannabis business within Blythe. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the possession, use, or provision of cannabis for purposes which violate state or federal law. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to any other permits, licenses and approvals which may be required to conduct business in the City, and are in addition to any permits, licenses and approval required under state, county, or other law. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.020 - Legal authority. 
    Pursuant to Sections 5 and 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution, and the provisions of the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA) (which combined the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (hereinafter "MCRSA"), and the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use Marijuana Act (hereinafter "AUMA")), the city of Blythe is authorized to adopt ordinances that establish standards, requirements and regulations for local licenses and permits for medical/nonmedical cannabis and medical/nonmedical cannabis-related activity. Any standards, requirements, and regulations regarding health and safety, security, and worker protections established by the state of California, or any of its departments or divisions, shall be the minimum standards applicable in the city of Blythe to medical/nonmedical cannabis, and/or medical/nonmedical cannabis-related activity. Whenever reference is made in this title to MCRSA or AUMA, the reference shall mean MAUCRSA as it repealed and replaced regulations added by MCRSA and amended certain regulations adopted by AUMA. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 2, 10-10-17) 
5.10.030 - Cannabis cultivation and commercial cannabis business activities prohibited unless specifically authorized by this chapter. 
    Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, dispensing, distribution, delivery, or sale of medical/nonmedical cannabis or medical/nonmedical cannabis product is expressly prohibited in the city of Blythe. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.040 - Compliance with laws. 
    It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that it is, always, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Nothing in this title shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate federal, state law or local law with respect to the operation of a commercial cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and the operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that the commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines, any subsequently enacted state law or regulatory, licensing, or certification requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis business permit. Nothing in this title shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate federal or state law regarding the operation of a commercial cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 3, 10-10-17) 
5.10.050 - Definitions. 
    When used in this title, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth herein. Any reference to California statutes includes any regulations promulgated thereunder, and is deemed to include any successor or amended version of the referenced statute or regulatory provision. 
A.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the cannabis sativa linnaeus, cannabis indica, or cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 14017 of the Statutes of 1972. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean industrial hemp as that term is defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  "Cannabis concentrate" means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate the cannabinoid active ingredient, thereby increasing the product's potency. An edible medical/nonmedical cannabis product is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code, or a drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  "Cannabis product" means a product containing medical or nonmedical cannabis, including, but not limited to, concentrates and extractions, intended to be sold for use by medical cannabis patients in California pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code (as the same may be amended from time-to-time) or pursuant to the Adult Use Marijuana Act. For purposes of this title, "medical/nonmedical cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
D.  "Canopy" means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, inclusive of all vertical planes, whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. The plant canopy does not need to be continuous on any premise in determining the total square footage which will be subject to tax. 
E.  "Caregiver" or "primary caregiver" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
F.  "City" or "city of Blythe" means the city of Blythe, a California General Law City. 
G.  "Commercial cannabis activity" includes cultivation, manufacture, processing, laboratory testing, transporting, delivery, distribution, or sale of medical/nonmedical cannabis or a medical/nonmedical cannabis product, within the meaning of California Business and Professions Code 19300 and/or California Business and Professions Code 26050, et seq. 
H.  "Commercial cannabis business" means any business or operation which engages in either/or medical or nonmedical commercial cannabis activity. 
I.  "Commercial cannabis business permit" means a regulatory permit issued by the city of Blythe pursuant to this title to a commercial cannabis business, and is required before any medical/nonmedical commercial cannabis activity may be conducted in the city. The initial permit and annual renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit is made expressly contingent upon the business' ongoing compliance with all of the requirements of this title and any regulations adopted by the city governing the commercial cannabis activity at issue. 
J.  "Cultivation" means any activity, whether occurring indoors or outdoors, involving the propagation, planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, and/or trimming of cannabis plants or any part thereof for any purpose, including marijuana. Indoor cultivation is limited to cultivation using exclusively artificial lighting, while outdoor cultivation is limited to cultivation using no artificial lighting. Mixed-light cultivation, or cultivation that uses a combination of natural and supplemental artificial light, is considered outdoor cultivation for purposes of this chapter. 
K.  "Cultivation site" means a facility where cannabis is cultivated, propagated, planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or that does all or any combination of those activities, and where the operator holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit for cultivation from the city of Blythe and a valid state license to cultivate cannabis as required by state law. 
L.  "Dispensary" means a commercial cannabis business facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, pursuant to express authorization, cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale, and where the operator holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the city of Blythe authorizing the operation of a dispensary, and a valid state license as required by state law to operate a dispensary or microbusiness. 
M.  "Dispensing" means any activity involving the retail sale of medical/nonmedical cannabis or medical/nonmedical cannabis products from a dispensary. 
N.  "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of medical/nonmedical cannabis or medical/nonmedical cannabis products between entities licensed pursuant to MCRSA, AUMA and any subsequent state of California legislation regarding the same. 
O.  "Distributor" means a person holding a valid commercial cannabis business permit for distribution issued by the city of Blythe, and, a valid state license for distribution, required by state law to engage in the business of purchasing medical/nonmedical cannabis from a licensed cultivator, or medical/nonmedical cannabis products from a license manufacturer, for sale to a licensed dispensary. 
P.  "Dried flower" means all dead cannabis that has been harvested, dried, cured, or otherwise processed, excluding leaves and stems. 
Q.  "Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code or a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
R.  "Live plants" means living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds, sprouts, immature plants (including unrooted clones), and vegetative stage plants. 
S.  "Manufacturer" means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of manufactured medical/nonmedical cannabis, as defined in this section, or medical/nonmedical cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages medical/nonmedical cannabis or medical/nonmedical cannabis products or labels or relabels its container, where the operator holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit for manufacturing from the city of Blythe and, after January 1, 2018 or as soon as permitted by the state granting agency, department or division, a valid state license for manufacturing pursuant to MCRSA and/or AUMA. 
T.  "Manufactured cannabis" means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate or manufactured product intended for internal consumption or topical application. 
U.  "Manufacturing site" means a location that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds medical/nonmedical cannabis or medical/nonmedical cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, and is owned and operated by a person issued a valid commercial cannabis business permit for manufacturing from the city of Blythe and, a valid state license as required for manufacturing of medical/nonmedical cannabis products. 
V.  "Marijuana" means "cannabis," as that term is defined in this title. 
W.  "Microbusiness" shall have the same definition as California Business and Professions Code Section 26070(a)(3)(A), as it may be amended, and which means a business that engages in the cultivation of cannabis on an area less than ten thousand square feet and to act as a licensed distributor, Level 1 manufacturer, and retailer under the Business and Professions Code and this Title, provided such licensee can demonstrate compliance with all requirements imposed by Business and Professions Code and this title on licensed cultivators, distributors, Level 1 manufacturers, and retailers to the extent the licensee engages in such activities. 
X.  "Patient" or "qualified patient" shall have the same definition as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., as it may be amended, and which means a person who is entitled to the protections of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. For purposes of this chapter, qualified patient shall include a person with an identification card, as that term is defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq. 
Y.  "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit and includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
Z.  "Person with an identification card" shall have the meaning given that term by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. 
AA.  "Premises" means the designated structure(s) and land specified in the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis activity as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 19300.5 of the Business and Professions Code, will be or is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous are and shall only be occupied by one license. 
BB.  "State license" means a permit or license issued by the state of California, or one of its departments or divisions, under MCRSA or AUMA to engage in commercial cannabis activity. 
CC.  "Topical cannabis" means a product intended for external use. A topical cannabis product is not considered a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
DD.  "Testing laboratory" means a facility, entity, or site in the city of Blythe that offers or performs tests of medical/nonmedical cannabis or medical/nonmedical cannabis products and that is both of the following: 
1.  Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state. 
2.  Registered with the State Department of Public Health, and is owned and operated by a person issued a valid commercial cannabis business permit for laboratory testing from the city of Blythe and a valid state license for laboratory testing as required by state law. 
EE.  "Youth center" shall have the same meaning as Health and Safety Code Section 11353.1." 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 4, 10-10-17) 
5.10.060 - Commercial cannabis business permit required to engage in commercial cannabis business. 
A.  No person may engage in any commercial cannabis business or in any commercial cannabis activity within the city of Blythe including cultivation, manufacture, processing, laboratory testing, transporting, dispensing, distribution, or sale of medical/nonmedical cannabis or a medical/nonmedical cannabis product unless the person: (1) has a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the city of Blythe; and (2) is currently in compliance with all applicable state and local laws and regulations pertaining to the commercial cannabis business and the commercial cannabis business activities, including the duty to obtain any required state licenses. 
B.  Until Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), is repealed, the city intends that persons eligible to operate collectives or cooperatives under that subdivision shall be eligible to apply for a city permit to conduct commercial cannabis activities, but only to the degree those activities are authorized under state law for collectives and cooperatives. When the Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), is repealed, or as soon as collectives and cooperatives are no longer permitted under state law, any city permit holder operating as a collective or cooperative who has not already obtained a state license for the commercial cannabis business activities they are engaged in shall automatically forfeit his or her city commercial cannabis business permit. At that point they shall no longer be authorized to engage in any commercial cannabis activities in the city until they obtain both a city issued commercial cannabis business permit and a state license for that commercial cannabis activity. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.070 - Cannabis employee permit required. 
A.  Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works within a commercial cannabis business must be legally authorized to do so under applicable state law. Employees and workers at businesses that are permitted by the city of Blythe as cannabis business cultivators, manufacturers, distributors, or delivers that are operating pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775(a) as collectives or cooperatives until that subsection is repealed must be qualified patients or primary caregivers as required by state law. 
B.  Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works within a commercial cannabis business must obtain a commercial cannabis employee work permit from the city prior to performing any work at any cannabis business. 
C.  Applications for a commercial cannabis employee work permit shall be developed and made available by the city of Blythe, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and phone number of the applicant; 
2.  Age and verification of applicant. A copy of birth certificate or other proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one years of age must be submitted with the application; 
3.  Name, address of the commercial cannabis businesses where the person will be employed, and the name of the primary manager of that business; 
4.  Name, address, and contact person for any previous employers from which the applicant was fired, resigned, or asked to leave and the reasons for such dismissal or firing; 
5.  The application shall be accompanied by fingerprints and a recent photograph of the applicant in a form and manner as required by the city manager or his/her designee(s); 
6.  A signed statement under penalty of perjury that the information provided is true and correct; 
7.  If applicable, verification that the applicant is a qualified patient or primary caregiver; 
8.  A fee paid in an amount set by resolution of the city council in an amount necessary to cover the costs of administering the employee work permit programs. The fee is non-refundable and shall not be returned in the event the work permit is denied or revoked. 
D.  The chief of police or his or her designee shall review the application for completeness, shall conduct a background check to verify the criminal record, and shall contact previous employers from which the applicant was fired, resigned in order to determine whether the applicant was convicted of a crime or left a previous employer for reasons that show the applicant: 
1.  Is dishonest or untrustworthy; 
2.  Has committed a felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement; 
3.  Was convicted of a violent felony, a crime of moral turpitude; or 
4.  The illegal use, possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled substances, as defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, except for medical cannabis related offenses for which the conviction occurred after the passage of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996. 
    Discovery of these facts showing that the applicant is dishonest or untrustworthy or has been convicted of those types of crimes are grounds for denial of the permit. 
E.  The city manager shall issue the commercial cannabis work permit or a written denial to the applicant within ninety days of the date the application was deemed complete. 
F.  A work permit shall be valid for a thirty-six month period and must be renewed sixty days prior to expiration. Renewal applications shall contain all the information required in subsection B above including the payment of a renewal application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. 
G.  In the event a person changes employment from one commercial cannabis business in the city to another, the work permit holder shall notify the city manager or his/her designee(s) in writing of the change within ten days, or the work permit shall be suspended or revoked and such person shall not be permitted to work at any commercial cannabis business in the city. 
H.  The city may immediately revoke the commercial cannabis work permit should the permit holder be convicted of a crime listed in subsections C and D above or if facts become known to the city manager or his/her designee that the permit holder has engaged in activities showing that he or she is dishonest or untrustworthy. 
I.  The city manager or his/her designee(s) is hereby authorized to promulgate all regulations necessary to implement the work permit process and requirements. 
J.  The applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a commercial cannabis work permit by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the date the applicant received the notice of denial, which appeal shall be conducted as set forth in Sections 5.10.150 and 5.10.160 of this title. 
K.  The city manager or his or her designee shall issue a permit in the form of a personal identification card that shall be worn by the employee. The personal identification card shall be worn approximately chest-high on their outermost garment, in a prominent and visible location. The identification card shall be maintained in good and readable condition at all times. 
L.  If the holder of an employee work permit fails to timely renew his/her permit, the permit will cease to be valid and he/she will be required to submit an application for a new permit, if desired as provided above. In addition to any administrative proceedings, it shall be a misdemeanor to engage in any type of employment activity with a cannabis related business without a valid employee permit. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 5, 10-10-17) 
5.10.080 - Maximum number and type of authorized commercial cannabis businesses permitted. 
    The number of each type of commercial cannabis business that shall be permitted to operate in the city at any one given time shall be as follows: 
A.  Dispensaries and/or micro businesses: Maximum of two; 
B.  Cultivation: Unlimited number permitted; 
C.  Manufacturing: Unlimited number permitted; 
D.  Testing: Maximum of two; 
E.  Distribution: Unlimited number permitted. 
    Section 5.10.080 is only intended to create a maximum number of commercial cannabis businesses that may be issued permits to operate in the city under each category. Nothing in this title creates a mandate that the city council must issue any or all of the commercial cannabis business permits if it is determined that the applicants do not meet the standards which are established in the application requirements or further amendments to the application process. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 6, 10-10-17; Ord. No. 891, § 1, 9-11-18) 
5.10.090 - Initial application procedure. 
A.  The city council shall adopt by resolution the procedures which will govern the application process, and the manner in which the decision will ultimately be made regarding the issuance of any commercial cannabis business permit(s). The resolution shall authorize the city manager or his or her designee to prepare the necessary forms, adopt any necessary rules to the application, regulations and processes, solicit applications, conduct initial evaluations of the applicants, and to ultimately provide a final recommendation to the city council. 
B.  At the time of filing, each applicant shall pay an application fee established by resolution of the city council, to cover all costs incurred by the city in the application process. 
C.  After the initial review the city manager or his designee will make a recommendation to the city council, and the city council shall make a final determination in accordance with Section 5.10.090. 
D.  The City's Reservation of Rights. The city reserves the right to reject any or all applications. The city may also modify, postpone, or cancel any request for applications, or the entire program under this chapter, at any time without liability, obligation, or commitment to any party, firm, or organization. Persons submitting applications assume the risk that all or any part of the program, or any particular category of permit potentially authorized under this chapter, may be cancelled at any time prior to permit issuance. The city further reserves the right to request and obtain additional information from any candidate submitting an application. In addition to any other justification provided a failure to comply with other requirements in this chapter, an application risks being rejected for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Proposal received after designated time and date. 
2.  Proposal not containing the required elements, exhibits, nor organized in the required format. 
3.  Proposal considered not fully responsive to this request for permit application. 
4.  Proposal contains excess or extraneous material not called for in the request for permit application. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.100 - Expiration of commercial cannabis business permits. 
    Each commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire twelve months after the date of its issuance. Commercial cannabis permits may be renewed as provided in Section 5.10.120. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.110 - Revocation of permits. 
    Commercial cannabis business permits may be revoked for any violation of any law and/or any rule, regulation and/or standard adopted pursuant to this Section 5.10.130. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.120 - Renewal applications. 
A.  An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit shall be filed at least sixty calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current permit. 
B.  The renewal application shall contain all the information required for new applications. 
C.  The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by the city council to cover the costs of processing the renewal permit application, together with any costs incurred by the city to administer the program created under this chapter. 
D.  An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit shall be rejected if any of the following exists: 
1.  The application is filed less than sixty days before its expiration. 
2.  The commercial cannabis business permit is suspended or revoked at the time of the application. 
3.  The commercial cannabis business has not been in regular and continuous operation in the four months prior to the renewal application. 
4.  The commercial cannabis business has failed to conform to the requirements of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
5.  The permittee fails or is unable to renew its state of California license. 
6.  If the city or state has determined, based on substantial evidence, that the permittee or applicant is in violation of the requirements of this chapter, of the city's municipal code, or of the state rules and regulations, and the city or state has determined that the violation is grounds for termination or revocation of the commercial cannabis business permit. 
E.  The city manager or his designee is authorized to make all decisions concerning the issuance of a renewal permit. In making the decision, the city manager or his designee is authorized to impose additional conditions to a renewal permit, if it is determined to be necessary to ensure compliance with state or local laws and regulations or to preserve the public health, safety or welfare. Appeals from the decision of the city manager or his designee shall be handled pursuant to Section 5.10.140. 
F.  If a renewal application is rejected, a person may file a new application pursuant to this chapter no sooner than one year from the date of the rejection. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.130 - Effect of state license suspension, revocation, or termination. 
    Suspension of a license issued by the state of California, or by any of its departments or divisions, shall immediately suspend the ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate within the city, until the state of California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or reissues the state license. Should the state of California, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke or terminate the license of a commercial cannabis business, such revocation or termination shall also revoke or terminate the ability of a medical/nonmedical cannabis business to operate within the city of Blythe. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.140 - Appeals from decisions of the city manager or his designee under this chapter. 
    Unless specifically provided elsewhere to the contrary, whenever an appeal is provided for in this chapter from a decision of the city manager or his or her designee, the appeal shall be conducted as prescribed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.150 - Written request for appeal. 
A.  Within ten calendar days after the date of a decision of the city manager or his designee(s) to revoke, suspend or deny a permit, or to add conditions to a permit, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing a written appeal with the city clerk setting forth the reasons why the decision was not proper. 
B.  At the time of filing the appellant shall pay the designated appeal fee, established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.160 - Appeal hearing. 
A.  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for a hearing before the city council. The city council shall hear the matter de novo, and shall conduct the hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth by the city. 
B.  The appeal shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing of the appeal. 
C.  At the hearing the appellant may present any information they deem relevant to the decision appealed. The formal rules of evidence and procedure applicable in a court of law shall not apply to the hearing. 
D.  At the conclusion of the hearing the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 7, 10-10-17) 
5.10.170 - Permittee selection process. 
A.  The city council shall adopt by resolution a procedure guideline by which the top applicants in each category of each commercial cannabis business will be presented to the city council for a final determination at a public meeting. 
B.  The top final applicants for each category may be invited to attend the city council meeting, where they may be expected to make a public presentation introducing their team and providing an overview of their proposal. In order to provide adequate time, presentations may be divided over more than one meeting over multiple days as determined to be necessary. 
C.  The city council shall either deny or approve the final candidates and shall select the top candidates in each category of the commercial cannabis businesses. The city council's decision as to the selection of the prevailing candidates shall be final. 
D.  Official issuance of the commercial cannabis business permit(s), however, is conditioned upon the prevailing candidate(s) obtaining all required land use approvals. Following the council's selection, the prevailing candidate(s) shall apply to the city's planning department to obtain any required land use approvals or entitlements for the permittee's location, if any. Land use approvals shall include compliance with all applicable provisions of CEQA. the city manager shall formally issue the commercial cannabis business permit(s) once the city manager and planning and building services director both affirm that all of the required land use approvals have been obtained. 
E.  Issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit does not create a land use entitlement. The commercial cannabis business permit shall only be for a term of twelve months, and shall expire at the end of the twelve-month period unless it is renewed as provided herein. Furthermore, no permittee may begin operations, notwithstanding the issuance of a permit, unless all of the state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the requirements of this title and of the permit, have been complied with. 
F.  Notwithstanding anything in this title to the contrary, the city council reserves the right to reject any or all applications if it determines it would be in the best interest of the city, taking into account any health, safety and welfare impacts on the community. Applicants shall have no right to a commercial cannabis business permit until a permit is actually issued, and then only for the duration of the permit's term. Each applicant assumes the risk that, at any time prior to the issuance of a permit, the city council may terminate or delay the program created under this title. 
G.  If an application is denied, a new application may not be filed for one year from the date of the denial. 
H.  Each person granted a commercial cannabis business permit shall be required to pay the permit fee established by resolution of the city council, to cover the costs of administering the commercial cannabis business permit program created in this title. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 8, 10-10-17) 
5.10.180 - Change in location; updated registration form. 
A.  Any time the dispensing, cultivation, manufacturing, and distribution location specified in the regulatory permit is changed, the applicant shall re-register with the city manager. The process and the fees for re-registration shall be the same as the process and fees set forth for registration in Sections 5.10.090 and 5.10.120. 
B.  Within fifteen calendar days of any other change in the information provided in the registration form or any change in status of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including any change in the commercial cannabis business ownership or management members, the applicant shall file an updated registration form with the city manager for review along with a registration amendment fee, as set forth in Sections 5.10.090 and 5.10.120. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 9, 10-10-17) 
5.10.190 - City business license. 
    Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall obtain a city of Blythe business license. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.200 - Building permits and inspection. 
    Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall be subject to a mandatory building inspection, and must obtain all required permits and approvals which would otherwise be required for any business of the same size and intensity operating in that zone. This includes but is not limited to obtaining any required building permit(s), fire marshall approvals, health department approvals and other zoning and land use permit(s) and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 10, 10-10-17) 
5.10.210 - Certification from the planner or designee. 
    Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business must obtain a certification from the planner or designee certifying that the business is located on a site that meets all of the requirements of the city's zoning and municipal code, including Section 17.08.740 (Commercial cannabis related uses and activities). 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.220 - Right to occupy and to use property. 
    As a condition precedent to the city's issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to this chapter, any person intending to open and to operate a commercial cannabis business shall provide sufficient evidence of the legal right to occupy and to use the proposed location. In the event the proposed location will be leased from another person, the applicant shall be required to provide a signed and notarized statement from the owner of the property, acknowledging that the property owner has read this chapter and consents to the operation of the commercial cannabis business on the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.230 - Limitations on city's liability. 
    To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city of Blythe shall not assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to this chapter or otherwise approving the operation of any commercial cannabis business. As a condition to the approval of any commercial cannabis business permit, the applicant shall be required to meet all of the following conditions before they can receive the commercial cannabis business permit: 
A.  They must execute an agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend (at applicant's sole cost and expense), and hold the city of Blythe, and its officers, officials, employees, representatives, and agents, harmless, from any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way related to, the city's issuance of the commercial cannabis business permit, the city's decision to approve the operation of the commercial cannabis business or activity, to process used by the city in making its decision, or the alleged violation of any federal, state or local laws by the commercial cannabis business or any of its officers, employees or agents. 
B.  Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon determined necessary and appropriate from time to time by the city attorney. 
C.  Reimburse the city of Blythe for all costs and expenses, including but not limited to attorney fees and costs and court costs, which the city of Blythe may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city's approval of the applicant's commercial cannabis business permit, or related to the city's approval of a commercial cannabis activity. The city of Blythe may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve any of the obligations imposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.240 - Records and recordkeeping. 
A.  Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain accurate books and records, detailing all of the revenues and expenses of the business, and all of its assets and liabilities. On no less than an annual basis (at or before the time of the renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this chapter), or at any time upon reasonable request of the city, each commercial cannabis business shall file a sworn statement detailing the number of sales by the commercial cannabis business during the previous twelve-month period (or shorter period based upon the timing of the request), provided on a per-month basis. The statement shall also include gross sales for each month, and all applicable taxes paid or due to be paid. 
B.  Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain a current register of the names and the contact information (including the name, address, and telephone number) of anyone owning or holding an interest in the commercial cannabis business, and separately of all the officers, managers, employees, agents and volunteers currently employed or otherwise engaged by the commercial cannabis business. The register required by this paragraph shall be provided to the city manager or his/her designee(s) upon a reasonable request. 
C.  Each commercial cannabis business shall maintain a record of all persons, patients, collectives and primary caregivers served by the commercial cannabis business, for a period of no less than four years. 
D.  All commercial cannabis businesses shall maintain an inventory control and reporting system that accurately documents the present location, amounts, and descriptions of all cannabis and cannabis products for all stages of the growing and production or manufacturing, laboratory testing and distribution processes until purchase by or distribution to a qualified patient, primary caregiver for medical purpose or an adult twenty-one years of age or older who qualifies to purchase nonmedical cannabis as set forth in AUMA. 
E.  Subject to any restrictions under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) regulations, each commercial cannabis business shall allow city of Blythe officials to have access to the business's books, records, accounts, together with any other data or documents relevant to its permitted commercial cannabis activities, for the purpose of conducting an audit or examination. Books, records, accounts, and any and all relevant data or documents will be produced no later than twenty-four hours after receipt of the city's request, unless otherwise stipulated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.250 - Security measures. 
A.  A permitted commercial cannabis business shall implement sufficient security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis or cannabis products, and to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis or cannabis products at the commercial cannabis business. Except as may otherwise be determined by the city manager or his/her designee(s), these security measures shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following: 
1.  Preventing individuals from remaining on the premises of the commercial cannabis business if they are not engaging in an activity directly related to the permitted operations of the commercial cannabis business. 
2.  Establishing limited access areas accessible only to authorized commercial cannabis business personnel. 
3.  Except for live growing plants which are being cultivated at a cultivation facility, all medical/nonmedical cannabis and medical/nonmedical cannabis products shall be stored in a secured and locked room, safe, or vault. All medical/nonmedical cannabis and medical/nonmedical cannabis products, including live plants which are being cultivated, shall be kept in a manner as to prevent diversion, theft, and loss, except for limited amounts of cannabis used for display purposes or for immediate sale at a dispensary. 
4.  Installing twenty-four-hour security surveillance cameras of at least HD-quality to monitor all entrances and exits to and from the premises, all interior spaces within the commercial cannabis business which are open and accessible to the public, and all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or currency, is being stored for any period of time on a regular basis. The commercial cannabis business shall be responsible for ensuring that the security surveillance camera's footage is remotely accessible by the chief of police and the Blythe police department, and that it is compatible with the city's software and hardware. In addition, remote and real-time, live access to the video footage from the cameras shall be provided to the chief of police and the police department. Video recordings shall be maintained for a minimum of forty-five days, and shall be made available to the city manager or his designee upon request. 
5.  Sensors shall be installed to detect entry and exit from all secure areas. 
6.  Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial cannabis businesses. 
7.  Having a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm system. 
8.  Any bars installed on the windows or the doors of the commercial cannabis business shall be installed only on the interior of the building. 
9.  Security personnel must be licensed by the state of California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services personnel and shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the chief of police or his/her designee(s), with such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. 
10.  Each commercial cannabis business shall have the capability to remain secure during a power outage and shall ensure that all access doors are not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks are not released during a power outage. 
B.  Each commercial cannabis business shall identify a designated security representative/liaison to the city of Blythe, who shall be reasonably available to meet with the chief of police or his/her designee regarding any security related measures or and operational issues. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 11, 10-10-17) 
5.10.260 - Restriction on alcohol sales. 
    No person shall cause or permit the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on or about the premises of the commercial cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.270 - Compliance with laws. 
    It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that it is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate state law or local law with respect to the operation of a commercial cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and the operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that the commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines, any subsequently enacted state law or regulatory, licensing, or certification requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis business permit. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate state law with regard to the operation of a commercial cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.280 - Fees and charges. 
A.  No person may commence or continue any commercial cannabis activity in the city, without timely paying in full all fees and charges required for the operation of a commercial cannabis activity. Fees and charges associated with the operation of a commercial cannabis activity shall be established by resolution of the city council which may be amended from time to time. 
B.  All commercial cannabis businesses authorized to operate under this chapter shall pay all sales, use, business and other applicable taxes, and all license, registration, and other fees required under federal, state and local law. Each commercial cannabis businesses shall cooperate with city with respect to any reasonable request to audit the commercial cannabis business' books and records for the purpose of verifying compliance with this section, including but not limited to a verification of the amount of taxes required to be paid during any period. 
C.  Council may approve a cannabis master development agreement that controls the terms of such a business park, facility or center. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.290 - Miscellaneous operating requirements. 
A.  Hours of Operation. Commercial cannabis businesses operating as dispensaries may be open for access to the public only between the hours of eight a.m. and seven p.m. Monday through Sunday. 
Other  commercial cannabis businesses may operate only during the hours specified in the commercial cannabis business permits issued by the city. 
B.  Restriction on Consumption. Cannabis shall not be consumed into the human body on the premises of any commercial cannabis businesses. 
C.  No cannabis or cannabis products or graphics depicting cannabis or cannabis products shall be visible from the exterior of any property issued a commercial cannabis business permit, or on any of the vehicles owned or used as part of the commercial cannabis business. No outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis products is permitted at any time. 
D.  Reporting and Tracking of Product and of Gross Sales. Each commercial cannabis business shall have in place a point-of-sale or management inventory tracking system to track and report on all aspects of the commercial cannabis business including, but not limited to, such matters as cannabis tracking, inventory data, gross sales (by weight and by sale) and other information which may be deemed necessary by the city. The commercial cannabis business shall ensure that such information is compatible with the city's record-keeping systems. In addition, the system must have the capability to produce historical transactional data for review. Furthermore, any system selected must be approved and authorized by the city manager or his/her designee prior to being used by the permittee. 
E.  All cannabis and cannabis products sold, distributed or manufactured shall be cultivated, manufactured, and transported by licensed facilities that maintain operations in full conformance with the state and local regulations. 
F.  There shall not be any firearms on the permitted premises by an owner, manager, employee, volunteer or vendor other than those individuals authorized as a state licensed security personnel and have been approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
F.  There shall not be a physician located in or around any commercial cannabis business at any time for the purpose of evaluating patients for the issuance of a medical marijuana prescription or card where applicable. 
G.  Prior to dispensing medical cannabis or medical cannabis products to any person, the commercial cannabis business shall obtain verification from the recommending physician that the person requesting medical cannabis or medical cannabis products is a qualified patient. 
H.  Emergency Contact. Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the city manager or his/her designee(s) with the name, telephone number (both land line and mobile, if available) of an on-site employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be provided at any hour of the day. 
I.  Signage and Notices. 
1.  In addition to the requirements otherwise set forth in this section, business identification signage for a commercial cannabis business shall conform to the requirements of the Blythe Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, seeking the issuance of a city sign permit. 
2.  No signs placed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business shall obstruct any entrance or exit to the building or any window. 
3.  Each entrance to a commercial cannabis business shall be visibly posted with a clear and legible notice indicating that smoking, ingesting, or otherwise consuming cannabis on the premises of any commercial cannabis businesses or elsewhere in the city of Blythe other than within private residences is prohibited. 
4.  Business identification signage shall be limited to that needed for identification only, and shall not contain any logos or information that identifies, advertises, or lists the services or the products offered. No commercial cannabis business shall advertise by having a person holding a sign and advertising the business to passersby, whether such person is on the premises of the commercial cannabis business or elsewhere including, but not limited to, the public right-of-way. 
5.  Holders of commercial cannabis business permits agree that, as an express and ongoing condition of permit issuance and subsequent renewal, the holder of the permit shall be prohibited from advertising any commercial cannabis business located in the city of Blythe utilizing a billboard (fixed or mobile), bus shelter, placard, aircraft, or other similar forms of advertising, anywhere in the state. This paragraph is not intended to place limitations on the ability of a commercial cannabis business to advertise in other legally authorized forms, including on the internet, in magazines, or in other similar ways. 
J.  Minors. 
1.  Persons under the age of twenty-one years shall not be allowed on the premises of a non-medical commercial cannabis business, and persons under the age of eighteen years shall not be allowed on the premises of a medical cannabis business. Those persons with a valid physician's recommendation to purchase medical cannabis who are between the ages of eighteen to twenty-one years are allowed on non-medical commercial cannabis business premises if the business also has a valid medical cannabis license. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this title for any person to employ any person at a commercial cannabis business who is not at least twenty years of age. 
2.  The entrance to a non-medical commercial cannabis business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice that no person under the age of twenty years of age is permitted to enter upon the premises of the commercial cannabis business. The entrance to a medical commercial cannabis business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice that no person under the age of eighteen years of age is permitted to enter upon the premises of the commercial cannabis business. The entrance to a business that is both a medical and non-medical cannabis business shall be clearly and legibly posted with both signs that also indicate their applicability to medical and non-medical customers. 
K.  Odor Control. Odor control devices and techniques shall be incorporated in all commercial cannabis businesses to ensure that odors from cannabis are not detectable off-site. Commercial cannabis businesses shall provide a sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the commercial cannabis business that is distinctive to its operation is not detected outside of the facility, anywhere on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, on or about the exterior or interior common area walkways, hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for use by common tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit located inside the same building as the commercial cannabis business. As such, commercial cannabis businesses must install and maintain the following equipment, or any other equipment which the city manager or his/her designee(s) determine is a more effective method or technology: 
1.  An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally; 
2.  An air system that creates negative air pressure between the commercial cannabis business's interior and exterior, so that the odors generated inside the commercial cannabis business are not detectable on the outside of the commercial cannabis business. 
L.  Display of Permit and City Business License. The original copy of the commercial cannabis business permit issued by the city pursuant to this title and the city issued business license shall be posted inside the commercial cannabis business in a location readily-visible to the public. 
M.  Background Check. Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which authorizes city authorities to access state and local summary criminal history information for employment, licensing, or certification purposes; and authorizes access to federal level criminal history information by transmitting fingerprint images and related information to the Department of Justice to be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, every person listed as an owner, manager, supervisor, employee or volunteer, of the commercial cannabis business must submit fingerprints and other information deemed necessary by the chief of police or his/her designee(s) for a background check by the Blythe police department. Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which requires that there be a requirement or exclusion from employment, licensing or certification based on specific criminal conduct on the part of the subject of the record. 
    No person shall be issued a permit to operate a commercial cannabis business or a related work permit unless they have first cleared the background check, as determined by the chief of police, as required by this section. A fee for the cost of the background investigation, which shall be the actual cost to the city of Blythe to conduct the background investigation as it deems necessary and appropriate, shall be paid at the time the application for a commercial cannabis business permit is submitted. 
N.  Loitering. The owner and/or operator of a commercial cannabis business shall prohibit loitering by persons outside the facility both on the premises and within fifty feet of the premises. 
O.  Permits and other Approvals. Prior to the establishment of any commercial cannabis business or the operation of any such business, the person intending to establish a commercial cannabis business must first obtain all applicable planning, zoning, building, and other applicable permits from the relevant governmental agency which may be applicable to the zoning district in which such commercial cannabis business intends to establish and to operate. 
P.  If a commercial cannabis business permittee is operating as a collective or cooperative under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), members of the applicant authorized to possess cannabis shall sign an agreement with the commercial cannabis business which states that members shall not distribute cannabis or cannabis products to non-members or in violation of the "Memorandum for all United States Attorneys," issued by the United States Department of Justice, from James M. Cole, Deputy Attorney General and any other applicable state and federal laws, regulations, or guidelines. 
Q.  If the commercial cannabis business permittee is operating as a collective or cooperative under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), the commercial cannabis business shall terminate the membership of any member violating any of the provisions of this title. 
R.  The city manager or his/her designee may develop other commercial cannabis business operational requirements or regulations as are determined to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 12, 10-10-17) 
5.10.300 - Operating requirements for dispensary. 
A.  Owners and operators are required to verify the age and the necessary documentation of each medical customer to ensure the customer is not under the age of eighteen years, and to verify that the potential customer has a valid doctor's recommendation. Doctor recommendations are not to be obtained or provided at the dispensary. Any retail customer who purchases cannabis or cannabis products for nonmedical use shall verify that they are at least twenty-one years of age or older at the time of purchase. 
B.  Entrances into the dispensary shall be locked at all times with entry strictly controlled. A "buzz-in" electronic/mechanical entry system shall be utilized to limit access to and entry to the dispensary, to separate it from the reception/lobby area. 
C.  Uniformed licensed security personnel shall be employed and will be required to carry a firearm to monitor site activity, control loitering and site access, and to serve as a visual deterrent to unlawful activities. The police chief at his discretion may modify or amend the requirement of requiring security personnel to carry a firearm which shall be specified in the terms of the regulatory permit. 
D.  Dispensaries may have on-site, in the retail sales area of the dispensary, only that quantity of cannabis and cannabis products reasonably anticipated to meet the daily demand readily available for sale. 
E.  All restroom facilities shall remain locked and under the control of management. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.310 - Operating requirements for cultivation facilities. 
A.  Outdoor Cultivation Prohibited. The cultivation of all cannabis must occur indoors. All outdoor cultivation is prohibited. 
B.  In no case, shall cannabis plants be visible from a public or private road, sidewalk, park or any common public viewing area. 
C.  Association with Dispensaries. If a dispensary is authorized to include cultivation activities, the dispensary may have only one cultivation site upon which cannabis is cultivated, produced, stored, harvested, manufactured, or packaged, and each of the dispensary and the cultivation site must be separately permitted pursuant to this title. 
D.  If the commercial cannabis business permitted by the city as a cultivator is operating as a collective or cooperative under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), the commercial cannabis business shall not allow more medical cannabis plants or plants per member of a commercial cannabis business than the amounts permitted pursuant to state law, to be cultivated at the commercial cannabis business premises. If a nonmedical cultivation is permitted in the city of Blythe than it shall only be allowed to cultivate the square feet of canopy space permitted by state law. 
E.  Cannabis cultivation shall be conducted in accordance with state, local, and federal laws, rules and regulations related to land conversion, grading, electricity, water usage, water quality, woodland and riparian habitat protection, agricultural discharges, and similar matters. 
F.  Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to avoid contamination through erosion, leakage or inadvertent damage from pests, rodents or other wildlife. 
G.  In no case, shall any hazardous, flammable or explosive substances be used to process or manufacture cannabis products on site. 
H.  The cultivation of cannabis shall at all times be operated in such a way as to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the employees working at the commercial cannabis business, visitors to the area, neighboring properties, and the end users of the cannabis being cultivated, to protect the environment from harm to streams, fish, and wildlife; to ensure the security of the cannabis being cultivated; and to safeguard against the diversion of cannabis. 
I.  All applicants for a cannabis cultivation permit shall submit the following in addition to the information generally otherwise required for a commercial cannabis business: 
1.  A cultivation and operations plan that meets or exceeds minimum legal standards and all state, local and federal rules and regulations for water usage, conservation and use; drainage, runoff, and erosion control; watershed and habitat protection; and proper storage of fertilizers, pesticides, and other regulated products to be used on the parcel, and a description of the cultivation activities and schedule of activities during each month of growing and harvesting, or explanation of growth cycles and anticipated harvesting schedules for all-season harvesting. 
2.  A description of a legal water source, irrigation plan, and projected water use. 
3.  Identification of the source of electrical power and plan for compliance with applicable building codes and related codes. 
4.  Plan for addressing odor and other public nuisances which may derive from the cultivation site. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 13, 10-10-17) 
5.10.340 - Cannabis manufacturing: Edibles and other cannabis products; sale or distribution of edible and other cannabis products. 
    The manufacturing of food or other products infused with or which otherwise contain cannabis may be manufactured within the appropriate manufacturing zoning districts as described in Chapter 17.63E, subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter, and subject to whatever additional regulations may be promulgated hereunder by an ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.350 - Packaging and labeling. 
A.  Before a commercial cannabis manufacturer delivers any edible cannabis or edible cannabis product to a dispensary, the same shall be labeled and placed in tamper-evident packaging which at least meets the requirements of California Business and Professions Code Section 19347, as the same may be amended from time-to-time or superseded or replaced by subsequent state legislation or by any department or division of the state of California. 
B.  All items to be sold or distributed shall be individually wrapped at the original point of preparation by the business permitted as a commercial cannabis manufacturer. 
C.  Labeling must include a warning if nuts or other known allergens are used, and must include the total weight (in ounces or grams) of cannabis in the package. 
D.  A warning that the item is a medication and not a food must be clearly legible on the front of the package and/or must comply with state packing requirements. 
E.  The package must have a label warning that the product is to be kept away from children. 
F.  The label must also state that the product contains cannabis and must specify the date of manufacture. 
G.  Any edible cannabis product that is made to resemble a typical food product must be in a properly labeled opaque (non-see-through) package before it leaves the commercial cannabis manufacturing business. 
H.  The city council may impose additional packaging and labeling requirements on cannabis or cannabis products by resolution, as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.360 - Operating requirements for cannabis manufacturing (levels one and two): Extraction, etc. 
A.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities requiring a Type-6 or Type-7 state license (using non-volatile and volatile solvents) as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 19341, may be permitted to operate within those zone districts as defined in Chapter 17.63E in Planning and Zoning Regulations, of the city of Blythe Municipal Code. 
B.  Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing process shall not be stored on any property within the city of Blythe in containers that exceed one hundred fifty pound tanks in size. Each site or parcel subject to a commercial cannabis permit shall be limited to a total of eight tanks on the property at any time. 
C.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities are limited to certain methods, equipment, solvents, gases and mediums when creating cannabis extracts. 
D.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use the hydrocarbons N-butane, isobutane, propane, or heptane or other solvents or gases exhibiting low to minimal potential human-related toxicity approve by the community development department. These solvents must be of at least ninety-nine percent purity and any extraction process must use them in a professional grade closed loop extraction system designed to recover the solvents, work in an environment with proper ventilation, controlling all sources of ignition where a flammable atmosphere is or may be present. 
E.  Any extraction process must use a professional grade closed loop CO 2 gas extraction system where every vessel is rated to a minimum of six hundred pounds per square inch. The CO 2 must be of at least ninety-nine percent purity. 
F.  Closed loop systems for hydrocarbon or CO 2 extraction systems must be commercially manufactured and bear a permanently affixed and visible serial number. 
G.  Certification from a licensed engineer must be provided to the community development department for professional grade closed loop systems used by any cannabis manufacturing system to certify that the system was commercially manufactured, safe for its intended use, and built to codes of recognized and generally accepted good engineering practices, such as: 
1.  The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME); 
2.  American National Standards Institute (ANSI); 
3.  Underwriters Laboratories (UL); or 
4.  The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
H.  The certification document must contain the signature and stamp of a professional engineer and serial number of the extraction unit being certified. 
I.  Professional closed loop systems, other equipment used, the extraction operation, and facilities must be approved for their use by the fire department and meet any required fire, safety, and building code requirements specified in the California Building Reference Codes. 
J.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use heat, screens, presses, steam distillation, ice water, and other methods without employing solvents or gases to create keef, hashish, bubble hash, or infused dairy butter, or oils or fats derived from natural sources, and other extracts. 
K.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use food grade glycerin, ethanol, and propylene glycol solvents to create extracts. All ethanol must be removed from the extract in a manner to recapture the solvent and ensure that it is not vented into the atmosphere. 
L.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities creating marijuana extracts must develop standard operating procedures, good manufacturing practices, and a training plan prior to producing extracts for the marketplace. Any person using solvents or gases in a closed looped system to create marijuana extracts must be fully trained on how to use the system, have direct access to applicable material safety data sheets and handle and store the solvents and gases safely. 
M.  Parts per million for one gram of finished extract cannot exceed five hundred parts per million of residual solvent or gas when quality assurance tested. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.370 - Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties. 
A.  In addition to any regulations adopted by the city council, the city manager or his/her designee is authorized to establish any additional rules, regulations and standards governing the issuance, denial or renewal of commercial cannabis business permits, the ongoing operation of commercial cannabis businesses and the city's oversight, or concerning any other subject determined to be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  Regulations shall be published on the city's website. 
C.  Regulations promulgated by the city manager shall become effective upon date of publication. Commercial cannabis businesses shall be required to comply with all state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to any rules, regulations or standards adopted by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.380 - Community relations. 
A.  Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the name, telephone number, and email address of a community relations contact to whom notice of problems associated with the commercial cannabis business can be provided. Each commercial cannabis business shall also provide the above information to all businesses and residences located within one hundred feet of the commercial cannabis business. 
B.  The owner, manager and community relations representative from each commercial cannabis business shall meet with the city manager or his/her designee(s) yearly or as requested by the city manager or his/her designee to discuss the costs, benefits and other community issues arising as a result of implementation of this title. 
C.  Commercial cannabis businesses to which a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall develop and make available to youth organizations and educational institutions a public education plan that outlines the risks of youth addiction to cannabis, and that identifies resources available to youth related to drugs and drug addiction. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 14, 10-10-17) 
5.10.390 - Fees deemed debt to city of Blythe. 
    The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city of Blythe that is recoverable via an authorized administrative process as set forth in the municipal code, or in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.400 - Permit holder responsible for violations. 
    The person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible for all violations of the laws of the state of California or of the regulations and/or the ordinances of the city of Blythe, whether committed by the permittee or any employee or agent of the permittee, which violations occur in or about the premises of the commercial cannabis business whether or not said violations occur within the permit holder's presence. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.410 - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The city manager or his/her designee(s) are charged with enforcing the provisions of the Blythe Municipal Code, or any provision thereof, may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation without notice, and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business as well as any recordings and records required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or under applicable provisions of state law. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person having responsibility over the operation of a commercial cannabis business, to impede, obstruct, interfere with, or otherwise not to allow, the city to conduct an inspection, review or copy records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under state or local law. It is also unlawful for a person to conceal, destroy, deface, damage, or falsify any records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under state or local law. 
C.  The city manager or his/her designee(s) charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation and without notice to obtain samples of the cannabis to test for public safety purposes. Any samples obtained by the city of Blythe shall be logged, recorded, and maintained in accordance with the police department standards for evidence. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.420 - Concurrent regulation with state. 
    It is the stated intent of this chapter to regulate commercial cannabis activity in the city of Blythe concurrently with the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.430 - Violations declared a public nuisance. 
    Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby deemed unlawful and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.440 - Each violation a separate offense. 
    Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by the Blythe Municipal Code. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter being deemed null and void, disgorgement and payment to the city of any monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or in equity. The city of Blythe may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under state and local laws for any violations committed by the commercial cannabis business or persons related to, or associated with, the commercial cannabis activity. Additionally, when there is determined to be an imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare, the city manager, his/her designee, or the police chief or his/her designee, may take immediate action to temporarily suspend a commercial cannabis business permit issued by the city, pending a hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.450 - Criminal penalties. 
    Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than twelve months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
5.10.460 - Remedies cumulative and not exclusive. 
    The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies. The city is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Chapter 5.12 - BILLIARD ROOMS 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Billiard room" means any public place wherein the game of billiards is permitted to be played and includes any place where a fee is charged which is directly or indirectly conditioned upon or related to the playing of the game of billiards. 
B.  "Billiards," as used in this chapter, means any of the several games played on a table, surrounded by an elastic ledge or cushions, with balls which are impelled by cues, and includes all forms of game known as pool. 
C.  "Person" means natural person, partnership, association, club, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. 346 § 1, 1966) 
5.12.020 - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall conduct, manage, operate or maintain a billiard room in the city without having first obtained a permit from the city to do so in the manner provided in this chapter, which permit shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the premises where such billiard room is located. 
(Ord. 346 § 2, 1966) 
5.12.030 - Permit-Application. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain the permit required by Section 5.12.020 shall file a verified application therefor with the city clerk. 
B.  Such application shall set forth the following information: the name, age and residence address of the applicant, if a natural person; or, if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business and the names of all its officers, together with their respective addresses; or, if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names of partners or persons comprising the association, together with their respective addresses; and the names, age, and residence address of the person who is to manage the billiard room, if other than applicant; whether the applicant or manager is a citizen of the United States; the address at which the billiard room is to be conducted; and a statement as to whether or not an application for a similar permit has been refused or cancelled by this or any other municipality in the state and, if so, a full statement of the reason therefor. 
C.  At the time of filing the application, the applicant or person making application upon behalf of any firm or corporation, and the person who is to manage the billiard room, if other than applicant, shall be photographed and fingerprinted and said photographs and fingerprints shall be made a part of the application provided for in this section. 
(Ord. 346 § 3, 1966) 
5.12.040 - Permit-Investigation and issuance. 
    The city clerk shall refer the application provided for in Section 5.12.030 to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be made. After investigation, the chief of police shall recommend to the city clerk the issuance of a permit, which shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance, unless he finds that the applicant is not a fit and proper person to conduct a billiard room or that the conduct of such billiard room at the location specified in the application would be detrimental to the public peace, morals, health or safety, in which event he shall deny the application; provided that any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice thereof with the city clerk within five days from the date of notice of such action. The decision of the council, after a hearing on the appeal, shall be final. 
(Ord. 346 § 4(a), 1966) 
5.12.050 - Permit-Application to permit minors. 
A.  The applicant for a permit, or a permittee, shall apply in writing to the chief of police for permission to allow minors in a billiard room and shall agree to comply with the following additional rules and regulations applicable to such billiard room: 
1.  No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, consumed or possessed by any person on the premises of the billiard room or on any other premises having access (other than by means of a public street) to the premises of the billiard room unless the permit, described herein, specifically authorizes same. The criteria to be used in determining whether or not the permit will allow such sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall consist of the following: 
a.  The interior design of the billiards establishment is such that the potential sale and consumption of such alcoholic beverages by minors without knowledge of the permittee is minimized; 
b.  The applicant provides assurances of training, staffing and/or supervision to the effect that potential sale and/or consumption by minors is prevented; 
c.  The chief of police, as part of his investigation made pursuant to Section 5.12.040, above, determines that the applicant is a fit and proper person to prevent the sale to and/or consumption by minors of alcoholic beverages on or about the billiards establishment; 
d.  A letter of public convenience will be written; 
e.  The operator shall at all times have a current city business license; 
f.  The operator shall have a valid beer only license issued by the state of California; 
g.  Only beer will be allowed to be served and only to those of legal age; and 
h.  The operator shall strictly enforce the provisions of the city curfew ordinance. 
2.  No gambling, betting or wagering of any kind shall be suffered, allowed or permitted on the premises of the billiard room. 
3.  No profanity of any kind shall be used, suffered, allowed or permitted on the premises of the billiard room. 
4.  The curfew hours for minors shall be strictly observed and enforced on the premises of the billiard room. 
5.  The owners, managers and operators, and each of them, of the billiard room shall be strictly responsible for the enforcement of all rules and regulations and shall not permit any person violating any rule or regulation to remain in such billiard room, and shall not permit any habitual violator to enter such billiard room. 
6.  At least four signs shall be posted and maintained at conspicuous places in and about the billiard room, printed in bold one-inch letters placed on a contrasting background, and setting forth the substance of the rules and regulations in this section. 
B.  The chief of police, after investigation and after determining that the billiard room is suitable for minors, may endorse the permit, "Minors allowed subject to provisions of Ordinance No. 346 of the City of Blythe." 
C.  Whenever a permit has been endorsed, as provided herein, including a permit that includes the authorization of minors to be present at a billiards establishment at which alcoholic beverages are sold and/or consumed, the permit to operate a billiards establishment or any part thereof, including the portion that allows minors to be present at such establishment when alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, may be suspended in whole or in part or revoked for the violation of any of the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter, including subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 737 §§ 1, 2, 1997; Ord. 346 § 4(b), (c), (d), 1966) 
5.12.060 - Employee work permit. 
A.  Employees in billiard rooms must obtain a work permit from the chief of police. 
B.  Applications for such work permits shall be submitted under oath and contain such information as may be deemed by the chief of police necessary to determine whether the applicant for the work permit is a proper person to be employed in a billiard room. 
C.  The chief of police may deny to such applicant a work permit if, in his opinion, good cause appears where such person should not be permitted to be employed in a billiard room. 
D.  Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars and said work permit, when issued, shall be valid for one year, unless otherwise suspended or revoked, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 502 § 1, 1978: Ord. 346 § 5, 1966) 
5.12.070 - Permit-Renewal. 
    Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be renewed from year to year upon application. Such application shall be made in the same manner as for an original application, and shall be made within thirty days before the date of expiration of such permit, or the last renewal thereof, and, if not so made, the permit shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 346 § 6, 1966) 
5.12.080 - Permit-Suspension or revocation. 
    The chief of police shall have the right, for cause, to revoke or suspend any billiard room license or permit issued under this chapter and take possession of such license or permit. The action of the chief of police in this respect shall be subject to an appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days; otherwise, the action of the chief of police in revoking or suspending the billiard room license or permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 346 § 7, 1966) 
5.12.090 - Permit-Application after revocation. 
    Whenever a permit has been revoked under the terms of Section 5.12.080, no application by the person whose permit has been revoked shall be considered by the city clerk for a period of one year. 
(Ord. 346 § 8, 1966) 
5.12.100 - Permit-Not transferable. 
    No permit granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be in any manner transferred or assigned, nor shall it authorize any person, other than persons mentioned or named in the permit, to carry on the billiard room for which the permit was granted. 
(Ord. 346 § 9, 1966) 
5.12.110 - Posting of ordinance required. 
    A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the premises where the billiard room is conducted. 
(Ord. 346 § 10, 1966) 
5.12.120 - Hours of operation. 
    No person shall operate a billiard room between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m., or permit or allow any person or persons to remain in any billiard room between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. This section, however, shall not be construed to prevent regular employees from performing necessary work within the premises. 
(Ord. 346 § 11, 1966) 
5.12.130 - Attendance of minors restricted. 
A.  No person under the age of eighteen years shall be in, remain in, enter or visit any billiard room where alcoholic beverages are sold, or consumed on the premises. 
B.  No person having charge or control of any billiard room shall permit or allow any person under the age of eighteen years to be in, remain in, enter or visit any billiard room where alcoholic beverages are sold, or consumed. 
C.  No person shall represent himself to have reached the age of eighteen years in order to gain admission to a billiard room or to be permitted to remain therein when such person in fact is under eighteen years of age. 
D.  No person under the age of sixteen years shall be in, remain in, enter or visit any billiard room after the hour of eight p.m. during the months of June through August, and after the hour of six p.m. during the months of September through May, unless such minor is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
E.  No person having charge or control of any billiard room shall permit or allow any person under the age of sixteen years to be in, enter or visit any billiard room in violation of subsection D of this section, unless such person is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
F.  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years to visit, frequent or enter billiard rooms between the hours of ten p.m. and two a.m. unless such minor is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
G.  No person having charge or control of any billiard room shall permit or allow any person under the age of eighteen years to be in, remain in, enter or visit any billiard room between the hours of ten p.m. and two a.m. unless such person is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
(Ord. 346 § 12, 1966) 
5.12.140 - Games of chance prohibited. 
    No owner, proprietor, manager, or employee of any billiard room shall permit the use of a pea-ball or dice, or the playing of games of chance in such billiard room, or give any checks or tokens which can be redeemed for merchandise or cash. 
(Ord. 346 § 13, 1966) 
5.12.150 - Unobstructed view required. 
    A billiard room operated under the provisions of this chapter, when minors under the age of eighteen years of age are permitted, shall be so constructed and maintained that a clear and unobstructed view of the entire interior thereof may at all times be had from any entrance to said room. No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures where the public congregates shall be permitted. This provision, however, shall not be construed to include the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes, or the maintenance of closets for storing purposes exclusively. All billiard rooms shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 346 § 14, 1966) 
5.12.160 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. 346 § 15, 1966) 
5.12.170 - Additional regulations. 
    The chief of police shall prescribe such additional regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as are deemed necessary by him in the public interest to prevent the operation of billiard rooms from adversely affecting the public peace, health, safety or morals. Such regulations, before becoming effective, shall be approved by the city council. A copy of such regulations shall be furnished to every person holding a valid permit to conduct a billiard room. 
(Ord. 346 § 16, 1966) 
5.12.180 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.24. 
(Ord. 346 § 18, 1966) 
Chapter 5.16 - BINGO GAMES 
Sections: 

5.16.010 - Purpose-Authority. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the issuance of permits under which certain bingo games may be allowed which would otherwise be unlawful under state law. 
B.  The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Section 19 of Article IV of the state Constitution and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. The provisions in this chapter shall be construed strictly in accordance with said authority and, in the event of any apparent conflict or inconsistency, the provisions in this chapter shall be given only such interpretation as will render them compatible with Penal Code Section 326.5 and other applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. 482 § 1, 1977) 
5.16.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Bingo," as defined in Penal Code Section 326.5, means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
B.  "Minors" means all persons under eighteen years of age, as specified in Civil Code Section 25. 
C.  "Nonprofit organization" means an organization within the purview of Penal Code Section 326.5, which is an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and a contribution or gift to which would be a charitable contribution under Section 170 (c) (2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(Ord. 482 § 2, 1977) 
5.16.030 - Permit-Issuance by city manager. 
    Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the city manager may issue permits to nonprofit organizations to conduct bingo games. 
(Ord. 482 § 3, 1977) 
5.16.040 - Permit-Fees. 
    Each applicant for a permit under this chapter or for permit renewal, and each person filing any appeal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall pay, at the time of filing the application or appeal, a processing fee or fees in an amount or amounts as may have been established by resolution of the city council. The permit fee is not refundable in the event the applicant is determined not to qualify for a license, and an appeal fee is not refundable unless expressly otherwise ordered by the city council. 
(Ord. 482 § 4, 1977) 
5.16.050 - Permit-Application. 
A.  An application for a bingo permit shall be written, signed, and verified under penalty of perjury, and shall be filed with the city manager in such form as the city manager shall prescribe. 
B.  Each application for permit or renewal shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  Game of bingo license fee; 
2.  A statement indicating the purpose and uses for which the proceeds of such bingo games are to be used or were used; 
3.  A report from the building and planning and fire departments of the city stating inspection of the property has been made, and such property meets with fire, building, and safety regulations and has adequate off-street parking for one car for each two possible participants in a bingo game; 
4.  A copy of the tax-exempt-status determination issued by the State Franchise Tax Board to the applicant organization showing that the applicant organization is exempt under the provisions of Section 23701(d) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, and that such exemption still exists at the time of application submittal or renewal; 
5.  A copy of the appropriate written confirmation from the Internal Revenue Service that the applicant organization is one, a contribution or gift to which would be a charitable contribution under Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(Ord. 593 § 1, 1982: Ord. 482 § 5, 1977) 
5.16.060 - Permit-Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application the city manager shall conduct or cause to be conducted whatever investigation is deemed necessary to assure the city manager that activities under the permit will probably comply in all respects with the requirements set forth in Penal Code Section 326.5 and with local standard permit conditions, and with whatever other conditions the city manager deems necessary or desirable to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare and to assure compliance with all laws, state and local. 
(Ord. 482 § 6, 1977) 
5.16.070 - Permit-Issuance. 
    Permits as applied for shall be issued by the city manager provided it appears that all requirements of Penal Code Section 326.5 and of this chapter, and of the standards, rules and regulations (including special conditions which will be attached to the permit), applicable pursuant to this chapter and other ordinances and laws, have been, and will appropriately be, met fully by the applicant. 
(Ord. 482 § 7(a), 1977) 
5.16.080 - Permit-Denial. 
    A permit shall be denied if the character, reputation or moral integrity of the applicant organization's personnel (management or otherwise) is determined by the city manager to be inimical or detrimental to the safety or general welfare of the community, or if the applicant falsifies any information in the permit application or omits any information required therein. A permit denial, however, shall be made only after opportunity has been granted to the applicant for a due process hearing before the city manager, after at least ten days' notice to said applicant, setting forth a statement of the proposed grounds for denial of the permit, and stating the time and place such hearing will be held. 
(Ord. 482 § 7(b), 1977) 
5.16.090 - Permit-Conditions by state law. 
    All permits issued under this chapter to allow bingo games shall be subject to the following conditions as mandated by Penal Code Section 326.5: 
1.  Bingo games are allowed only when they are for the benefit of organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, a contribution or gift to which would be a charitable contribution under Section 170 (c) (2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
2.  No person is to receive a profit, wage, or salary from any authorized bingo game. 
3.  No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
4.  A nonprofit organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, which property is used by such organization for any office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Premises used solely for purposes of conducting bingo games are not qualified therefor. 
5.  All bingo games shall be opened to the public, not just to the members of the nonprofit organization. 
6.  A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game, shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
7.  No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except that organization authorized to conduct a bingo game, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
8.  All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. 
9.  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
10.  The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both. 
(Ord. 482 § 8, 1977) 
5.16.100 - Permit-Local standard conditions. 
    All permits issued pursuant to provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following additional special conditions: 
A.  No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed, sold, given away, served or delivered to any person within the building (or portion thereof) occupied by the permittee at the time of the games, during the period of time between the commencement and ending of bingo games, except while such games are suspended for not less than one hour for meal purposes or the like. 
(Ord. 593 § 2, 1982: Ord. 482 § 9, 1977) 
5.16.110 - Permit-Additional special conditions. 
    The issuance of any bingo permit pursuant to this chapter, if appropriate, shall have additional special conditions attached thereto which are deemed by the city manager to be necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and of Penal Code Section 326.5, and to assure compliance with the provisions of said chapter and section, and to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare from foreseeable adverse effects which might otherwise result from any of the activities sanctioned by the permit; and the city manager shall have discretionary authority to prescribe any such necessary or appropriate conditions. The permittee (applicant) shall have the right to a due process hearing before the city manager, if such hearing is duly requested, in order to protest, or to propose modification of, any such additional special condition, existing or proposed. 
(Ord. 432 § 10, 1977) 
5.16.120 - Permit-Not issued for games conducted by city. 
    No permit shall be issued for the conducting of any bingo game or games by the city or any department or agency thereof. 
(Ord. 629 § 7, 1986: Ord. 482 § 7(c), 1977) 
5.16.130 - Permit-Term-Transferability. 
A.  The term of a bingo permit shall be six months (unless a lesser term has been applied for) and a permit may be renewed for up to a one-year period of time, any time within one year from the date of its issuance, upon due application therefor. 
B.  Each permit issued under this chapter shall be issued to a specified nonprofit organization to conduct bingo games at a specific location and shall in no event be transferable from one organization to another or from one location to another. 
(Ord. 482 § 11, 1977) 
5.16.140 - Permit-Revocation-Grounds. 
    Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, after the permittee has been afforded the opportunity of a due process hearing as provided in Section 5.16.150, be revoked, suspended or modified by the city manager for any of the following grounds or reasons: 
A.  There has been a violation of or a failure to comply with any condition attached to the permit or any provision or regulation mentioned in this chapter or any other rule or regulation or law specifically applicable to the permitted activities. 
B.  The character or moral integrity of the permittee or the permittee's personnel is determined inimical to the public safety or general welfare of the community. 
C.  There was given any false or fictitious information in connection with the application for and obtaining of the permit. 
D.  Any one of the permittee's personnel (management or otherwise) has committed any fraudulent, false, deceptive or dangerous act in connection with, or while conducting, any permitted bingo game. 
E.  The permittee or any of its personnel has conducted any bingo game in a manner contrary to the peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
F.  The permittee or any of its personnel have, in connection with activities allowed by the permit, failed to comply with any law or regulation in any of the following fields: zoning, building codes, off-street parking requirements, controls related to public assemblies, health regulations, or local and state fire regulations. 
G.  Any activities done under or occurring incidental to the permit have interfered or tended to interfere with the normal flow or vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any public right-of-way. 
H.  Any activities done under or occurring incidental to the permit have unduly and unreasonably interfered with or adversely affected any private property owner's or resident's rights to peaceful and unmolested enjoyment of his private premises. 
I.  The permittee or any of its personnel have failed to comply with provisions of the city's sign ordinance, or with conditions attached to the permit relating to sign control. 
J.  Any other reason exists for which the permit might have been lawfully denied in the first instance, or that for any reason the continued operations under the permit will be inimical to the public safety or general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 482 § 12, 1977) 
5.16.150 - Permit-Revocation-Procedure. 
A.  A revocation, suspension or modification, as referred to in Section 5.16.140, shall be made only after opportunity has been granted to the permittee for a due process hearing before the city manager, after ten days' notice to said permittee, setting forth the nature and grounds of complaint against it and stating the time and place such hearing will be held. 
B.  Upon failure of the permittee to respond to the opportunity for hearing after receiving notice of such hearing, the permit may be suspended or revoked, or may be modified in such particulars as are deemed necessary in the public interest, and any such suspension, revocation or modification shall be effective upon notice or knowledge thereof being received by any of the permittee's local management personnel, orally or in writing. Any such order of suspension, revocation or modification shall also be effective as to any employee or agent of the permittee, which employees or agent has been notified orally in writing of the substance of the order. 
C.  Any such revocation or modification of any permit may be in addition to any penalties otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 482 § 13, 1977) 
5.16.160 - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved by, dissatisfied with, or excepting to any action, denial, order, requirement, condition, permit, decision or determination made by the city manager in administering the provisions of this chapter may appeal by filing written notice, specifying the grounds of appeal and the relief sought, with the city clerk within ten days after notice of the action from which appealed. Upon any failure to file such written appeal within the time allowed, the action of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. A timely appeal shall be reviewed by the city manager and, unless an adjustment of the matter is made by the city manager satisfactory to the appellant, the appeal shall be expeditiously scheduled for hearing before the city council, which body at the conclusion of its consideration may affirm, reverse or modify the action appealed from and may take any action which might have been legally taken in the first instance by the city manager. 
(Ord. 482 § 14, 1977) 
5.16.170 - Permit-Renewal. 
    In the event a renewal application is filed during the pendency of a proceeding to suspend or revoke the permit, such filing shall continue such permit in full force and effect until the making of the final order by the city manager terminating the proceedings. Failure of the city manager to revoke, suspend, limit or condition the permit shall have the effect of granting the renewal. The application for renewal shall become a part of the pending proceeding and be subject to all evidence which has been or is thereafter presented. No further notice to the applicant is required and the city manager is authorized to consider and take action upon such application in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 482 § 15, 1977) 
5.16.180 - Alternate to city manager. 
    In connection with any function vested by this chapter in the city manager, should the city manager in a particular case be disqualified to act, then the chief of police shall perform all functions and exercise all authority under this chapter otherwise vested in the city manager. Should both such officers simultaneously be so disqualified, then the city council shall designate another city officer to act in the particular case. 
(Ord. 482 § 16, 1977) 
5.16.190 - Permit-Ineffective while conditions not observed. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, during its term, shall be deemed in effect so as to validate bingo games thereunder (which would otherwise be unlawful under state law) only throughout periods of time during which the permittee and its personnel are fully complying with all permit conditions as referred to, and/or authorized in or by Sections 5.16.090 through 5.16.110. If any such permit conditions are being violated or not complied with, then the state laws regarding bingo games shall be deemed fully applicable to the permittee and its personnel managing, supervising or conducting the bingo games, to the same extent as if no permit had ever been issued; provided, however, that members of the public who are participating in the bingo games not as personnel of the permittee, which members of the public have no knowledge or reason to know of the aforesaid violations of or noncompliance with the permit conditions, shall be deemed to be participating in games for which a permit is in full force and effect, so long as a permit is conspicuously displayed upon the premises in accordance with subsection K of Section 5.16.100. 
(Ord. 482 § 17, 1977) 
Chapter 5.20 - CAMPGROUNDS 
Sections: 

5.20.010 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases are defined as follows and certain provisions shall be construed as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from their context that they have a different meaning: 
1.  "Camp cars and/or trailers" means any unit used for living or sleeping purposes, and which is equipped with wheels or similar devices used for the purpose of transporting said unit from place to place, whether by motive power or by other means. 
2.  "Campground" means any place, area or tract of land upon which is located any camp car and/or trailer. 
3.  "Health department" means the health department or the health officer of the city or the county of Riverside. 
B.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural and singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
(Ord. 152 § 1, 1942) 
5.20.020 - Permit-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, maintain or offer for public use within the corporate limits of the city any campground without first applying for and receiving from the health department a permit to do so, in the manner provided in this chapter, or without complying with regulations set forth in this chapter, or any rules and regulations which may be formulated by the health department from time to time, and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 152 § 3, 1942) 
5.20.030 - Permit-Application. 
A.  Each application for the permit required by Section 5.20.020 shall be in writing, upon a form provided by the health department for that purpose. 
B.  It shall state the name and address of the applicant and a description of the property, whereon or wherein it is proposed to conduct a campground. It shall also contain such other information as the health department may require and it shall be filed by the applicant. 
C.  It shall be filed with the health department not fewer than five days, nor more than fifteen days, before said campground is made ready for use, and it shall also be accompanied by an inspection fee in the following sum: 
1.  Campgrounds containing ten trailers or fewer shall pay an inspection fee of one dollar per trailer; and 
2.  Campgrounds containing more than ten trailers shall pay a maximum inspection fee of ten dollars, irrespective of the number of trailers; for which sum the health department shall issue a receipt. 
(Ord. 154 § 1, 1943: Ord. 152 § 4, 1942) 
5.20.040 - Disposition of funds. 
    All moneys received by the health department as inspection fees, under provisions of this chapter, shall be paid into the city treasury and placed in the general fund. 
(Ord. 152 § 5, 1942) 
5.20.050 - Permit-Investigation. 
    Upon the filing of the application described in Section 5.20.030, accompanied by the inspection fee, it shall be the duty of the health department or any of its duly authorized representatives to investigate the premises and determine whether the proposed campground or the site selected therefor conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the rules and regulations of the health department and the laws of the state, and no permit shall be issued unless such campground or the site selected therefor complies with such requirements and the approval of the health department; and said department may at its discretion approve or reject any proposed campground site. 
(Ord. 152 § 6, 1942) 
5.20.060 - Permit-Revocation or suspension. 
    Any permit granted under this chapter shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the health department in the following manner: 
    A notice shall be served upon the person holding said permit specifying wherein he has failed to comply with this chapter, and requiring him to appear before the health department, at a day and hour therein specified, not fewer than five days after the personal service of said notice on such permit holder, requiring him to show cause at said time and place why said permit should not be revoked or suspended. At the time and place mentioned in the notice, the person holding the permit shall have the right to appear in person, or by counsel, and to introduce such evidence as he may desire, and the health department shall confront said permit holder with any charges that the health department may have against him; and after the hearing, the health department, at its discretion, may revoke or suspend the permit. 
(Ord. 152 § 7, 1942) 
5.20.070 - Permit-Transferability. 
    The permit provided for in this chapter shall be transferrable upon the written application of the holder of the permit to the health department and with its consent endorsed thereon. A permit may be granted at any time during the year and, unless previously revoked, shall expire one calendar year following the date of issue. 
(Ord. 152 § 8, 1942) 
5.20.080 - Permit-Posting. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish, maintain, conduct or carry on any campground unless there is at all times posted in a conspicuous place at said campground the permit obtained from the health department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 152 § 9, 1942) 
5.20.090 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to every campground within the incorporated area of the city, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation maintaining, operating, conducting or carrying on any such campground, any person living or sleeping in any camp car and/or trailer located in any campground, or any other person to violate or to contribute in any way to the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 152 § 10, 1942) 
5.20.100 - Ground area. 
    No camp car and/or trailer in any campground existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or which may be established thereafter, shall be located within eight feet of any other camp car and/or trailer, nor shall any camp car and/or trailer be located within eight feet of any lot line. Camp cars and/or trailers shall be arranged in rows abutting or facing on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than fifteen feet in width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a public street or alley. 
(Ord. 152 § 13, 1942) 
5.20.110 - Drainage. 
    Every campground established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be located on a well drained area and the premises of every such campground or any existing campground shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or casual waters. 
(Ord. 152 § 14, 1942) 
5.20.120 - Water supply. 
    An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of a camp ground regulated by this chapter. Such water supply shall be obtained from faucets only, conveniently located in the campground, and no dipping vessel or common cups shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 152 § 15, 1942) 
5.20.130 - Removal of wheels or similar devices. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating a camp car and/or trailer located in a campground to remove or to cause to have removed the wheels or any similar transporting devices from said camp car and/or trailer or to otherwise permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent the ready removal of said camp car and/or trailer without first obtaining a permit so to do, from the building department or building inspector of the city. Any alteration to any camp car and/or trailer as set forth in this section shall be construed as removing it from the requirements of this chapter and converting it into a dwelling and it shall thereupon be subject to the requirements of the building code of the city and the State Housing Act. 
(Ord. 152 § 16, 1942) 
5.20.140 - Dogs not allowed at large. 
    Dogs at no time shall be permitted to run at large in any campground. 
(Ord. 152 § 17, 1942) 
5.20.150 - Toilets. 
    There shall be provided in every existing campground, and every campground which may be established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, one water closet for each sex. One of such water closets shall be distinctly marked "For Men" and one of such water closets shall be distinctly marked "For Women"; and there shall be provided an additional watercloset for each sex for every fifteen or fraction part thereof in excess of fifteen males or fifteen females living in the campground; provided, however, that the health department may exempt any campground existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter from full compliance with the provisions of this section when, in its discretion, such deviation will not be detrimental to the health of persons occupying the campground or to the proper sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. 152 § 18, 1942) 
5.20.160 - Garbage receptacles. 
    There shall be provided in every campground established at the time of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter such number of tight receptacles with close-fitting metal covers for garbage, refuse, ashes and rubbish as may be deemed necessary by the health department; and such garbage receptacles shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 152 § 19, 1942) 
5.20.170 - Slop sinks. 
    There shall be provided in every campground established at the time of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter one or more slop sinks properly connected with a sewer or cesspool. Such sinks shall be conveniently located at no greater distance than one hundred feet from any camp car and/or trailer. 
(Ord. 152 § 20, 1942) 
5.20.180 - Refuse and sewage disposal. 
    It is unlawful to permit any wastewater or material from sinks, baths, showers or other plumbing fixtures in camp cars and/or trailers to be deposited upon the surface of the ground, and all such fixtures, when in use, must be connected to the city sewer system, or the drainage therefrom must be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the health department. 
(Ord. 152 § 21, 1942) 
5.20.190 - Lighting. 
    Every campground established at the time of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be provided with means of lighting the same at night and all public water closets and bath units shall be provided with sufficient lighting facilities which shall be kept lighted during the time from one half hour after sunset until one half hour before sunrise. 
(Ord. 152 § 22, 1942) 
5.20.200 - Facilities and equipment required by other laws and ordinances. 
    Any water faucets, toilets, garbage receptacles or other equipment required by the provisions of this chapter, or which may be required by any rules and regulations of the health department pertaining to campgrounds, shall not be construed to mean water faucets, toilets, garbage receptacles or other equipment located in or adjacent to campgrounds and which may be required at the time of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter under provisions of other laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. 152 § 23, 1942) 
5.20.210 - Responsibility of owner or operator. 
    Every person owning or operating a campground shall maintain such campground, and any toilets, baths or other permanent equipment in connection therewith, in a clean and sanitary manner and condition and shall maintain said equipment in a state of good repair. 
(Ord. 152 § 11, 1942) 
5.20.220 - Enforcement-Health officer. 
    It shall be the duty of the health department to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and, for the purpose of securing enforcement thereof, the health officer, or any of his duly authorized representatives, shall have the right and are empowered to enter upon the premises of any campground operated at the time of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter within the city of Blythe to inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith. 
(Ord. 152 § 2, 1942) 
5.20.230 - Enforcement-Health department. 
    The health department is empowered to formulate from time to time and to enforce any rules and regulations that said department may deem advisable governing the operation of campgrounds or camp cars and/or trailers bearing on any matters of sanitation or housing. 
(Ord. 152 § 12, 1942) 
5.20.240 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Every person, firm or corporation violating or contributing in any way to the violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during which such violation continues and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this section. 
B.  It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, renting or operating a campground in the city to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter, and/or any rules and regulations formulated by the health department governing campgrounds, and any such person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or said rules and regulations, or contributing in any way to the violation of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the city or county jail not exceeding three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 152 §§ 24, 25, 1942) 
Chapter 5.22 - CANNABIS DISPENSARIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 873, § 2, adopted January 12, 2016, amended Chapter 5.22 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 5.22, §§ 5.22.010-5.22.050, pertained to similar material, and derived from Ord. No. 841, adopted January 26, 2010. 

5.22.010 - Cannabis dispensaries. 
    The city shall refuse to issue any license under this Title 5 when it is determined from the application for such license that the business or occupation for which the license is requested involves in anyway whatsoever commercial cannabis activities prohibited within the city, pursuant to Chapter 17.64 of the Blythe Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 873, § 2, 1-12-16) 
Chapter 5.24 - CARDROOMS[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 598 and 716. 

5.24.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
    "Cardroom" means any space, room or enclosure, furnished or equipped with a table used or intended to be used as a card table for the lawful playing of controlled games as defined in California Penal Code Section 337j (e) or any successor statutes thereto. 
    "Cardroom employee" means any dealer, overseer or other person directly connected with the operation and supervision of controlled games in a cardroom excluding waitresses, bartenders, culinary workers and others not connected with such operation and supervising. 
    "The Gambling Control Act" means the Gambling Control Act, as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 19800 et seq., or any successor statutes thereto. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.020 - License required-Exempt organizations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct, or to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted, any cardroom in the city without first obtaining a license from the city to do so in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any nonprofit society, club, fraternal, labor or other organization having adopted bylaws, duly elected directors and members which have card tables for the exclusive use of its members, and where no charge is made for any of the facilities, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.030 - License application-Generally. 
A.  Application for a cardroom license shall be made to the city manager upon such form as the city manager may prescribe. Such application shall include, among other things, the following: 
1.  The names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business proposing to operate a cardroom. The term "persons financially interested" shall include all persons who share, directly or indirectly, in the income of the business on the basis of gross or net revenue; 
2.  Previous criminal record, if any, of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business; 
3.  Physical descriptions of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business; 
4.  A copy of a valid gambling license issued to the applicant pursuant to the Gambling Control Act. If the applicant is not a natural person, then this requirement shall apply to the applicant and to each person required by the California Gambling Control Commission to also have a license for that cardroom. 
B.  Such application shall be certified as to its correctness by the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
C.  On receipt of a copy of a valid gambling license and a completed city application form, the city manager shall issue the applicant a cardroom license subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No cardroom license shall be issued, re-issued or renewed unless the cardroom is located or proposed to be located in a commercial zone, i.e., a zone in which the word "commercial" appears in the title, or a valid use permit has been obtained for the cardroom as authorized by the city zoning regulations; and 
2.  No cardroom may be located near any unsuitable area, as specified in California Business and Provisions Code Section 19852A(a)(3) or any successor statues thereto. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.040 - License-Fee. 
    The applicant for a cardroom license shall pay a license fee with the application. The entire fee shall be retained by the city. The amount of the license fee shall be established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.050 - License-Term. 
    Those establishments holding valid cardroom licenses at the time of the passage of the California Gambling Control Act on January 1, 1998, shall have the right to continue operation, subject to compliance with the act until the expiration of their license. A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until the end of the city's fiscal year in which such license is issued. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.090 - License-Number per person limited. 
    No person shall be granted more than one license to conduct a cardroom. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.100 - License-Transferability. 
    No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or assignable. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.110 - License-Limitation of number of card tables which may be authorized. 
    No more than five card tables shall be allowed to operate in the city, and no more than five card tables in each cardroom. There shall be no more than five cardroom licenses issued in the city at any one time. Each cardroom license shall set forth the number of card tables authorized for that cardroom. The city council may amend this section to decrease the number of card tables or cardrooms allowed in the city when it determines that it is in the best interest to do so. The number of card tables or cardrooms may be increased only to the extent allowed in California Business and Professions Code Section 19950.1. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.120 - Employee work permits-Required of cardroom employees. 
    Cardroom employees as deemed herein shall obtain a work permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.130 - Employee work permits-Application-Generally. 
A.  Application for a cardroom employee work permit shall be made to the city manager upon such form as the city manager may prescribe. Such application shall include, among other things previous criminal records, if any, of the applicant. 
B.  The application shall be certified as to its correctness by the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
C.  The applicant must provide a set of their fingerprints for submission to the Department of Justice for a criminal history background check. 
D.  In addition to any other restrictions provided by law, no work permit shall be issued to anyone who is disqualified from holding a state gambling license, for any reasons specified in California Business and Professions Code Section 19850. 
E.  Any application for a work permit shall be subject to objection by the Department of Justice, Division of Gambling Control. If the Division objects to the issuance of a work permit, it shall be denied. Such a denial may be reviewed in accordance with the Gambling Control Act (California Business and Professions Code Section 19801 et seq). 
F.  On receipt of a copy of a valid work permit and a completed city application form, the city manager shall issue an employee work permit. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.140 - Employee work permits-Fee. 
    The applicant for a cardroom employee work permit shall submit, along with the application, a non-refundable fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.180 - Employee work permits-Term. 
    Such work permits shall be valid until the end of the city's fiscal year in which such permit is issued. Only one such work permit shall be required each fiscal year even though the holder thereof may change places of employment within the city. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.200 - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision or determination made pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.24.210 - Cardroom rules and regulations. 
    It is unlawful to operate a cardroom in violation of any of the following regulations and rules: 
A.  Location. Not more than one cardroom shall be located at any one address or within any building. A cardroom shall not operate at any location for which the city zoning regulations do not authorize such use or in the alternative a valid use permit is not in effect pursuant to the city zoning regulations of this code. 
B.  Minors. No person under the age of twenty-one shall be permitted at any card table, nor shall participate in any game played thereat. This subsection does not permit greater access to cardrooms than what is set forth in the California Business and Professions Code Section 19915.5 or any successor statutes thereto. 
C.  Hours of Operation. Cardrooms may operate twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. Each cardroom shall adopt a schedule specifying its hours of operation. Each cardroom shall clearly post at its location the schedule specifying its hours of operation so as to give law enforcement and patrons adequate notice of the hours of operation. 
D.  Police Inspection. All cardrooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation, or at any other time which, in the judgment of the chief of police, it is necessary to inspect for violations of this chapter. 
E.  Doors to be Unlocked. During the hours of operation, all entry and exit doors shall be unlocked and accessible to the general public. 
F.  Supervision of Tables. Each card table shall have assigned to it a person whose duty shall be to supervise the game and to see that it is played strictly in accordance with the terms of this chapter and with the provision of the Penal Code. Such person may have more than one table under supervision at any one time but shall not, however participate in the game unless such person is clearly identified on a nameplate or such other visible means of identification as an employee of the establishment. 
G.  Signs to be Posted. There shall be posted in every cardroom in letters plainly visible from all parts thereof signs stating such information relating to the regulations contained herein as the city manager may require including, but not limited to, the amount of time charge for participation, the hours of operation in the cardroom, and the watering limits established by that cardroom. 
H.  Intoxicated Persons. No person who is in the state of intoxication shall be permitted in a cardroom. This subsection does not prohibit other grounds for removing individuals from cardrooms as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 19835.5A or by successor statutes thereto. 
I.  "Cuts" of Pots. The operator of a cardroom shall establish a reasonable time charge to customers and there shall not be permitted any "rakeoff" or "cut" of any pots or bets. 
J.  No "Shills." In addition to the limitations set forth in subsection F of this section, no other person employed by or receiving consideration from the cardroom establishment shall participate in any card game unless such person is clearly identified on a nameplate or such other identification as an employee of such establishment. 
K.  Solicitation of Players. No cardroom operator or employee shall solicit or induce a person to participate in a card game by offering or providing to such person free food or drink. 
L.  Money on Tables, Etc. It is illegal to have money on any card table or to use money in any card game. 
M.  Exhibition of Permits. Operators and employees shall present their state and city licenses or permits on demand of any law enforcement officer. 
N.  Security. Each cardroom shall be responsible and liable for its patrons' safety and security in and around it. Each cardroom shall adopt and enforce a plan that is sufficient to provide for the safety and security of its patrons. 
O.  Wagering Limits. Each cardroom shall be unlimited. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 838, § 1, 1-26-10) 
5.24.220 - State law violation. 
    The city council declares that it is not the intention of this chapter to permit the licensing of any cardroom for the playing of any game prohibited by the laws of the state, including but not limited to, those games enumerated in Section 330 of the Penal Code or any successor statues thereto. 
(Ord. 760 § 1 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 5.28 - CIRCUSES AND MENAGERIES 
Sections: 

5.28.010 - License-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal, agent, owner or employee, either for himself or any other person or for any body, corporate or otherwise, or as an officer of any corporation, to commence to carry on within the corporate limits of the city, or to operate any circus, menagerie, carnival, tent show or side show, or any rack or device where the element of skill or chance is involved, without first having procured a license therefor from the city clerk. 
(Ord. 86 § 1, 1926) 
5.28.020 - License-Fees. 
    The license fee shall be as set by resolution of the city council, payable in cash in advance, and, in addition, in cash in advance, a sum to be determined by the city council to cover the cost of any extra police and fire protection which may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 571 § 2 (part), 1980; Ord. 467 § l (part), 1975; Ord. 224 § 1, 1955: Ord. 86 § 2, 1926) 
5.28.030 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who, for himself or for any other person or persons, or for any body, corporate or otherwise, commences to carry on any business, trade, calling or occupation specified in Section 5.28.010 without first having procured the license required by Section 5.28.010, for each violation of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars nor less than fifty dollars, or imprisoned in the city jail for a term not exceeding ninety days nor less than thirty days, or shall be punished by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. 86 § 5, 1926) 
Chapter 5.32 - COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINES 
Sections: 

5.32.010 - License fee-Imposed. 
    A license fee or tax is imposed upon any individual or firm whose business is limited exclusively to the renting, leasing, or operating of coin-operated vending machines, which license fee or tax shall be imposed upon the gross receipts which are directly attributable to the business activities conducted within the city. The license fee or tax shall be based on the entire gross receipts which are directly attributable to the business activities conducted within the city. 
(Ord. 464 § 1, 1975) 
5.32.020 - License fee-Amounts designated. 
    The license fee or tax shall be as set forth in this section for the following business activities: 
A.  One-fourth of one percent for cigarette machines; 
B.  One-half of one percent for machines dispensing candy or food; 
C.  Two percent for juke box music machines, or other mechanical musical devices; 
D.  Two percent for pool tables; 
E.  Two percent for machines of games of skill or contest; 
F.  Two percent for pinball machines; 
G.  One percent for all other coin-operated vending machines not specifically mentioned in this section. 
(Ord. 464 § 2, 1975) 
5.32.030 - Revocation of license. 
    The license issued for the privilege of renting, leasing, or operating coin-operated vending machines to any individual or firm whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating such machines within the city may be revoked for failure of the licensee to report to the city clerk the gross receipts from such machines. Such report shall be made to the city clerk every calendar month on the first day of the calendar month when the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective. 
(Ord. 464 § 3, 1975) 
5.32.040 - Audit. 
    The city may demand an audit of any licensee under this chapter and require him to submit a copy of the state sales and use tax returns filed relative to such machines, and a copy of any other tax statement filed with any government entity by him or by any other individual or firm owning, renting, leasing or operating such machines disclosing the gross receipts received from owning, renting, leasing or operating such machines. 
(Ord. 464 § 4, 1975) 
5.32.050 - Exemption. 
    Pursuant to Section 16002.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, this chapter shall not apply to coin-operated laundry equipment owned and operated by a retail establishment providing coin-operated laundry equipment for general public use. 
(Ord. 464 § 5, 1975) 
Chapter 5.36 - COMMERCIAL PHOTOGRAPHY 
Sections: 

5.36.010 - License-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business, occupation or profession of portrait or commercial photography, or in the business of enlarging, copying, coloring or developing, or portrait finishing of photographs in the city without first having procured a license therefor. 
(Ord. 691 § 1, 1992: Ord. 201 § 1, 1951) 
5.36.020 - License-Fee. 
    The license fee for any person, firm or corporation engaged in any business set forth in Section 5.36.010, whether resident, transient or itinerant, shall be as set by resolution of the city council; and, in addition, a license fee as set by resolution of the city council shall be paid by such person, firm or corporation for each outside solicitor or salesperson including solicitors or salespersons employed but operating from their own temporary or permanent residences or telephones, whether paid on a salary or commission basis, contracted with or employed by such person, firm or corporation for the purposes of selling, distributing or securing orders for portrait or commercial photographs, or for the enlarging, copying, coloring or portrait finishing thereof or for the selling or distribution of coupons or tokens, or other printed or similar offers or advertising literature pledged or used in the sale of portrait or commercial photographs or the enlarging, copying, coloring or portrait finishing thereof. 
(Ord. 571 § 2 (part), 1980; 467 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 201 § 2, 1951) 
5.36.040 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for each such offense, and each day's violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 201 § 4, 1951) 
Chapter 5.40 - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS 
Sections: 

5.40.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
A.  "CATV" means a community antenna television system as defined in this section. 
B.  "City" means the city of Blythe, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
C.  "Community antenna television system" means a system of antenna, coaxial cables, wires, wave guides, or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing television or FM radio service by cable or through its facilities as contemplated in this chapter. 
D.  "Council" means the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city. 
E.  "Franchise" means any authorization granted under this chapter in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall not mean any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city in accordance with Chapter 5.04. 
F.  "Grantee" means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as defined in this section, is granted by the council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm or corporation. 
G.  "Gross annual receipts" means any and all compensation including installation and line extension charge, and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in payment for television or FM radio signals or service received within the city. 
    Gross annual receipts shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit. 
H.  "Property of grantee" means all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the city under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
I.  "Street" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the city. 
J.  "Subscriber" means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a grantee. 
(Ord. 557 § 2, 1979) 
5.40.020 - Franchise-Application. 
    Application for a franchise, except by the existing grantee operator under this chapter shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, main offices, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies; 
B.  A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various components; the manner in which applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and, particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other public utilities will be used for such system; 
C.  A description, in detail, of the public streets, public places and proposed public streets within which applicant proposes or seeks authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities; a detailed description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof; 
D.  A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed service area or areas within which applicant proposes to provide CATV services and for which a franchise is requested; 
E.  A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city clerk of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. For unusual circumstances, such as underground cable required, or more than one hundred fifty feet of distance from cable to connection of service to subscribers, an additional installation charge over that normally charged for installation as specified in the applicant's proposal may be charged, with easement to be supplied by subscribers. For remote, relatively inaccessible subscribers within the city, service may be made available on the basis of cost of materials, labor, and easements if required by the grantee; 
F.  A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines or conduits; 
G.  A statement setting forth all agreements, and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever; 
H.  A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing applicant's financial status and his financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the proposed CATV system; 
I.  The council may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
(Ord. 557 § 21(a), 1979) 
5.40.030 - Franchise-Granting. 
    Upon consideration of any such application, the council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the council may by ordinance grant a franchise for a CATV system to any such applicant as may appear from said application to be in its opinion best qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in the city. The council's decision in the matter shall be final. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the franchise as granted. 
(Ord. 557 § 21(b), 1979) 
5.40.040 - Franchise-Conditions. 
A.  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall include the following condition: 
    "The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by Ordinance of the City of Blythe and no other purpose whatsoever." 
B.  Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the city to include any other reasonable condition which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. 557 § 21(c), 1979) 
5.40.050 - Exclusive use of telephone facilities. 
    When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted under this chapter constructs, operates and maintains a CATV system exclusively through telephone company facilities constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to a state-granted telephone franchise and offers satisfactory proof that in no event during the life of such franchise shall the grantee make any use of the streets independently of such telephone company facilities, said grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter as a licensee, and, in such event, whenever the term "grantee" is used in this chapter, it means licensee. 
(Ord. 557 § 3, 1979) 
5.40.060 - Franchise-Grantee. 
    A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or any portion of the city may be granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
    No provision of this chapter may be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more. 
(Ord. 557 § 4, 1979) 
5.40.070 - Franchise-Uses permitted. 
A.  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city. 
B.  The grantee may make a charge to subscribers for installation or connection to its CATV system and a fixed monthly charge as filed and approved as in this chapter provided. No increase in the rates and charges to subscribers, as set forth in the schedule filed and approved with grantee's application, beyond those presently in effect may be made without the prior approval of the council expressed by resolution. 
(Ord. 557 § 5, 1979) 
5.40.080 - Franchise-Duration. 
A.  No franchise granted by the council under this chapter shall be for a term longer than fifteen years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof. 
B.  Any such franchise granted under this chapter may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the council in the event that said council has found, after thirty days' notice of a hearing and full public hearing thereon, of any proposed termination that: 
1.  The grantee has failed to comply with any material provision of this chapter, or has, by act or omission, violated any material term or condition of any franchise or permit issued under this chapter, and has failed to make a satisfactory attempt to correct said violation after notice is given by the city; 
2.  Any provision of this chapter has become invalid or unenforceable and the council further finds that such provision constitutes a consideration material to the grant of said franchise; or 
3.  The city acquires the CATV system property of the grantee. 
(Ord. 557 § 6, 1979) 
5.40.090 - Franchise-Renewal. 
    Any franchise granted under this chapter is renewable at the application of the grantee, in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as required in this chapter for obtaining the original franchise, except those which are by their terms expressly inapplicable; provided, however, that the council may at its option waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of Section 5.40.270. 
(Ord. 557 § 22, 1979) 
5.40.100 - Franchise-Limitations. 
A.  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive. 
B.  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed in this chapter. 
C.  Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property. 
D.  Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty days after any such transfer or assignment. The consent of the council may not be arbitrarily refused; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter; and provided further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness. 
E.  Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted under this chapter. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or by any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
F.  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department, or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the city. 
G.  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued under this chapter or because of its enforcement. 
H.  The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of city ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
I.  Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the city, utility company, or from others maintaining poles in streets. 
J.  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by grantee, or any successor to any interest of grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any CATV system in the city; and the acceptance of any franchise under this chapter shall operate, as between grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities within the city, to the effect that, as between grantee and the city, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any CATV system in the city shall be, in all instances and respects under and pursuant to said franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity, or authority whatsoever. 
(Ord. 557 § 8, 1979) 
5.40.110 - Franchise-Payments. 
A.  Any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall pay to the city, during the life of such franchise, a sum equal to three percent of the gross annual receipts of the grantee for the franchise period. Such payment by the grantee to the city shall be made annually, or as otherwise provided in the grantee's franchise, by delivery of the same to the city clerk. 
B.  The grantee shall file with the city, within thirty days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which such franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined in this chapter, of grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the city, within fifteen days after the time for filing such statements, the sum prescribed in this section or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year or portion thereof covered by such statements. 
C.  In any year, or portion thereof, following the first full year service has been provided and during which payments under this section amount to less than twelve hundred dollars per year, grantee shall pay the city, as a minimum, an amount equal to twelve hundred dollars per year. 
D.  The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this chapter. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation under this chapter. 
E.  In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of any franchise granted under this chapter without the consent of the city, the grantee shall pay to the city reasonable compensation and damages, of not less than fifty percent of its total gross profits during said period. 
(Ord. 557 § 7, 1979) 
5.40.120 - Rights of city. 
A.  Nothing in the franchise or this chapter shall limit or in any way alter the right of the city to acquire the franchisee's assets of the system by condemnation, exercise of rights of eminent domain, or otherwise, as may now or in the future be permitted by law, for such value as is now or may be permitted by law. 
B.  Neither the granting of any franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar franchise to any other person, firm or corporation, within all or any portion of the city. 
C.  There is reserved to the city the power to amend any section or part of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the part of the grantee, so long as they are not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter and so long as the city will give consideration to these additional or greater standards in setting subscriber rates. 
D.  Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city. 
E.  The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted under this chapter. The city clerk is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the city, the grantee, or any subscriber in the best interest of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the city clerk may appeal the matter to the council for hearing and determination. The council may accept, reject, or modify the decision of the city clerk, and the council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from any provision of this chapter, and the city council may employ at the sole expense of the grantee a consultant to determine questions of fact concerning grantee's operation under the franchise. 
(Ord. 557 § 9, 1979) 
5.40.130 - Securing permit-Diligent completion of work. 
A.  Within thirty days after acceptance of any franchise, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
B.  Within ninety days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, the grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system. 
C.  Within ninety days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, the grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for franchise, as provided in Section 5.40.270, shall be provided within one year from the date that service was first provided. 
D.  Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue any material requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth in this chapter, shall be grounds for termination of such franchise, under and pursuant to the terms of Section 5.40.080; provided, however, that the council in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control. 
(Ord. 557 § 10, 1979) 
5.40.140 - Facilities-Location. 
A.  Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the director of public works acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion. 
B.  The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the written approval of the director of public works. 
C.  In those areas and portions of the city where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, the grantee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purpose of this subsection, "underground" includes a partial underground system, e.g. streamlining. Amplifiers in grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 557 § 11, 1979) 
5.40.150 - Facilities-Abandonment-Discontinued use. 
A.  In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of nine months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place, without complying with the requirements of grantee's franchise or this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given ten days' notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the director of public works may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the director of public works. 
B.  Any property of the grantee remaining in place thirty days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The director of public works may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty days. 
C.  Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the director of public works shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the city, and the grantee shall submit to the director of public works an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. 
(Ord. 557 § 12, 1979) 
5.40.160 - Facilities-Removal-Improvements. 
    The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by the director of public works by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in Section 5.40.150. 
(Ord. 557 § 13, 1979) 
5.40.170 - Failure to perform work. 
    Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, the director of public works may, at this option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the director of public works to the grantee within thirty days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(Ord. 557 § 14, 1979) 
5.40.180 - Bond. 
A.  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of and acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, file with the city clerk and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee's sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a company and in a form approved by the city attorney, in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars, renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of grantee, and upon the further condition that in the event grantee fails to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, or of any franchise issued to the grantee under this chapter, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed by this chapter which may be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have arisen from the acceptance of said franchise or renewal by the grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that thirty days' prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation, or material change, be given to the city. 
B.  Neither the provisions of this section nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant to this section, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued under this chapter or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Ord. 557 § 15, 1979) 
5.40.190 - Indemnification. 
A.  The grantee shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers and employees, from and against any and all injury, loss, damage, cost, expenses, claims, attorneys fees, demands, actions, suits, judgment or other proceedings, or liability, including, but not limited to, any liability for inverse condemnation or failure to secure consents for programs delivered by grantee's CATV system, arising out of or in any way connected with the grant, exercise or enjoyment of the grantee's franchise, and regardless of any negligence or other acts or omissions on the part of the city, its officers and employees. 
B.  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, furnish to the city and file with the city clerk, and at all times during the existence of any franchise granted under this chapter, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the city, its officers, boards, commission, agents and employees, in a company approved by the city clerk and a form satisfactory to the city attorney, protecting the city and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the operations of grantee under such franchise, with minimum liability limits of five hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of any one person and five hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, and fifty thousand dollars for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence. 
C.  The policies mentioned in this section shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the city ten days in advance of the effective date thereof. If such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other entity or persons other than those above named, then such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. 
(Ord. 557 § 16, 1979) 
5.40.200 - Inspection. 
A.  At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the council determines that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
(Ord. 557 § 17 (part), 1979) 
5.40.210 - Records-Keeping-Filing. 
A.  The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the director of public works and the city clerk at the times and in the form prescribed by either of said officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise. 
B.  The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the city full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the city. 
C.  The grantee shall file with the director of public works, on or before the last day in March of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the city. 
(Ord. 557 § 17 (part), 1979) 
5.40.220 - Operational standards. 
    The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best accepted standards of the CATV industry, to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest quality service technically possible. 
(Ord. 557 § 18, 1979) 
5.40.230 - Material filed with clerk. 
    When not otherwise prescribed in this chapter, all matters required in this chapter to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 557 § 19(a), 1979) 
5.40.240 - Payment of publication expenses. 
    The grantee shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty days after the city furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses by delivery of same to the city clerk. 
(Ord. 557 § 19(b), 1979) 
5.40.250 - Grantee-Office required. 
    The grantee shall maintain an office within the city limits or at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers. 
(Ord. 557 § 19(c), 1979) 
5.40.260 - Refusal of service. 
    No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge. 
(Ord. 557 § 19(d), 1979) 
5.40.270 - Facilities-Joint use. 
    When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 557 § 20, 1979) 
5.40.280 - Franchise-Effective date. 
A.  No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective unless and until the ordinance granting same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this section and Sections 5.40.180 and 5.40.190 are done and completed, all of such things being conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such franchise granted under this chapter. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the council may declare the franchise null and void. 
B.  Within twenty-five days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the council in its discretion may authorize, the grantee shall file with the city clerk his written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, of the franchise, together with the board and insurance policies required by Sections 5.40.180 and 5.40.190, respectively, and his agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall in form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 557 § 23, 1979) 
5.40.290 - Violations-Designated. 
A.  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this city any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise therefore has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
B.  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the city, or within any other public property of the city, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this city for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of said system. 
E.  It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Ord. 557 § 24, 1979) 
5.40.300 - Violations-Operations. 
    The grantee shall in no way conduct its operation in a manner detrimental or harmful to any actual operation of any existing or future translator of television signals. 
(Ord. 557 § 27, 1979) 
5.40.310 - Violations-Penalty. 
    Any person, or anyone acting on behalf of said person, violating any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding three months or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation of this chapter is continued or permitted to exist without compliance constitutes a separate offense punishable upon conviction in the manner prescribed in this section. 
(Ord. 557 § 28, 1979) 
Chapter 5.52 - JUNK DEALERS AND AUTOMOBILE WRECKERS 
Sections: 

5.52.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the signification attached to them in this section, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context: 
A.  "Automobile wrecker" means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling or dealing in vehicles of a type required to be registered under the California Vehicle Code, for the purpose of dismantling or wrecking the same, and who buys or sells the integral parts and component materials thereof, in whole or in part, and deals in used motor vehicle parts. This section shall not apply to the occasional and incidental dismantling or wrecking of vehicles by dealers who have secured dealer's plates from the department for the current year whose principal business is buying and selling new and used or used vehicles, or by those owners who desire to wreck their own vehicles, or by garages or repair shops. 
B.  "Automobile wrecking yard" means the premises used by an automobile wrecker, to carry on, conduct, maintain or engage in the business of automobile wrecker, and the vehicles, or parts of vehicles, constituting the stock in trade of the business of automobile wrecker when such are not entirely and at all times located or carried on within a building. 
C.  "Itinerant junk dealer" means any person who goes about from house to house, or place to place, gathering, receiving, collecting, buying or otherwise acquiring or selling, including sale at public auction, or otherwise disposing of or otherwise dealing in secondhand articles, goods, wares or merchandise of any type or description. 
D.  "Junkyard" means the premises used by a junk dealer to carry on, conduct, maintain or engage in the business of junk dealer, and the articles, goods, wares or merchandise constituting the stock in trade of the business are not entirely and at all times located within a building. 
E.  "Junk dealer" means a person, other than a licensed pawnbroker, having a fixed place of business in the county, who carries on, conducts, maintains or engages in the business of buying or otherwise acquiring, or selling, including sale at auction, or otherwise disposing of, or otherwise dealing in, secondhand articles, goods, wares or merchandise of any type or description. 
F.  "Person" means and includes both the singular and plural, and means any person, copartnership, association, firm, club, society or corporation. 
(Ord. 243 § 1, 1956) 
5.52.020 - License and permit-Requirements. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a junk dealer within the city without first making an application for and receiving from the city council a license to act as a junk dealer. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an itinerant junk dealer within the city without first making an application for and receiving from the city council a license to act as an itinerant junk dealer. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, establish, maintain or operate a junkyard or an automobile wrecking yard unless and until a permit therefor has been granted by the city council, except that no permit shall be required of any junkyard or automobile wrecking yard legally established and existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that no person shall act as a junk dealer or itinerant junk dealer without first having complied with this chapter. 
(Ord. 243 § 2, 1956) 
5.52.030 - License-Fees. 
A.  The fee required for a license to act as junk dealer shall be as set by resolution of the city council, a separate license being required for each place of business within the city. 
B.  The fee required for a license to act as an itinerant junk dealer shall be as set by resolution of the city council for each truck, wagon or other vehicle used in the business of itinerant junk dealer. 
(Ord. 571 § 2 (part), 1980; Ord. 467 § l (part), 1975; Ord. 243 § 4, 1956) 
5.52.040 - License and permit-Revocation. 
    The city council may suspend or revoke any license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter upon receiving evidence that the person holding said license or permit has been convicted of any violation of this chapter or of any ordinance of the city or law of the county or state relating to any business for which a license is required by this chapter, or has conducted his business in an unlawful manner. 
(Ord. 243 § 3, 1956) 
5.52.050 - License-Separate required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person acting as a junk dealer to also act as an itinerant junk dealer without obtaining a license to act as an itinerant junk dealer, provided, however, that a person acting as a junk dealer may use motor or other vehicles if incidental to his business as a junk dealer without having to obtain a license to act as an itinerant junk dealer. 
(Ord. 243 § 11, 1956) 
5.52.060 - License-Display. 
A.  Each person obtaining a license to act as a junk dealer shall keep on display at all times in his place of business the license issued to him under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Each person obtaining a license to act as an itinerant junk dealer shall carry with him at all times while acting as an itinerant junk dealer the license issued to him under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 243 § 12, 1956) 
5.52.070 - Daily report to chief of police. 
A.  Every person acting as junk dealer or itinerant junk dealer shall mail or deliver daily to the chief of police, on the original and duplicate of triplicate blank forms to be furnished by the chief of police for such purpose, a full, true and complete report, written or printed in the English language in a clear and legible manner, of all secondhand articles, goods, wares and merchandise purchased or otherwise acquired upon any terms and conditions or for any purpose or purposes whatever during the day preceding the mailing or delivering of such report. Said report shall show with respect to each item the following particulars: 
1.  Complete description of each item, including the manufacturer's trade name or brand, if any, its size and color and, if the item has engraved thereon any number, word or initial or contains any fittings of any kind, the description shall include such number, word or initial and the kind of fittings, if any, and the number thereof; 
2.  The cost of each item, or if the item is acquired on an exchange a brief description of the item exchanged for it; 
3.  The true name and address, as nearly as the same is known to or can be ascertained by the licensee, and the personal signature of the person or persons from whom such article was received or purchased or otherwise acquired, together with a full and complete description of such person or persons, including but not limited to height, weight, color of eyes, color of hair, dress and occupation; 
4.  If the item is delivered or received from a vehicle, its license number, if any, and its year of manufacture, model, type, name and color. 
B.  Each person required to make the foregoing report shall retain the triplicate copy thereof as a permanent record at the place of business of said person, if said person has a place of business, otherwise at the residence of said person. Said triplicate copies shall be open for inspection at all times to any law enforcement officer, his agent, deputy or investigator. 
(Ord. 243 § 5 (part), 1956) 
5.52.080 - Records required. 
A.  Every person having a license or permit pursuant this chapter shall keep a permanent record showing the following particulars relative to the disposition of all secondhand articles, goods, wares and merchandise disposed of by said person: 
1.  Date of disposition; 
2.  Place of disposition; 
3.  Name and address of the person buying or otherwise acquiring it, which records shall be open for inspection at all times to any law enforcement officer, his agent, deputy or investigator. 
B.  Permanent records required by this section shall be kept and retained for a period of five years. 
(Ord. 243 § 5(f), 1956) 
5.52.090 - Exemptions from reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 
    The provisions of Sections 5.52.070 and 5.52.080 shall not be deemed to apply to the purchase or acquisition by other means by persons acting as junk dealers or itinerant junk dealers of the following secondhand articles, goods, wares and merchandise: rags, bottles, sacks in lots of fifty or less, barrels, cans and newspapers. 
(Ord. 243 § 10, 1956) 
5.52.100 - Property to be held before disposition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee or permittee under this chapter to sell or otherwise dispose of any secondhand articles, goods, wares or merchandise of any type or description within fifteen days after report of the same is made to the chief of police, as provided by this chapter. The chief of police is authorized to release any property covered by this chapter which he inspects and is satisfied that the same is in the lawful possession of such person, regardless of whether the waiting period, as provided by this chapter, has expired. 
(Ord. 243 § 7, 1956) 
5.52.110 - Alteration or disposition of goods. 
    It shall be unlawful, prior to the time that any articles, goods, wares or merchandise may be lawfully disposed of, to clean, alter, repair, paint or otherwise change the appearance of the same, or to fail to expose the same to public view at all times during business hours. 
(Ord. 243 § 8, 1956) 
5.52.120 - Use of fictitious name or address. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use a fictitious name or incorrect address in any report made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 243 § 6, 1956) 
5.52.130 - Dealing with minors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person acting as a junk dealer or itinerant junk dealer to purchase or otherwise acquire any secondhand articles, goods, wares or merchandise of any type or description offered said person by any minor under the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. 243 § 9, 1956) 
5.52.140 - Penalty for violation. 
    Every person violating or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.24. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of, or failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person. 
(Ord. 243 § 14, 1956) 
Chapter 5.56 - MULTIPLE AMPLIFIED TELEVISION SIGNAL SERVICE 
Sections: 

5.56.010 - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to operate or cause to be operated at any point in the city the business of installation of amplifiers for and the distribution of multiple amplified television service unless a permit therefor has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such permit is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 228 § 1, 1955) 
5.56.020 - Permit-Application. 
A.  Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring to obtain the permit required by Section 5.56.010 shall make application therefor to the city council. 
B.  The application shall be verified under oath and shall set forth: 
1.  The name, address, residence of the applicant, if a natural person; or, if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, the address of its principal officers, together with their respective addresses, or if a partnership association or unincorporated company, the names of the partners, or the persons comprising the association or company, with the place of business and the residence of each such partner or person; 
2.  A schedule of all rates and charges to be charged for the distribution of amplified television signal service, including the rates of installation and maintenance, and a statement of the basis on which such rates and charges shall be computed; 
3.  The past experience of the applicant in the matter to which the request appertains, and the name and address and past experience of the person in charge of the premises or business; 
4.  A verified financial statement of the applicant; 
5.  Whether or not any similar permit has been revoked and, if so, the circumstances of such revocation; 
6.  Such further information as the city council may require. 
(Ord. 228 § 2, 1955) 
5.56.030 - Permit-Fee. 
    An application fee in the sum set by resolution of the city council shall be paid by every person, firm, association or corporation making application for the permit referred to in Section 5.56.010 at the time of filing said application. No part of said application fee shall be returnable, whether the application is granted or denied. 
(Ord. 571 § 2 (part), 1980; Ord. 467 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 228 § 7 (part), 1955) 
5.56.040 - Permit-Investigation. 
A.  Upon receipt of any application for permit referred to in Section 5.56.010, the city council may cause to be made an investigation relative to the granting of such permit for a prescribed or definite period, if the city council finds that: 
1.  The applicant has complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter; 
2.  The public convenience and necessity requires that granting of such permit and that the proposed operations are beneficial to the city. 
B.  The city council shall have power to determine all issues relative to the granting or denying of such permit. 
(Ord. 228 § 4, 1955) 
5.56.050 - Permit-Denial, suspension, revocation, cancellation. 
    The city council shall have the power to deny the granting of, or to revoke, suspend or cancel, any permit provided for by this chapter if public convenience and necessity does not require the same, or for any reasonable cause which in its discretion is contrary to the public welfare. 
(Ord. 228 § 3, 1955) 
5.56.060 - Permit-Revocation, suspension for violation of chapter. 
    The city council shall have the power to revoke or suspend any permit issued under this chapter in the event the holder thereof shall be found guilty of any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 228 § 5, 1955) 
5.56.070 - Permit-Nontransferable. 
    All permits granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable except with the approval and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 228 § 7 (part), 1955) 
5.56.080 - License required-Fee. 
    Every person, firm, association or corporation carrying on the business of installation of amplifiers for and the distribution of multiple amplified television service in the city shall obtain and pay an annual license therefor, in advance, in the sum as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 571 § 2 (part), 1980; Ord. 467 § 1 (part), 1975; Ord. 228 § 8, 1955) 
5.56.090 - Insurance policy. 
    Any applicant granted a permit under this chapter shall immediately thereafter file with the city clerk a policy of insurance, signed and executed by a responsible insurance company, protecting the applicant and the city against claims for property damage and personal injury with respective limits of twenty-five thousand dollars property damage and twenty-five to one hundred thousand dollars public liability. 
(Ord. 228 § 10, 1955) 
5.56.100 - Deposit. 
    Any applicant granted a permit under this chapter shall immediately deposit with the city clerk a cash deposit in the sum of five hundred dollars to guarantee to the city that said applicant will hold the city free and harmless from any and all claims by any third person by reason of the applicants' business operation under the permit and the applicant shall further enter into an agreement to pay to the city on demand the cost of all repairs necessitated by reason of damage to any property of the city. 
(Ord. 228 § 11, 1955) 
5.56.110 - Rate changes require council approval. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or holder of any permit to make any change in the rates and charges referred to in this chapter without first filing with the city council a new schedule of rates and charges and securing the approval of the city council thereto. 
(Ord. 228 § 6, 1955) 
5.56.120 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city jail or the county jail for a period of not more than three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Upon conviction, the permit issued to such person, firm, association or corporation pursuant to this chapter may be revoked. 
(Ord. 228 § 9, 1955) 
Chapter 5.57 - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 

5.57.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Pawnbroker" shall mean every person engaged in the business of receiving goods, including motor vehicles, in pledge as security for a loan pursuant to Section 21000 of the California Financial Code. 
B.  "Secondhand dealer" shall mean any person, corporation, firm, or corporation whose business includes buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning, secondhand tangible personal property pursuant to Section 21626 of the Business and Professions Code. 
C.  "Permittee" shall mean every person, business, corporation, or firm that has obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  "Permit" shall mean any permit granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.020 - Governing law. 
A.  "Pawnbroker." Subject to regulation by the state of California, all pawnbrokers are regulated by Division 8, Section 21000 et seq. of the California Financial Code. A pawnbroker is exempt from the licensing requirements for secondhand dealers pursuant to Sections 21641 and 21642 of the California Business and Professions Code and may engage in any secondhand dealer transaction. Nonetheless, a pawnbroker conducting secondhand dealer activities must comply with all applicable secondhand dealer laws. 
B.  "Secondhand Dealer." Subject to regulation by the state of California, all secondhand dealers must comply with the requirements set forth in the California Business and Professions Code, Division 8, Chapter 9, Section 21500 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.030 - Exemptions from this chapter. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  The sale of secondhand goods when such sale is made other than at a regular business location and no more than one sale, not exceeding forty-eight hours duration, is conducted during any thirty-day period, provided the vendor of the goods has an ownership or possessory interest in the real property upon which the sale takes place or has written permission from a person with an ownership or possessory interest in the real property to conduct the sale, and such written permission is in the vendor's possession at the time of the sale. If the conditions under which this exception is to apply are not satisfied, a permit shall be required. 
B.  The purchase by a person or business organization of new merchandise for the use in its regular business activity and, after having used the merchandise for its intended purpose, sells the merchandise as an incident to its primary business activity. 
C.  Car dealers duly permitted to sell used motor vehicles pursuant to the California Vehicle Code and rules and regulations promulgated by the state of California relating to such sales. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.040 - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, business, corporation, or firm to engage in the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer within the city limits without first obtaining a permit issued by the chief of police or his designee. A permit shall be issued to each pawnbroker or secondhand dealer after their application is approved by the chief of police or his designee, and the department of justice. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.050 - Permit-Display. 
    Each permittee required to have a permit under this chapter shall, at all times, prominently display such permit at the business location which has been permitted. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.060 - Application for permit. 
    Each person, corporation, or firm, respectively, that desires to be permitted as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in the city of Blythe shall complete an application. This application will be vetted by the chief of police or his designee. All applications shall contain a financial statement reviewed and signed by a permitted certified public accountant. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.070 - Background check. 
    The chief of police, or his designee, shall cause an investigation to be conducted of all statements submitted in an application submitted pursuant to Section 5.57.060 if this chapter. A background check of the applicant shall be conducted. All applications and fingerprints of applicants shall be forwarded to the department of justice for review. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.080 - Denial of permit. 
    After reviewing an application for pawnbroker or secondhand dealer permit, the chief of police, or his designee, may refuse to issue permits under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The investigation reveals that the applicant has falsified information on the application, concealed a material fact, or otherwise committed any fraud in the application. 
B.  It is discovered that the applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor and/or felony involving an offense against private property interests. Such property offenses include, but are not limited to, larceny, false pretense, fraud, grand theft, embezzlement, and receipt of stolen property. 
C.  The applicant has been previously denied a permit or had a permit revoked under this chapter within one year of the current application. A permit may be issued, however, if the applicant can and does show, to the satisfaction of the chief of police or his designee, that the reasons for the previous denial no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.090 - Fees. 
A.  The applicant shall bear the cost for the review of the applicant(s) fingerprints by the department of justice. 
B.  The applicant shall also pay a processing fee to the city of Blythe police department for each application submitted. This processing fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.100 - Permits-Renewal. 
    Pawnbroker and secondhand dealer permits shall be maintained and renewed every other year commencing from the date of issuance by the city. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.110 - Permits-Non-assignable. 
    Pawnbroker and secondhand dealer permits shall not be sold, transferred, or assigned by the permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person(s), corporation(s), or firm(s). Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or any attempt thereof, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the permit 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.120 - Permits-Revocation. 
A.  A permit granted under this chapter shall be revoked if it is determined and established that the permittee has violated any section or provision of this chapter where such violation demonstrates to be part of a pattern of impermissible conduct. 
B.  A permit granted under this chapter shall be revoked if it is determined that the permittee has violated any applicable state or federal law where such violation demonstrates to be part of a pattern of impermissible conduct. 
C.  No revocation shall occur unless the permittee is given a hearing in which permittee may contest the proposed revocation of permit. Written notice of this hearing shall be given to permittee at least ten days prior to the scheduled hearing date. 
D.  There shall be no refund of any fees or costs for any permit revoked pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.130 - Recordkeeping. 
A.  All permittees under this chapter shall maintain records for each day that a permittee may be open for business, and for each transaction that takes place. The records shall contain the true and complete report of all articles received during each day. The records kept shall comply with state law and contain the following information: 
1.  The name and current address of the person from whom the property was received; 
2.  A brief description of the property received; 
3.  The pawn ticket number associated with the property received; 
4.  The amount loaned or the amount paid for the property received; and 
5.  If the property has any serial numbers, those serial numbers shall also be recorded. 
B.  All permittees shall use recordkeeping forms of a type and content approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.140 - Record keeping-Inspection of records by chief of police. 
    All records kept pursuant to this chapter shall be, at all reasonable times, open to the inspection by members of the city of Blythe police department, the chief of police, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.150 - Recordkeeping-Violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, business, corporation, or firm permitted under this chapter to fail to keep or maintain reports as specified under Section 5.57.130 of this chapter or to refuse to make such reports available to members of the city of Blythe police department, chief of police, or his designee, upon reasonable demand pursuant to Section 5.57.140 of this chapter. Failure to comply with Sections 5.57.130 and 5.57.140 of this chapter shall be subject to penalties described in Section 5.57.180 of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude or prevent similar or parallel prosecution under any applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.160 - Reserved. 
5.57.170 - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
    No permittee shall operate a pawnbroker and secondhand dealer business without compliance with all applicable zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
5.57.180 - Penalty. 
    Any person, business, corporation, or firm shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for violation of this chapter, which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 853, § 1, 10-25-11) 
Chapter 5.60 - PUBLIC DANCES 
Sections: 

5.60.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter: 
    "Public dance" means a dance which is or may be participated in by any of the members of a group or gathering of persons who are assembled or present at a place to which the public is admitted, with or without charge, for the principal or incidental purpose of dancing; provided, however, that the following designated dances are excepted from the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Any dance conducted by the city as part of its recreation program; 
2.  Any dance conducted by any public school or private school which is permanently located within the city as a part of the recreation program of the school for the exclusive entertainment of its duly registered pupils. 
    "Public dancehall" means any room, place or premises, whether enclosed or unenclosed, where a public dance is being conducted or permitted. 
(Ord. 260 §§ 2, 3, 1958) 
5.60.020 - Permit and license required. 
    No person shall conduct a public dance or operate a public dancehall without first having secured a permit from the chief of police, and having paid the license tax required by the city. 
(Ord. 260 § 4, 1958) 
5.60.030 - Rules governing conduct. 
    The chief of police may make rules governing the conduct of public dances and the operation of public dancehalls, and any license issued for any public dancehall is subject to revocation if the proprietor or person in charge violates or permits or condones any violation of the said rules governing the conduct of any public dancehall or permit, any intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly person to enter, be or remain in any public dancehall. 
(Ord. 260 § 5 (part), 1958) 
5.60.040 - Permit-Application. 
A.  All applications for permits shall be accompanied by a filing fee which shall be set by resolution of the city council. A separate fee shall be set for a one-day dance permit, and an annual dance permit to allow any number of dances at a single location in the calendar year. Annual permits shall be renewable on January 2nd of each year. 
B.  All applications for permits shall be in writing and shall be filed with the chief of police and shall contain such information as will enable the chief, by reasonable investigation, to determine whether the allowing or permitting of dancing or the offering of entertainment in the place for which such permit is sought will be inimical to the public health, welfare or safety of the community. 
(Ord. 629 § 9, 1986: Ord. 260 § 13, 1958) 
5.60.050 - Permit-Issuance. 
    If the chief of police finds that the issuing of the permit will not be inimical to the public health, welfare or safety of the community, he may issue a permit subject to such rules and regulations as he may make governing the operation of the public dance. 
(Ord. 260 § 16, 1958) 
5.60.060 - Police supervision-Requirements. 
A.  It shall be within the discretion of the city manager based upon a recommendation of the chief of police, whether or not to require, after having first been given at least ten days' written notice prior to approving an application for one or more police officers of the City and/or to require one or more private security personnel to aid in regulating any dance. Such security personnel shall be licensed as required by the state of California and the city. Security personnel may be either armed or unarmed as required by the chief of police. Such application shall be filed with the chief of police. 
B.  Should the applicant be required to have one or more police officers of the city in attendance at a dance, then the applicant shall pay in advance for such officers a fee as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 713 § 1, 1995; Ord. 629 § 10, 1986: Ord. 465 § 1, 1975: Ord. 410 § 1, 1971: Ord. 260 § 14, 1958) 
5.60.070 - Police supervision-Not to relieve proprietor's responsibility. 
    The presence of any policeman at any public dancehall shall not relieve the proprietor thereof, or any of his employees, from the responsibility of the provisions of this chapter or for violation of any law or ordinance or lawful rule of the chief of police or from responsibility for maintaining decency and order in said public dancehall. 
(Ord. 260 § 12, 1958) 
5.60.080 - Illumination. 
    No person carrying on a public dancehall, or having charge or control thereof, nor any person employed in or about the same, shall carry on such public dancehall after sunset of any day, unless the room or hall in which dancing takes place, including any loge, booth or alcove, is lighted or illuminated in such manner and to such extent as is usual or customary for lighting or illuminating halls or rooms or like dimensions in the nighttime for public assemblies, before any person is admitted thereto and before any dancing is commenced therein. Such lighting or illumination shall be maintained thereafter throughout the entire time which such dancing is in progress without diminution and without interruption until such dancing is concluded and until all dancers leave the premises. 
(Ord. 260 § 6, l958) 
5.60.090 - Dancing for hire. 
A.  No person operating a public dancehall, or having charge or control thereof, shall employ or permit any female person under the age of twenty-one years to give instruction in dancing therein or thereat to persons, nor shall any such operator permit any person to dance for hire with a person therein or thereat, nor shall any person, male or female, give instruction in dancing in any public dancehall to a person or persons except when such instructors are specifically authorized by the chief of police in writing to give dancing instruction. Any such authorization shall at once be revoked if it becomes evident that such person is dancing for hire and is not a bona fide dancing instructor. 
B.  No person carrying on a public dancehall, or having charge or control thereof, shall permit any instructor to give instructions in dancing in any private room or booth in such public dancehall. For the purpose of this section, "private room or booth" includes any room, booth, alcove or enclosure, every part of which is not clearly visible at all times from the main dance floor. 
C.  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed as applying to any place wherein or whereat classic dancing is the principal subject taught. 
(Ord. 752 § 8, 1998; Ord. 260 § 11, 1958) 
5.60.100 - Employees dancing with patrons. 
    No employee of any applicant and no employee of any public dancehall shall dance at any public dance. 
(Ord. 260 § 15, 1958) 
5.60.110 - Endurance contests-Prohibited. 
    No person shall carry on any so called marathon dancing contest, exhibition or race, or any contest or exhibition of endurance in dancing, or any walkathon or any contest of a similar nature, continuing for more than twenty-four hours within the city. 
(Ord. 260 § 9, 1958) 
5.60.120 - Endurance contests-Participation prohibited. 
    No person shall participate in any so called marathon dancing contest, exhibition or race, or in any contest or exhibition of endurance in dancing or any walkathon, or any contest of a similar nature within the city. 
(Ord. 260 § 10, 1958) 
5.60.130 - Hours restricted. 
    No person shall enter, be in, or dance in any public dancehall on any day between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. 
(Ord. 260 § 7, 1958) 
5.60.150 - Intoxicated persons prohibited. 
    No person in an intoxicated condition shall enter, or remain in any public dancehall. 
(Ord. 260 § 5 (part), l958) 
5.60.160 - Boisterous conduct prohibited. 
    No person shall conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner in a public dancehall. 
(Ord. 260 § 5 (part), 1958) 
5.60.170 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, whether acting for himself, or as the agent or servant of any person, firm or corporation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment of not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that any act continues in violation of any provision of this chapter and each day that anything forbidden by the terms of this chapter continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 260 § 19, 1958) 
Chapter 5.68 - SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS 
Sections: 

5.68.010 - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, "solicitor" means all persons, both principal or agent, who go from house to house, or to only one house, or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or plaza, or in any park or public place in the city, soliciting gifts of money or property for any purpose, soliciting, either by sample or otherwise, the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals or other publications, or subscriptions for the same, regularly published newspapers excepted, for themselves or for firms which do or do not have an established place of business in the city, and who offers to or distributes to any person any coupon, certificate or ticket or card which is redeemable in goods, wares, merchandise or services. 
(Ord. 191 § 1, 1949) 
5.68.020 - Registration card-Required. 
    All persons operating as solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, salesman or vendors of goods, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals or other publications, or subscriptions for the same, regularly published newspapers excepted, who go from house to house, or to only one house, or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or plaza, or in any park or public place in the city, are required to register with the police department and to obtain an identification card showing such registration. 
(Ord. 191 § 2, 1949) 
5.68.030 - Registration card-Application-Renewal. 
A.  Applicants for police registration cards under the terms of this chapter are required to: 
1.  Furnish two satisfactory photographs of the applicant, one to be attached to applicant's registration card, and the other to be retained by the police department; 
2.  To file their fingerprint identification with the police department. 
B.  Those persons soliciting gifts of money or property for any purpose shall not be required to comply with subsection A of this section. Said applicants, however, shall furnish an affidavit stating clearly the full name and address of the person or group or association or corporation that they represent, the purpose for which the money or property is being solicited, and where and for what uses the money will be spent. 
C.  Registration cards may be renewed annually and shall be valid not longer than one year from the date of issuance stamped on the card. 
(Ord. 191 § 3, 1949) 
5.68.040 - Interstate commerce-Registration requirements. 
    Persons engaged in, or acting as agents for firms operating under interstate commerce shall be required to register as provided in this chapter, and shall be issued an identification card without tax, upon satisfactory evidence of such method of operation, which bears the approval of the city attorney. 
(Ord. 191 § 4, 1949) 
5.68.050 - Interstate commerce-Issuance restriction. 
    Registration cards shall be given without charge to all applicants who have complied with Section 5.68.040 unless, at the discretion of the chief of police, any such applicant is deemed not to be a proper person to be permitted to go from house to house or upon any street or in any park or public place, or unless the proposed sales proposition includes some element of trickery, fraud or deceit, in which case, in the interest of the public safety and protection, the applicant shall not be registered, or registration card issued. 
(Ord. 191 § 5, 1949) 
5.68.060 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment of not more than three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 191 § 6, 1949) 
Chapter 5.72 - TAXICABS* 
Sections: 

5.72.010 - Definition. 
    "Taxicab" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle of the distinctive color of public appearance, such as is in common usage in this country for taxicabs, used for transportation of passengers for hire over the streets of the city, and not over a defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary lines of the city, at rates for distance traveled, or for waiting time, or for both, when such vehicle is routed under direction of such passengers or persons hiring the same; however, charter buses are not included within the definition of "taxicabs." 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.020 - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab within the city without first having obtained a written permit for the operation of such vehicle under and in accordance with the terms and conditions prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.030 - Permit-Application. 
    Applicants for taxicab permits shall file with the city council an application upon blanks provided by the city police department, containing such information as is required by the rules and regulations of the city council pertaining to the operation of taxicabs. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the city council for the first vehicle and a fee set by resolution of the city council for each additional vehicle covered by the license. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.040 - Driver's permit-Required. 
    No person shall operate any taxicab, as defined in Section 5.72.010, upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls any such vehicle shall permit it to be so driven, and no such taxicab shall be so driven unless the driver of said taxicab has first obtained and has then in force a driver's permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.050 - Driver's permit-Application. 
A.  Any person may apply to the city for a permit to operate a taxicab by filing with the chief of police upon forms supplied by the city police department an application containing the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and other pertinent applicant information; 
2.  Convictions, if any, in the courts of any state of the United States or in any United States court; 
3.  The endorsement of the owner by whom he is to be employed as driver; 
4.  Number and expiration date of his/her valid driver's license; 
5.  Such other information regarding the character and experience of the applicant as may be necessary or desirable to enable the chief of police to ascertain applicant's qualifications for a driver's permit; 
6.  Department of Justice and Federal Bureau of Investigations Livescan fingerprint check to be processed through the Blythe police department. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police or his/her designee shall also conduct an investigation of each applicant for a driver's permit. On the basis of this investigation and the results of the Department of Justice and Federal Bureau of Investigations background checks, he/she shall approve or reject the application. A permit may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Person under the age of twenty-one years; 
2.  Person has been convicted of a felony or of any offense involving moral turpitude; 
3.  Person has been convicted of driving a vehicle recklessly or while under the influence of intoxicating liquors within a period of three years prior to the date of the application; 
4.  Person has been convicted of driving a vehicle while under the influence of narcotics; 
5.  Person not possessing a valid driver's license. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.060 - Driver's permit-Filing with city clerk. 
    Each driver's permit granted by the city council must be filed with the city clerk or his/her designee, who shall collect the sum set by resolution of the city council. The clerk or his/her designee shall deliver to each permittee such evidence of the issuance of the driver's permit and of the identity of the holder thereof as the city council may prescribe. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.070 - Rules and regulations. 
    The city council shall have the authority to adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the service and safety of the operation of taxicabs. Permits provided for in this chapter may be granted, denied, revoked, suspended or cancelled as to any person or applicant whenever, in the exercise of reasonable and sound discretion, the city council determines that the provisions of this chapter have or have not been complied with, or that the permittee or applicant is or is not a fit and proper person to be in charge of or operate a taxicab, as may be determined by the rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of and the extent, quality and character of the service of such vehicle. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.080 - Driver's permit-Revocation or suspension. 
    From the time of the revocation or during the suspension of any permit, no person whose permit is revoked or suspended shall drive, operate or be in charge of any taxicab, or permit any taxicab on which the license has been revoked or suspended to engage in the operation of such vehicle as a taxicab, or allow any such taxicab to stand while awaiting employment at a location designated in such revoked or suspended permit, or until the period of suspension has expired. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.090 - Issuance and suspension of permits. 
    The chief of police of the city may issue the permits required by this chapter at the direction of the city council, and he/she may suspend any of the permits mentioned in this chapter whenever the permittee has not complied with the provisions of this chapter or has been convicted of a felony, reckless driving, the use, sale, possession, or transportation of narcotics, or for assault or battery, or has charged rates other than those which the permittee has on file with the city council and as set forth in this chapter, or has violated any of the rules and regulations of the city council pertaining to the operation of and extent, quality and character of service of taxicabs. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.100 - Suspension of permit subject to council approval. 
    The action of the chief of police in suspending any of the permits provided for in this chapter shall be subject to the ratification and approval of the city council without further action at any of its meetings held subsequent to the action of the chief of police, but not later than thirty days thereafter. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.110 - Term of permits. 
    All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be for a period not to exceed one year, and all such permits shall expire upon such date as may be fixed by the city council. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.120 - Temporary permit. 
    Regardless of the provisions of Section 5.72.200, this section grants a further authority to the chief of police as follows: the chief of police has authority to issue a sixty-day temporary permit, revocable at any time by the chief of police, permitting a person to temporarily operate a taxicab within the city, pending a complete background investigation by said chief of police or his/her designee of any applicant driver of a taxicab. The chief of police shall have the right to revoke any such sixty-day temporary permit at any time by verbal or written notice to such applicant driver or to the registered owner of any such taxicab by any verbal or written notice to such registered owner. After the expiration of any sixty-day temporary permit, unless said person complies with Sections 5.72.130 through 5.72.150 and 5.72.180, said sixty-day temporary permit shall automatically expire and be of no further force and effect. The chief of police has authority to grant a sixty-day extension as necessary in extenuating circumstances. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.130 - Permit-Public hearing. 
    No permit for the operation of any taxicab shall be granted until the city council, after a public hearing, conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the city council, determines that public convenience and necessity require the operation of such taxicab. The declaration of public convenience and necessity shall not be necessary for the granting of the same number of permits held by the applicant under the same name and color scheme on the date prescribed by the city council for the expiration of permits, and such permits shall be classed as renewals and shall be granted automatically on the filing of an application unless the applicant violates other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.140 - Permit-Granting. 
    If the city council finds that further taxicab service in the city is required by public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the city council, the city shall issue a permit stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under said permit and the date of issuance; otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.150 - Permit-Criteria for council decision. 
    In making the findings, the city council shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience and responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.160 - Effect of permits. 
    Each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall entitle the owner thereof to obtain a business license to engage in the business described in such permit from the city finance department, upon the payment of the business license fee. The finance department clerk shall issue such license. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.170 - Taxi stands. 
A.  Permits may be issued to owners of taxicabs allowing such vehicles while awaiting employment to stand at certain designated places upon the street. 
B.  No such permit shall be granted except upon the application of the person desiring such stand, filed with the city council, stating the number of taxicabs for which the permit is sought, and the proposed location of such stand. 
C.  The application must contain either the written consent of the occupant of the first floor of that portion of the building or property in front of which it is desired that such vehicle shall stand or, if such building is used for hotel purposes, the written consent of the person operating such hotel. 
D.  If there is no building on the premises in front of which it is desired that such taxicab shall stand, or if there is a building and the first floor is unoccupied, then such permit may be granted on the written consent of the owner of such building or premises. 
E.  Not more than three taxicabs shall be permitted to stand on any one side of a street within the limits of any one block. 
F.  No permit shall be issued for any taxicab to be located within three hundred feet of another stand on the same side of the street. 
G.  The city council may, after exercising reasonable discretion, grant renewals or extensions of permits for such stand. 
H.  The fee payable to the city for each cab stand permit issued shall be as set by resolution of the city council, in addition to the further sum payable by each taxicab owner or operator for one taxicab and the sum for each additional taxicab. 
I.  No owner or driver of any taxicab shall stand while awaiting employment at any place other than a stand designated by the city council and assigned to the owner of such vehicle. 
J.  Stands may be occupied for a period of twenty-four hours a day except where standing, stopping and parking of vehicles is otherwise prohibited during any portion of twenty-four hours. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.180 - Insurance requirements. 
    No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, deposited with the city clerk, and providing for each taxicab vehicle authorized under this chapter, a minimum single combined limit of three hundred thousand dollars. Said insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder of a permit under this chapter, his servants or agents. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.190 - Transferability. 
    No permit issued under this chapter may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, transferred, or interest therein diminished without the written consent of the city council being first had and obtained. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.200 - Exceptions. 
    Any motor-propelled vehicles may transport a passenger or passengers from a point outside to a destination within the city or may proceed through the city while en route to a destination outside the city without the issuance of a permit under this chapter, and such operations shall not of themselves constitute engaging in the operation of a taxicab within the city. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.210 - Operation restrictions. 
    Taxicabs for which permits have been issued shall be operated by the owner thereof or by an employee of the owner. No owner or driver of any such taxicab shall enter into any contract, agreement or understanding between themselves by the terms of which such driver pays to, or for the account of, such owner, a fixed or determinable sum for the use of such taxicab. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.220 - Issuance restrictions. 
A.  No taxicab permit shall be issued to any person until a standard, distinctive and uniform color scheme has been adopted by the applicant and approved by the city council, which designates by color the owner of said taxicab. 
B.  No permit shall be issued to any person whose color scheme, name, monogram or insignia is in conflict with or imitates any color scheme, monogram, name or insignia used by another concern in such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or mislead the public. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.230 - Display of certain information required. 
    Every taxicab shall display in the rear of the driver's seat and in the passenger's compartment, in full view of the passengers, a card not less than two inches by four inches nor more than two and one-half inches by five inches, which has printed thereon the owner's name under which he operates and the business address and telephone number of such owner together with the rates to be charged for such vehicle. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.240 - Markings. 
    Every taxicab shall have painted upon the door of said cab the name under which the owner operates, together with the telephone number and the cab number. The number of the cab and the telephone number shall be painted upon the rear of said vehicle. All of the lettering mentioned in this section shall be not less than two and one-half inches in height and not less than five-sixteenths inch stroke. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.250 - Vacant signs. 
    Every taxicab may display an electrically lighted vacant sign attached to the top of such cab. Every such sign shall be not more than two and one-half inches by nine inches in length. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.260 - Sign restriction. 
    No person shall display any sign other than those mentioned in Sections 5.72.230 through 5.72.250 without first obtaining the written permission of the city council to do so. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.270 - Additional passengers. 
    The passengers of a taxicab shall have the full and exclusive right to the passenger compartment, and no owner or driver of such taxicab shall solicit or carry additional passengers. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.280 - Use of most direct route required. 
    Any driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.290 - Charges restricted. 
    No person shall charge, collect, demand, receive or arrange for any compensation for the service of any taxicab any amount, rate or compensation greater than the charges or rates regulated by the city council. Rate increases shall be approved by the city council before implementation, and any extraordinary increase must be justified by the operator before the city council. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.300 - Taximeters. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner or driver to operate any taxicab in the city unless and until such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter of such type, style and design as may be approved by the Blythe police department and certified annually by the county of Riverside department of weights and measures, and it is the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to maintain such taximeter in such condition that it will at all times correctly and accurately indicate the correct charge for the distance traveled and waiting time. Such taximeters shall be at all times subject to inspection by the Blythe police department which is authorized at its instance or upon complaint of any person to investigate or cause the taximeter to be investigated, and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy in said taximeter, to remove or cause the same to be removed and not to be used until it has been correctly adjusted. 
B.  Taxicabs not equipped with meters operating in the city at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be equipped as soon as delivery can be obtained. Under no condition shall the date of installation of said meters be more than one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
C.  Every taximeter shall be equipped to register the cost of transportation of passengers in the city and the taximeter shall be so placed in the taxicab that the display showing the amount to be charged may be readily seen by the passengers in the taxicab. It is unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of a taxicab in the city to charge any sum in excess of the amount shown on said dial for conveyance in said taxicab. 
D.  It is unlawful for a taxicab driver, while carrying passengers, to display the flag or the device attached to the taximeter in such position as to denote that the vehicle is for hire or to cause the taximeter to record when the vehicle is not actually employed or to fail to cause the device on the taximeter to be placed into a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. 
E.  It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab in the city to fix, charge or collect for service a rate more or less than the rate set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.310 - Daily manifest. 
    Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which all trips made each day are recorded, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the holder of the permit under this chapter at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the holder of the permit under this chapter and shall be of a character approved by the chief of police, and shall be made available for inspection at the request of the chief of police or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.320 - Vehicle inspection and maintenance. 
    All taxicabs shall be inspected by a certified mechanic, at the cost of the operator, on an annual basis. The operator will submit a form certifying the vehicle(s) as mechanically safe along with his/her annual renewal forms. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.330 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars and possible suspension or revocation of his/her driver's permit. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
5.72.340 - Unauthorized/unlicensed operators. 
    Any person found providing taxi service within the city of Blythe without first obtaining a city of Blythe taxicab operator's and/or driver's permit shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 823 § 1 (Att. A) (part), 2007) 
Chapter 5.77 - SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 839, § 1, adopted January 26, 2010, amended Chapter 5.77 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 5.77, §§ 5.77.010-5.77.150, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 622, 1985 and Ord. No. 741, 1997. 

5.77.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions will apply: 
A.  "Alarm system" is any device designated for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and when actuated, emits a sound or transmits a signal to indicate that an emergency situation exists, and to which peace officers are expected to respond. 
B.  "False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system necessitating response by peace officers when an emergency situation does not exist; provided alarms generated by natural disaster will not be considered false alarms. 
C.  "Audible alarm" is a device designed for the detection of the unauthorized entry on or attempted entry into a premise or structure or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act or both, and which, when actuated, generates an audible sound on the premises. 
D.  "Alarm business" means any person, firm, or corporation conducting or engaged in the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in or on any building, place or premises. 
E.  "Alarm agent" means any person who is self-employed or employed either directly or indirectly by an alarm business whose duties include any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing an alarm system in or on any building, place or premises. 
F.  "Alarm user" means any person using an alarm system at his residence or place of business. 
G.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity. 
H.  "Peace officer" means the chief of police of the city, his officers, and designated employees. 
I.  "Non-priority" means that law enforcement response to the activation of an alarm will not be given precedence over any other calls and will be predicated upon availability of law enforcement personnel and other service needs. 
J.  "Alarm administrator" means a person or persons designated by the Blythe police chief to administer, control and review alarm response procedures, dispatch requests, and reported false alarms. 
K.  "Notice of noncompliance" means formal thirty-day notification by the alarm administrator, advising of the intent to put the alarm user in substantial noncompliance status. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.020 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles, unless the vehicle alarm is connected to a central monitoring system. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.030 - Registration-Alarm business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation, or firm to own, manage, conduct or carry on the business of selling, leasing, installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving, removing, or monitoring an alarm system in or on any building, place, or premises within the incorporated area of the city without first having registered with the chief of police. Such registration shall not be required for any business which only sells said alarm systems from a fixed location unless such business services, installs, monitors, or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. Registration shall be accomplished by furnishing such information as may be required by the chief of police, including, but not limited to, the full name of the business, the number of the license issued by the State Director of Consumer Affairs for the alarm business, and the name and business address of the manager of operations for the area within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.040 - Registration-Alarm agent. 
    It is unlawful for any person, including the owners of an alarm business, to engage directly in the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing of an alarm system in or on any building, place, or premises within the incorporated area of the city without first having registered his name and filed with the chief of police a copy of the alarm agent registration card issued him by the State Director of Consumer Affairs pursuant to the provisions of the Alarm Company Act as outlined in Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, Chapter 11.6, Section 7592.8(b). Nothing herein shall require a person to so register who is merely a salesman for any business not required to obtain an alarm business permit under the provisions of Division 3, if such salesman is engaged in sales of alarm systems only. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.050 - Change of address reports. 
A.  Any alarm business registered with the chief of police shall, within five days, report to the chief of police any change of address or ownership of the business or the name or business address of the manager of operations for the area which includes the area within the incorporated limits of the city. 
B.  Any person registered with the chief of police as an alarm agent shall, within five days report to the chief of police any change of business address. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.060 - Permit requirements. 
A.  No person shall install, or cause to be installed, use, maintain or possess an alarm system on premises owned by or in the possession of or in control of such persons within the incorporated area of the city without first having obtained an alarm user's permit from the chief of police of the city in accordance with this section. The application for an alarm user's permit shall be submitted on a form as prescribed by the chief of police and shall include the address of the premises wherein the system is to be located and the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, type or purpose of alarm, and the person who will render service or repairs during any hour of the day or night. 
B.  An administrative citation in the amount of one hundred dollars shall be issued to a person found to be responsible for an alarm system which is operated in violation of Section 5.77.060(A). 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.070 - Specifications. 
    All alarm systems sold for installation or installed in any place of business within the incorporated area of the city shall utilize approved Underwriter's Laboratories rated protection equipment. All electrical installations shall be in accordance with applicable requirements of the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city and all necessary permits shall be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.080 - False alarm-Report filing. 
    Following law enforcement response to the activation of an alarm which investigation determines to be false and notification of said fact by the chief of police, the alarm user shall file written report with the chief of police within seventy-two hours upon notice to do so from the chief of police. Such report shall contain all information pertaining to the activation of said alarm, any planned corrective action and projected date of correction. Where the alarm system is serviced by an alarm business, the report shall be made by such business and a copy forwarded to the alarm user by the alarm business. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.090 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  An administrative citation in the amount of one hundred dollars shall be issued to an alarm user for every false alarm after the first false alarm reported for a period of one year at his/her premises following enactment of this chapter. 
B.  Activation of a duress, panic, or holdup alarm for an event not consistent with a robbery or other life threatening situation, shall be considered a violation of this section and will result in an administrative citation being issued in the amount of one hundred dollars for residential or business related alarms. 
C.  In determining the number of false alarm penalties, multiple alarms occurring in any twenty-four-hour period may be counted as one false alarm, to allow the alarm user time to take corrective action, except where the alarm user has a history of chronic false alarms. 
D.  A false alarm response penalty may be waived if the alarm system was activated by factors out of the alarm users control, including violent conditions of nature; such as, earthquake, high intensity winds, extreme storms including thunderstorms, lightning, electrical surge, or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm business or alarm user. The Blythe police department may request a written statement/report from a licensed alarm company representative, which details the reasons for the false alarms under this section. 
E.  Whenever, in the opinion of the alarm administrator, an alarm user has a history of false alarms the pertinent system may be placed in "no response" status until the alarm user submits proof of system service and problem resolution by a licensed alarm business. Failure to pay alarm-related penalty assessments shall result in the pertinent system being placed in "no response" status at the discretion of the alarm administrator until such payment is received. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.100 - Activation or emergency-Procedures-Nuisance when. 
A.  Every place of business maintaining an alarm system shall either post or file with the chief of police a notice containing the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified in case of emergency or alarm activation or to render service to the system during any hour of the day or night. The persons named shall include the occupant of the premises, or the alarm business or agents responsible for the maintenance of the system. If posted, such notice shall be placed near the front door of the structure containing the alarm system or at the front gate if the structure is fenced; said notice shall be posted in such a position as to be clearly legible from the ground level adjacent to the structure or fence. It shall be the duty of the alarm user to maintain current such notice whether posted or filed with the chief of police. 
B.  If service is unavailable, audible alarms which have emitted an alarm in excess of fifteen minutes are declared to be nuisances, and the chief of police may cause such alarm to be disconnected by a registered alarm agent, with the cost therefore to be a charge payable by the alarm user. 
C.  The chief of police may designate an alarm system at a specific location as a nuisance if such alarm system actuates excessive false alarms. It is determined that four false burglar alarms within any three consecutive calendar month period, or two false robbery alarms within any three consecutive calendar month period is excessive and constitutes a public nuisance. The chief of police shall not consider any false alarm in his computation of nuisance alarms if such false alarm falls under Section 5.77.090(D), and not the result of the negligence of the alarm user, his agents or employees or a defect in the alarm system. 
D.  The chief of police shall suspend the permit of an alarm user whose alarm has been so designated a nuisance. The chief of police shall serve the permitter with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reason for such suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served, or forty-eight hours after the same has been deposited with postage prepaid in the United States mail. 
    Immediately upon such an order of suspension becoming effective, the alarm system shall receive non-priority response from the police department. 
E.  The suspension of the alarm user's permit shall become a revocation fifteen days after the order of suspension becomes effective unless the permittee presents to the chief of police written verification that the system has been completely evaluated and the problem located and corrected, and the documentation exists that the alarm system of the alarm user falls within the acceptable alarm activation limit set forth in this section and such limits as set by the chief of police. Notice of revocation shall be served by personal service or by certified mail. 
F.  If an alarm user's permit is revoked pursuant to this section, the permittee shall surrender said permit to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.110 - Systems listing-Availability. 
    Every alarm business which monitors an alarm system located within the incorporated area of the city shall maintain on file a current listing of all such alarm systems including the name, address and telephone number of the individual or individuals from whom entry to the premises may be obtained. Said information shall be available to the chief of police upon request of any authorized representative thereof. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.120 - Alarm agent registration card. 
    Every person engaged in installing, repairing, servicing, altering, replacing, moving or removing an alarm system as defined in this chapter, on any place of business within the incorporated area of the city other than those owned or occupied by said person, shall carry on his person at all times while so engaged a valid state of California alarm agents registration card and shall display such card to any peace officer upon request. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.130 - Operative dates. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter and the requirements therein shall become operative ninety days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for those persons conducting an alarm business or engaged as an alarm agent within the incorporated area of the city on such effective date; provided, however, the aforementioned persons who have filed an application as required herein for an alarm business permit may continue doing business after such operative date until such application has been processed. 
B.  All persons not conducting an alarm business or engaged as an alarm agent within the incorporated area of the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not commence such operation until the necessary alarm business permit required by this chapter has been issued or the registration required by this chapter for an alarm agent has been completed. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter relating to the alarm users permit shall become operative one hundred twenty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for those persons using, maintaining, or possessing an alarm system on premises owned or in the possession or control of such person within the incorporated area of the city if said system was installed or in operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Any person installing, or causing to be installed an alarm system on premises owned or in possession or control of such person within the city on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not commence such installation until the necessary alarm users permit required by this chapter has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
5.77.140 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter as herein enacted or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional by decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this chapter, or any section or portion of section hereof which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and to this end the provisions of this chapter are, and are intended to be, severable. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 839, § 1, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: 477, 626. 

Chapter 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - Animals or fowl at large prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any steer, calf, ox, bull, cow, horse, colt, jack, mule, burro, sheep, goat, hog or fowl to run at large in the city or to be pastured or herded, stabled or tied in any of the streets, lanes, alleys, public squares, parks, parkways or other public places that are under the control of the city, or in such a way as to trespass in any manner upon the public places, or upon any private property other than that of the person owning or having charge of such animal unless such owner or person having charge of such animal has consent of the owner or occupier of the private property. The above enumerated animals shall be collectively referred to as domestic animals in this title. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.020 - Definitions. 
    Whenever, in this title, the following terms are used, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section unless it is apparent from the context that some other meaning is intended: 
A.  Administration. The animal control officer shall supervise the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title and of the laws of the state pertaining to the control of dogs. 
B.  Animal-control Officer. "Animal-control officer" or "AC" means the employee of the city who is charged with enforcement of the provisions of this title and his regularly appointed deputies. 
C.  At large. "At large" means off the premises of the owner and not under physical restraint by the owner. A dog securely leashed and under the control of the owner or person in charge thereof, and a dog confined within the property of the owner or person in charge thereof by means of a fence or other effective enclosure, or within a vehicle, is not a dog running at large. 
D.  Impounded. "Impounded" means having been received into the custody of any pound authorized under the provisions of this title. 
E.  Kennel, dog, and pet shop. "Dog kennel" or "pet shop," whether used in the singular or plural, means any building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon or within which five or more dogs are kept or maintained for any purpose or reason whatsoever. The term does not include, nor is this section applicable to, dogs under one hundred twenty days of age. 
F.  Owner. Any person keeping or harboring, or having custody or control over, any dog for thirty consecutive days shall be deemed to be the "owner" of such dog within the meaning of this title; except a veterinarian duly licensed and practicing as such and having in his possession or control a dog or dogs for the purpose of treatment or care. 
G.  Person. "Person" includes a firm, partnership, corporation, trust or any association of persons. 
H.  Poundmaster. "Poundmaster" means any person, or any duly authorized agent of any such person, in charge of any pound. 
I.  Unlicensed Dog. "Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which the license for the current year has not been paid, or to which the license tag for the current year is not attached. 
J.  Vaccination. "Vaccination" and "vaccination against rabies" mean the inoculation of a dog, at four months of age or older, with canine chick-embryo origin modified live-virus rabies vaccine, or canine nerve tissue killed-virus rabies vaccine, in a manner prescribed by the California State Department of Public Health or any other vaccine for such purpose prescribed by such department. 
K.  Vicious Dog. "Vicious dog" means any dog which has bitten a person or animal without provocation or which has a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal. 
L.  Wild animal. "Wild animal" means any animal not ordinarily and customarily domesticated, but under human control. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.030 - Animal control officers not peace officers. 
A.  The animal control officer, his assistants and deputies are not peace officers, but may exercise the powers of arrest of a peace officer as designated in Section 836 of the California Penal Code and the power to serve warrants as specified in Sections 1523 and 1530 of the Penal Code during the course and within the scope of their employment, if they receive a course in the exercise of those powers pursuant to Penal Code Section 832. That part of the training course specified in Penal Code 832 pertaining to the carrying and use of firearms shall not be required, if the chief of police does not authorize the use of firearms. 
B.  For the purposes of subsection A of this section, the term "firearms" includes capture guns, blow guns, carbon dioxide operated rifles and pistols, air guns, hand guns, rifles and shotguns. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.040 - Duties-Generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the AC to take up, impound and safely keep any domestic animal found running at large, staked, tied or herded or being pastured on any street, lane, alley, park, parkway or other place belonging to or under the control of the city contrary to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.050 - Care of animals generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the AC to safely keep all domestic animals impounded by him and to give same the necessary food, water and ordinary attention necessary for the welfare of such animals. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.060 - Interference with animal control. 
    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose or resist the animal control or other person charged with the enforcement of this title, while such AC or such other person may be engaged in the performance of their duties under this title. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.070 - City to provide impoundment facilities-Designation. 
    The city shall provide or may contract for suitable enclosure to keep safely all animals enumerated in this title and subject to impoundment. It shall be known and designated as the city animal control center unless contracted for with another agency. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.080 - Notice to owner of impounded animal-Posting and content of notice. 
    When a domestic animal is found by the AC, acting under the authority of this title and is impounded, he shall immediately notify the owner thereof, if known to him, either by mail or personal notice. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.090 - Redemption-Generally. 
    The owner of any domestic animal impounded by the AC, acting under the authority of this title, shall have the right to reclaim the same at any time prior to the sale, adoption or destruction, upon payment to the contracting animal shelter agency of the costs and charges of transporting and maintaining the animal while impounded. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.100 - Fees. 
    The contracting animal center or the AC shall collect from the owner or any person seeking to reclaim any domestic animal impounded by him under the authority of this title, the fees established by city council resolutions and/or by the contracting animal center's current fees schedules. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.04.110 - Destruction of impounded animals. 
    If any domestic animal impounded by the AC under the provisions of this title has not been redeemed or sold within the time and in the manner specified in this title, it shall be euthanised and disposed of by the AC or the contracting animal control agency in a humane manner and in no other way. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.06 - DOGS-CATS 
Sections: 

6.06.010 - Definitions. 
    Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section unless it is apparent from the context thereof that some other meaning is intended. 
A.  At large. "At large" means any dog which is off the premises of its owner, custodian or caretaker and which is not under physical restraint by a leash of a size and material appropriate to the size and temperament of the dog and which is held by a person capable of restraining such dog, or is not otherwise physically restrained by some other device or instrumentality except that such device or instrumentality shall not include voice control, eye control or signal control of the dog by any person, device or instrumentality. 
B.  Cattery. "Cattery" means any building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon, or within which four or more cats, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained. 
C.  Chief Animal Control Officer. The chief animal control officer shall be under the supervision of the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
D.  Kennel. "Kennel" means any building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon, or within which, four or more dogs, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained. 
E.  Community. "Community" means any public entity which is authorized by law to regulate and control animals, fowl, and reptiles. 
F.  Dangerous Reptile. "Dangerous reptile" means any living reptile that is venomous and/or can cause great bodily harm to any human being, or domestic type animal. 
G.  Guide Dog. "Guide dog" means any dog trained or being reared, trained or used for the purposes of guiding a blind person. 
H.  Health Officer. "Health officer" means the health officer of the county of Riverside or his duly authorized representative. 
I.  Impounded. "Impounded" means having been received into the custody of any animal control center, animal control officer, animal control vehicle or peace officer duly authorized by the city to receive such animal. 
J.  Officer. "Officer" means the authorized person or agency designated by the city council, such as the chief animal control officer or animal control or health officer for the county of Riverside, or any duly authorized representative of the city designated by the city council. 
K.  Owner. "Owner" means any person who is the owner or an person keeping or harboring or having custody or control over any animal for thirty consecutive days. Ownership is also established by a person registering as the owner on a license or other legal document, or by a person claiming ownership and taking possession of an animal. A veterinarian duly licensed and practicing as such and having in his possession or control an animal for the purpose of treatment or care is not an "owner" for the purposes of this chapter. 
L.  Person. "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, club or organization. 
M.  Police Service Dog. "Police service dog" means any dog being reared, trained, or used for the particular requirements of a law enforcement agency or search and rescue organizations. 
N.  Public Entity. "Public entity" means any state, or any political subdivision, municipal corporation or agency thereof. 
O.  Sentry Dog. "Sentry dog" means any dog trained to work without supervision in a fenced facility and to deter or detain unauthorized persons found within the facility. 
P.  Service Dog. "Service dog" means any dog being reared, trained or used for the purpose of fulfilling the particular requirements of a physically disabled person, including, but not limited to minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped items. 
Q.  Signal Dog. "Signal dog" means any dog being reared, trained or used for the purpose of alerting a deaf person or a person whose hearing is impaired, to intruders or sounds. 
R.  Unlicensed Dog. "Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which no valid license is currently in force. 
S.  Vaccination. "Vaccination" means an inoculation against rabies of any dog or cat, four months of age or older, with any vaccine prescribed for the purpose by the California Department of Health Services. 
T.  Veterinarian. "Veterinarian" means a person holding a currently valid license to practice veterinary medicine issued by the state pursuant to Chapter 11 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
U.  Wild Animal. "Wild animal" means a member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity except the following: human beings, domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, and hybrid animals that are part wild, and captive-bred species of common cage birds. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.06.020 - Mandatory dog licensing and vaccination. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection G of this section, it is unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep any dog, four months of age or older, within the incorporated area of the city, for a period longer than thirty days, unless a currently valid license tag has been issued by the AC for such purpose and such tag is prominently displayed on such dog. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep any dog, four months of age or older, within the area for a period longer than thirty days, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Every person who owns, harbors or keeps any dog over four months of age for a period longer than thirty days shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies as provided herein, by a veterinarian of his choice and such vaccination shall be renewed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the state. 
C.  Each veterinarian, after vaccinating any dog shall sign a certificate of vaccination in duplicate in the form required by AC. The veterinarian shall keep one copy and shall give one copy to the owner of the vaccinated dog and the owner shall retain such copy in his possession. 
D.  The AC shall issue only upon presentation of a certificate of vaccination indicating therein that the date of expiration of the vaccination immunity is not earlier than the date of expiration of the license being issued or renewed, and upon payment of license fee specified in subsection F of this section; provided, however, that where the vaccinated dog is between the ages of four months and twelve months, the period of vaccination immunity required for licensing shall be as specified in Title 17, California Administrative Code, Section 2606.4. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections B and D of this section, in the event a dog has a short-term illness, is pregnant, or suffers from a long-term debilitating illness which in the opinion of a veterinarian contraindicates vaccination for rabies, such dog shall not be required to undergo vaccination during the period of such illness or pregnancy where a request for vaccination deferral has been approved by the AC. Such request shall specify the duration of the requested deferral, the reason for the requested deferral, and shall be signed by a veterinarian. The animal control officer/humane officer shall issue a license for such dog upon approval of the request for vaccination deferral and payment of the applicable license fee specified in subsection F of this section. The owner or person having custody of such dog shall present to the AC a certificate of vaccination in accordance with the provisions of subsection C of this section. 
F.  Subject to the provisions of this section, licenses shall be issued upon payment of fees as set by resolution of the city council from time to time and as the council may deem. 
G.  That the provision for the payment of license fees set forth in subsection F of this section shall not apply to guide dogs, service dogs, signal dogs and dogs owned by a public entity. 
H.  Upon the transfer of ownership of any dog validly licensed under subsection A of this section, the new owner shall notify the animal control of such transfer on a form prescribed by the AC accompanied by the transfer fee as set by resolution of the city council. 
I.  Dog licenses issued by other cities or counties of the state will accepted as meeting the requirements of this section for a period of one year. Licenses issued by jurisdictions outside of California are not acceptable for any period. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.06.030 - Optional licensing of cats. 
    Any owner of a cat may be issued a license and tag for such cat upon presentation to the AC a certificate of vaccination signed by a veterinarian certifying that such a cat has been vaccinated, and upon the payment of a license fee set by resolution of the city council. Said license shall be valid for the period of immunity indicated in the certificate of vaccination. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.06.040 - Micro-chip identification of dogs. 
A.  All dogs over the age of four months must be implanted with an identifying microchip. The owner or custodian is required to provide the microchip number to the police department, and shall notify the police department of any change of ownership of the dog, or any change of address or telephone number. Nothing in this section supersedes, eliminates, or alters the requirements of Sections 6.06.020 BMC, and any other licensing requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Enforcement. An animal control officer or any peace officer may electronically scan any dog found within the city of Blythe to verify the presence of an identifying microchip as required in this section. An administrative citation, infraction, or other such authorized penalty may be issued to an owner or custodian of a dog for a violation of this section only when the owner or custodian is concurrently cited for another violation under state or local law pertaining to the obligations of a person owning or possessing a dog. In no case will enforcement of this section be conducted by door to door canvassing. 
C.  Exemptions. The mandatory microchipping requirements shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  A dog with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily injury, if implanted with the microchip identification, due to health conditions of the animal. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of that fact from a California licensed veterinarian. If the dog is able to be safely implanted with an identifying microchip at a later date, that date must be stated in the written confirmation. 
2.  A dog which would be impaired of its athletic or performance if implanted with the microchip identification. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of that fact from a California licensed veterinarian. If the dog is able to be safely implanted with an identifying microchip at a later date; that date must be stated in the written confirmation. 
D.  Transfer, Sale of Dogs. 
1.  An owner or custodian who offers any dog, over the age of four months, for sale, trade, or adoption must provide the microchip identification number and the valid dog license number with the offer of sale, trade or adoption. The license and microchip numbers must appear on a document transferring the dog to the new owner. The owner or custodian shall also advise the police department of the name and address of the new owner or custodian in accordance with subdivision (a) of this section. An owner or custodian who offers any dog, over the age of four months, for sale, trade, or adoption and fails to provide the police department with the name and address of the new owner is in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
2.  When a puppy under the age of four months implanted with microchip identification is sold or otherwise transferred to another person, the owner or custodian shall advise the police department of the name and address of the new owner or custodian, and microchip number of the puppy within ten days after the transfer. If it is discovered that an owner or custodian has failed to provide the police department with name and address of the new owner or custodian and microchip number of the puppy, the owner or custodian shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter. 
E.  When a dog is impounded and is found not to have microchip identification, the owner of the animal must meet applicable requirements for the animals release and shall do one of the following: 
1.  Have the dog implanted with an approved microchip by a veterinarian, registered veterinarian technician, or designated personnel where the dog is impounded, at the expense of the owner or custodian. 
2.  Have the dog implanted with an approved microchip by a California licensed veterinarian. 
3.  At the discretion of the animal control officer, the dog may be released to the owner or custodian if he or she signs a statement under penalty of perjury, representing that the dog will be implanted with a microchip and that he or she will submit a statement within thirty days of the release, signed by a California licensed veterinarian, confirming that the dog has been so implanted and provide the microchip number to the police department or allow the police department to scan the dog for the microchip to verify. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 5-12-15) 
6.06.050 - Spay/neuter of dogs. 
A.  Requirement. No person may own, keep, or harbor an unaltered or unspayed dog in violation of this section. An owner or custodian of an unaltered dog must have the dog spayed or neutered, or provide a certificate of sterility in accordance with this chapter. Nothing in this section supersedes, eliminates, or alters the requirements of Sections 6.06.020 BMC, and any other licensing requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Enforcement. A violation of subsection A shall not be enforced unless the department has received at least three complaints, verified by the department, that the owner, custodian, or licensee has allowed a dog to be stray or run at large. An administrative citation, infraction, or other such authorized penalty may be issued to an owner or custodian of an unaltered dog for a violation of this section only when the owner or custodian is concurrently cited for another violation under state or local law pertaining to the obligations of a person owning or possessing a dog. 
C.  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  A dog with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death if spayed or neutered, due to age or infirmity. The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation of this fact from a California licensed veterinarian. If the dog is able to be safely spayed or neutered at a later date, that date must be stated in the written confirmation; should this date be later than thirty days, the owner or custodian must apply for an unaltered dog license. 
2.  Animals owned by recognized dog breeders, as defined by animal control policy. 
D.  Impoundment of Unaltered Dog. When an unaltered dog is impounded pursuant to state and/or local law, in addition to satisfying applicable requirements for the release of the animal, including, but not limited to, payment of impound fees pursuant to this chapter, the owner or custodian shall also do one of the following: 
1.  Provide written proof of the dog's prior sterilization, if conditions cannot or do not make this assessment obvious to department personnel; 
2.  Have the dog spayed or neutered by a California licensed veterinarian. The veterinarian shall complete and return to the department within ten days, a statement confirming that the dog has been spayed or neutered or is, in fact, incapable of breeding and shall release the dog to the owner or custodian only after the spay or neuter procedure is complete; 
3.  At the discretion of the animal control officer, the dog may be released to the owner or custodian if he or she signs a statement under penalty of perjury, representing that the dog will be spayed or neutered and that he or she will submit a statement within ten days of the release, signed by the veterinarian, confirming that the dog has been spayed or neutered or is incapable of breeding. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 5-12-15) 
Chapter 6.12 - DOGS-KENNELS 
Sections: 

6.12.010 - License-Required. 
    Every person engaged in the business of operating a dog kennel or pet shop shall obtain a license from the city. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.020 - License-Term and renewal. 
    A license shall be valid until the first day of October following issuance, and shall be renewed within thirty days thereafter. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.030 - License-Fees. 
    The license fees, and the additional fees in application for licenses made more than thirty days after the date such license is required, shall be as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.040 - License-Application. 
    Application for a license to operate a dog kennel or pet shop shall be made in writing to the license department, which shall transmit copies of said application to the development services and the animal control officer and building and safety department. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.050 - License-Conditions for issuance. 
A.  After receipt of the application, the city shall make or cause to be made an examination of the dog kennel or pet shop for which the license is requested. 
B.  No license shall be issued, nor shall any license be renewed, unless and until the dog kennel or pet shop, in the opinion of the development service department and building and safety department complies with all the codes of the city and in the opinion of the animal control officer satisfactorily meets each of the following conditions: 
1.  The dog kennel or pet shop is constructed, equipped and maintained so as to continuously provide a healthful and sanitary environment for the animals kept, or to be kept therein; 
2.  There is adequate shelter from the elements and sufficient space for exercise; 
3.  There is ample and healthful food and potable water, and adequate sanitary facilities for storage of the same; 
4.  There are adequate drainage facilities and satisfactory sanitary disposal of both natural precipitation and animal wastes of all kinds; 
5.  There are adequate and effective means of control of insects and rodents, and such control is vigorously maintained at all times; 
6.  The living quarters of a house or home shall not be considered adequate for a kennel or pet shop. 
C.  Failure of the applicant for said license to comply with any one of the foregoing conditions shall be deemed just cause for the denial of any license whether original or renewal. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.060 - Dogs subject to provisions. 
A.  All dogs owned by the operator of a dog kennel or pet shop shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter upon attaining the age of four months. 
B.  Personal pets that are kept in the house may be licensed separately. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.080 - Report of certain sales required. 
    The sale of each dog by a kennel or pet shop before it has attained the age of four months shall be reported on a form to be furnished by the animal-control officer, which form shall include information as to the name and address of the person to whom the dog is sold, a description of the dog, age of the dog, and such other pertinent data as the animal- control officer may require. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.090 - Entry authority. 
    The animal-control officer shall have authority to enter upon any area or premises in which a dog kennel or pet shop is located for the purpose of the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.100 - License-Revocation-Failure to meet conditions. 
A.  The animal-control or code enforcement officers may revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter whenever he determines from an inspection that any dog kennel or pet shop fails to meet all the conditions of this chapter. 
B.  Any revocation of a license shall be effective until all conditions of this chapter have been met and complied with to the satisfaction of the animal-control and/or code enforcement officer and written notice of this fact has been given to the licensee. 
C.  Upon receipt of such notice, the license shall be deemed in full force and effect for the remainder of the original term for which issued. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.110 - License-Revocation-Violation of title. 
    The animal control and/or code enforcement officer shall have the power, upon the giving of ten days' notice by the United States mail to any licensee under this chapter, to revoke any license granted to a dog kennel or pet shop operator for a violation of this title. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.120 - Nonprofit corporations-Prevention of cruelty to animals-Fee exemption. 
    A nonprofit corporation formed pursuant to the provisions of the California Corporations Code commencing with Section 10400, for the prevention of cruelty to animals, shall not be required to pay a fee for the licenses required by Section 6.12.030; provided, however, that all other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any such nonprofit corporation. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.12.130 - Denial of application for kennel or cattery. 
A.  The AC and/or code enforcement officer may, in his discretion, deny any application for a kennel or cattery license whether such application is for an original license or renewal of a license, and may suspend or revoke any kennel or cattery license if he finds that a kennel or cattery is in violation of any law of the state or any provision of this title or the zoning codes of the city. 
B.  When such denial, suspension or revocation occurs, the AC shall prepare a written notice of such denial, suspension or revocation which shall contain a brief statement of the reason or reasons for such denial suspension or revocation. The AC shall serve such notice upon the applicant or licensee by hand-delivery or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Denial, suspension or revocation shall be effective thirty days after service of such notice. Where an application for a kennel or cattery license is denied or where a kennel or cattery license issued pursuant to this chapter is revoked, no application for a new license for such kennel or cattery shall be considered for a period of one year from the effective date of such denial or revocation; provided, however, that for good cause shown, the city council may direct that there be a lesser period of time before such application will be considered. 
C.  Any person whose application has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked, may appeal such denial, suspension or revocation by filing with the city clerk within fifteen days after notice of such denial, suspension or revocation, written notice of appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why the appellant alleges such denial, suspension or revocation is improper. Within five days of the receipt by the city clerk of such notice of appeal, the clerk shall set a hearing date for the appeal and shall give written notice of the date, time and place of such hearing to the appellant, and such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. The date of hearing shall be not less than twenty days from the date of mailing of the notice of the date, time and place of the hearing, and the hearing shall be conducted not later than forty-five days from the date of mailing of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation; provided, however, that at the request of the appellant, the city clerk may extend the hearing date for a reasonable period beyond the aforementioned forty-five-day limit. The appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, modify, or reverse the denial, suspension or revocation. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses, as applicable in courts of law. To be admissible, evidence shall be of the type upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. During the pendency of the appeal, there shall be in effect an automatic stay of the denial, suspension or revocation; provided, however, that during said period of pendency the AC officer may take such action as he deems appropriate under this chapter or any other provision of the law respecting the subject kennel or cattery, including but not limited to the abatement of public nuisances, inspection of the kennel or cattery premises or the prosecution of any violation of the title or any other provision of law not related to the failure of the subject kennel or cattery to be currently and otherwise validly licensed. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 6.16 - ANIMAL CONTROL DUTIES AND IMPOUNDMENT 
Sections: 

6.16.010 - Duties and powers of officers. 
    It shall be the duty of all peace officers, within the city to cooperate with and assist the AC officer in the enforcement of the provisions of this title, and such peace officers and the AC shall be empowered to: 
A.  Receive, take up and impound: 
1.  Any dog found running at large in violation of this title or of any law of the state, 
2.  Any dog which, without provocation or direction is molesting any person, and 
3.  Any dog which, without provocation or direction, is molesting or harassing animals, birds, or pets upon the premises of any person; 
B.  Regularly and adequately feed, water and otherwise care for all dogs and cats impounded under the provisions of this title or provide for such feeding, watering and care; 
C.  Investigate the condition and behavior of any dog or cat which he has reason to believe is vicious or dangerous and if he finds such dog or cat to be vicious or dangerous in its habits, he shall report his findings in writing, either by hand-delivery or by mail, to the owner of such dog or cat if the name and whereabouts of said owners are known, and if unknown, then the dog or cat shall be impounded; 
D.  The duties of the AC officer shall include the collection of all fees required in this title, the issuance of licenses and tags on dogs impounded by that officer, and the deposit of all moneys received in payment of license fees in a timely manner with the finance department; 
E.  Follow the provisions of the California Penal Code, Section 597(f), in humanely destroying or giving emergency care to sick or injured dogs and cats. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.16.020 - Entry upon private property. 
    Unless otherwise prohibited by law all persons whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this title are empowered to enter upon private property, where any dog or cat is kept or reasonably believed to be kept, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such dog or cat is kept in violation of any provision of this title. Notwithstanding any provision in this title relating to entry upon private property for any purpose under this title, no such entry may be conducted; (a) without the express or implied consent unless an inspection warrant has been issued and the entry is conducted in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50 through 1822.56, inclusive, (b) except as may otherwise be expressly or implied permitted by law. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.16.030 - Certain acts made unlawful. 
A.  In the interest of public health and safety, it shall unlawful for the owner of any dog, licensed or unlicensed, to permit that dog to run at large. It shall be lawful for any person to take up, in a humane manner, any dog running at large in violation of this title and promptly deliver such dog to the AC. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person in control of any dog to bring such dog upon any public school ground unless authorized by the school board or the principal of that school. 
C.  It is unlawful for the owner or person in control of any dog to fail to remove any excreta deposited by that dog on any public walks, parks, parkways, recreation areas or private property. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to make use of a stolen, counterfeit or unauthorized license, tag, certificate or any other document or thing for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.16.040 - Noise disturbances by animals. 
A.  No person owning, keeping or having in his care or custody any dog, fowl or other animal shall knowingly permit or suffer such dog, fowl or other animal, by any barking or other noise or sound, to disturb any other person's peace and quiet. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the prohibit the keeping of any watchdog, provided the keeper thereof takes immediate steps to quiet such dog whenever it barks, and provided such keeper never leaves such dog unattended on the premises in a place where its barking, if prolonged or if repeated an undue number of times, disturbs any other person's peace and quiet. 
B.  No person, after being informed orally or in writing that his dog or other animal has by barking or other noise or sound disturbed any other person's peace and quiet, shall fail, refuse or neglect to take whatever steps or use whatever means are necessary to assure that such dog or animal does not again disturb such other person's peace and quiet. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.16.050 - Impounded animals and fowl. 
A.  An impounded animal or fowl may be redeemed upon the payment of fees set by resolution of the city council or fees set by the contracting agency from time to time and as they may deem necessary. 
B.  Any dog, four months of age or older, which has been impounded shall not be released from impoundment unless it is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
C.  An officer acting under the provisions of this title and impounding a licensed dog, or a licensed cat, shall give written notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the owner, of the impounding of such dog or cat. If such dog or cat is not redeemed within ten days from the date of the mailing of such notice, the officer having custody of the dog or cat shall dispose of it in accordance with the provisions of this title, or shall destroy such dog or cat. 
D.  Upon impounding an unlicensed dog or an unlicensed cat, the officer shall give notice to the owner, if the owner and his whereabouts are known, of the impounding of such dog or cat. If such dog or cat has not been redeemed within three days of the giving of such notice, the officer shall dispose of such dog or cat in accordance with the provisions of subsection E of this section, or shall destroy such dog or cat. For the purpose of this subsection, the notice specified herein shall be given in the manner determined of the officer as expedient under the circumstances. 
E.  The officer having custody of a impounded dog or cat may, by humane methods, summarily destroy such dog or cat if: 
1.  The dog or cat is suffering from any incurable, dangerous or contagious disease, providing a veterinarian shall certify in writing, that such dog or cat is so suffering; or 
2.  It is an unlicensed vicious dog or cat. 
F.  Any officer having in his custody an unredeemed, impounded dog or cat may release such dog or cat to any adult individual upon payment by that individual of the impound fees and charges specified in this title and a spay/neuter deposit fee, or to a nonprofit corporation formed under the provisions of the California Corporations Code commencing with Section 10400 for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or to a nonprofit organization formed under the laws of the state for the prevention of cruelty to animals, for such sale or placement as such nonprofit corporation or nonprofit organization may choose. Releases of dogs or cats to such nonprofit corporations or nonprofit organizations pursuant to this subsection, shall not be subject to the payment of the impound fees and charges specified in subsection A of this section but shall be subject to a spay/neuter deposit. 
G.  Under no circumstances, whatsoever, will a dog, cat or any animal be sold, given away or donated to any person, organization, or retailer whose intention is to sell, perform, donate or give away for the purpose of laboratory experimentation medical usage, and/or any type of program where the animal could be subjected to pain, discomfort, or cruelty. 
H.  All of the provisions of this chapter pertaining to impounded unlicensed dogs, except the licensing provisions thereof shall also apply to impounded cats, fowl, reptiles, wild animals and to domesticated wild animals. 
I.  It is unlawful for any person to remove an impounded animal from an animal control center without the permission of the officer in charge thereof. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.16.060 - Vicious animals. 
A.  The term "vicious animal" or "dangerous animal" means an animal which: 
1.  Has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the animal has tendencies to attack or bite human beings; or 
2.  Has twice within a forty-eight month period bitten, attacked, or shown the disposition, tendency, or propensity to attack, bite, or otherwise cause injury to a person engaged in lawful activity; or 
3.  Has once attacked or bitten a person engaged in lawful activity, causing death or substantial injury; or 
4.  Has been determined by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation thereof, as posing a danger to humans or domestic animals if not enclosed or muzzled; or 
5.  Has attacked, or behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the animal has tendencies to attack domestic animals without provocation; or 
6.  Has been trained for fighting for or as an attack dog, except such dogs which are employed by the police department of the city or the sheriff of Riverside County or any other law enforcement agency. Any dog which is outfitted with a training device for fighting or attack such as a weighted collar around the neck of the dog, shall be presumed to be a dog trained as a fighting or attack dog. 
B.  No person owning or harboring or having the care or custody of a dangerous or vicious animal shall suffer or permit such animal to go beyond the premises of such person unless animal is under the immediate control and physical restraint of such owner or person. In the case of a vicious dog, such dog shall be muzzled. 
C.  No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dog fighting; nor train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging said dog to unprovoked attacks on human beings or domestic animals. Nor shall any person outfit any dog with a training device for fighting or attack, such as a weighted collar around the neck of the dog. 
D.  No person shall possess, with intent to sell, or offer for sale, breed, or buy or attempt to buy within the city, any vicious or dangerous dog. 
E.  Whenever an animal suspected of being dangerous or vicious is reported, the AC may investigate the circumstances, and if he finds that the animal, by reason of the animal's acts, propensities, or disposition, is a dangerous or vicious animal as defined in this title, he may notify the owner or harborer in writing stating the facts and circumstances. The AC may classify the animal as "vicious" and impose any or all of the following requirements. 
1.  That the vicious animal be confined (i) indoors; (ii) in a lot, pen or dog-run, secured in a manner prescribed by the AC; (iii) securely fastened by a chain; and/or (iv) in any other reasonable manner as determined by the AC. 
2.  That the owner of the vicious animal maintain a policy of insurance in an amount not less than $100,000 insuring said owner or anyone else who is responsible for the acts of the vicious animal against any claim, loss, damage, or injury to persons, domestic animals or property resulting from acts, whether intentional or unintentional, of the vicious animal. Such owner or other responsible person shall produce evidence of such insurance upon the request of a law enforcement officer; and/or 
3.  That the owner comply with such further conditions and restrictions as are deemed and necessary under the circumstances. 
G.  If restraint or confinement as ordered under subsection F is impractical, the animal shall be impounded until the owner or harborer is able to comply with the AC's orders. For any such impoundment, the owner or harborer shall be liable to the city for payment of fees as described pursuant to Section 6.04.100. Any animal not reclaimed within a reasonable time after such impoundment shall be subject to destruction. 
H.  Failure to comply with any order of the AC made pursuant to this section on the part of the owner or person having custody of the vicious animal, which is the subject of such order, shall constitute a violation of this title. Continued violations and/or noncompliance with this chapter may result in prosecution for maintaining a public nuisance, a misdemeanor, as described in Section 6.28.040 and the vicious animal may be subject to summary destruction. 
I.  A sign shall be posted at or near all entrances to the premises upon which a vicious animal is maintained. The signs shall be clearly visible and have letters at least two inches in height and two inches in width that read "BEWARE OF VICIOUS DOG," "BEWARE OF VICIOUS CAT," etc. as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 6.20 - MISCELLANEOUS-QUARANTINE-RABIES-SUPPRESSION 
Sections: 

6.20.010 - Rabies suppression, control and quarantine. 
A.  If it shall appear to the animal control officer that any animal has rabies, the animal control officer may destroy such animal forthwith, or may hold such animal for further examination or observation for such time as the animal health officer may determine to be appropriate. If the animal is destroyed the head of the animal shall be submitted to the county health department for examination. 
B.  Whenever any animal has been bitten by an animal which has rabies, which exhibits any symptoms of rabies or which is otherwise suspected of having, or having been exposed to rabies, the owner or person having custody of such bitten animal shall immediately notify the animal control officer, and shall immediately confine the animal and maintain that confinement until it is established to the satisfaction of the animal control officer that such animal does not have rabies. The animal control officer shall have the power to quarantine any such animal, or impound it at the owner's expense if the owner or the person having custody of such animal shall fail, refuse, or is unable, in the opinion of the animal control officer, to adequately confine such animal immediately, or in the event the owner or person having custody of such animal is not readily accessible. 
C.  Whenever it is shown that any licensed animal has bitten any person, the owner or person having custody of such animal shall, upon the order of the animal control officer, quarantine such animal and keep it confined at the owner's expense for a minimum period of ten days for dogs and cats and fourteen days for all other animals, and shall allow the animal control officer to make an inspection or examination of such animal at any time during such period of quarantine. Animals quarantined pursuant to this subsection shall not be removed from the premises upon which such animal is quarantined without permission of the animal control officer. The animal control officer is authorized to impound any animal at the owner's expense in the event the owner or person having custody of such animal fails or refuses to so confine such animal. Animals quarantined pursuant to this subsection shall remain under quarantine until notice is given by the animal control officer that such quarantine is terminated. Whenever it is shown that any unlicensed animal has bitten any person that the animal control officer is authorized to impound and quarantine the animal at the owner's expense. 
D.  The animal control officer may, in his discretion, post or cause to be posted an appropriate sign on any premises where an animal is quarantined pursuant to this title, for the purpose of warning the public of the fact of such quarantine. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a sign pursuant to this subsection without the permission of the animal control officer. 
E.  Whenever the animal control officer shall determine that an epidemic of rabies exists or is threatened, the animal control officer shall have the authority to take such measures as may be reasonably necessary to prevent the spread of the disease, including but not limited to the declaration of quarantine against any or all animals in any area of the city as the animal control officer may determine and define, for a period of not more than one hundred and twenty days. An additional or extended quarantine period may also be declared if such additional or extended quarantine period shall be deemed necessary by the animal control officer for the protection and preservation of the public health, peace and safety. Any quarantine declared pursuant to this subsection, other than as restricted in this title, such conditions as the animal control officer may determine and declare. 
F.  No person shall bring a dog into an incorporated area of the city from any county, city, state, or country in which a reported case of rabies exists or has existed within the preceding six months. 
G.  In order to protect the public health from the hazard of rabies which has been found to exist in skunks, a quarantine is imposed to continue until released by the animal control officer, whereby it is prohibited to trap or capture skunks for pets; to trap, capture, or hold skunks in captivity for any reason; to transport skunks from or into the city except pursuant to a permit issued by the California Department of Health Services pursuant to Title 17, California Administrative Code, Section 2606.8. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.20.020 - Inhumane treatment and abandonment. 
A.  Any animal which is abandoned or treated in a cruel or inhumane manner, or which is willfully or negligently allowed to suffer torture or unnecessary pain is in violation of this subsection, and may be impounded and disposed of in a humane manner. 
B.  At least five working days prior to the impoundment of any animal pursuant to subsection A of this section, written notice shall be made by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the owner or person entitled to possession of such animal, of such person's right to a hearing as to whether or not such impoundment is justified. In the event the owner or person entitled to possession of such animal requests a hearing prior to impoundment, no impoundment shall take peace until the conclusion of such hearing, except as otherwise provided in this title. If, in the opinion of the AC immediate impoundment is necessary for the preservation of the public health or safety or the health or safety of the animal, the preimpoundment hearing shall be deemed waived; provided, however, that in such case the owner or person entitled to possession of such animal shall be given at least five working days' notice as provided in this subsection of his right to a post-post-impoundment hearing. In the event a post-impoundment hearing is requested, it shall be conducted by the AC personally or by a designated employee who shall not have been directly involved in the subject action, within five days of the date the request is made, and the animal which is the subject of such hearing shall not be destroyed or otherwise disposed of prior to the conclusion of the hearing. Notice of the time, date and place of such hearing shall be given to the owner or person entitled to possession of the animal which is the subject of such hearing. Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the AC shall render, in writing, his findings, decision and order thereon and shall give notice of said findings, decision and order to the owner or person entitled to possession of the subject animal. Service of such notice shall be made by personal delivery or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid. If the impoundment is found to be unjustified, the animal which is the subject of such hearing shall be returned, without charge, to the owner or the person entitled to possession of such animal. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 6.28 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

6.28.010 - Enforcement. 
A.  The animal control officer shall supervise the administration and enforcement of this title and of the laws of the state pertaining to the control of animals and shall have charge of city animal control employees and facilities. 
B.  The city council may enter into a written agreement or by agreements with any veterinarian or any organized humane society or association, which will undertake to carry out the provisions of this title and maintain and operate a pound, and which will license, take up, impound and dispose of animals. Any such veterinarian or society or association which shall enter into such an agreement shall carry out all of the provisions of this title in the manner herein prescribed. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose or resist any officer or person empowered to enforce the provisions of this title while such officer or person is engaged in the performance of his duties as provided in this title. 
D.  Nothing in this title shall prevent the AC from acting, when he deems it appropriate to do so, under the applicable provisions of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.28.020 - Violation. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for the second violation within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  A violation for failure to obtain the license for a dog required by subsection A of Section 6.06.020 of this title may be dismissed by the court when the person charged for such violation produces a valid dog license procured not more than ten days after the date of the violation. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.28.030 - Wild animals and dangerous reptiles. 
    It is unlawful for any person to possess any wild animal or dangerous reptile within the incorporated area unless such area is zoned for such use and permission has been granted by the city council, or such person possesses the animals described in this section pursuant to current licenses or permits issued by the State Fish and Game Department, and in accordance with Title 14 of the California Administrative Code Sections 40, 670 through 670.7, and 671 through 671.7 with the exception that it shall be unlawful for any person to possess and confine venomous reptiles within the incorporated area of the city. This section does not apply to the California state Fish and Game or United States Fish and Wildlife Service. 
    Any venomous reptile impounded by the animal control officer will be destroyed immediately or turned over to the California Department of Fish and Game at the discretion of the officer enforcing the provisions of the code with notice of a hearing. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
6.28.040 - Public nuisance. 
A.  The possession or maintenance of any animal or the allowing of any animal to be in violation of this title in addition to being a violation of this title is declared to be a public nuisance. The animal control officer and any city peace officers are directed and empowered to summarily abate any such public nuisance independently of any criminal prosecution or the results thereof, by any means reasonably necessary to accomplish said abatement including but not limited to the destruction of the animal involved, or by the imposition of specific reasonable conditions and restrictions for the maintenance of such animal. Failure to comply with such conditions and restrictions is a misdemeanor. The owner of such animal shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred in enforcing compliance with the provisions of this section. The city by and through the animal control officer may also commence and maintain such proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction as are appropriate under the laws and regulations of the state for the abatement and redress of public nuisances. 
B.  At least ten working days prior to the impoundment or abatement or both pursuant to subsection A of this section, the owner or custodian of the subject animal shall be notified by the animal control officer, in writing, of the right to a hearing to determine whether grounds exist for such impoundment or abatement or, where applicable, both. Said notice shall be served by hand-delivery or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. If the owner or custodian requests a hearing prior to impoundment or abatement, no impoundment or abatement shall take place until the conclusion of such hearing, except as provided in subsection C of this section. 
C.  When, in the opinion of the animal control officer, immediate impoundment is necessary for the preservation of an animal or public health, safety or welfare, or if the subject animal has been impounded under any other provision of this title or any law or regulation of the state, the preimpoundment hearing shall be deemed waived; provided, however, that the owner or custodian of the subject animal shall be given notice by the AC, in writing, which would allow five working days to request an abatement hearing. Service of such notice shall be in accordance with the service methods specified in subsection B of this section. Where requested by such owner or custodian, a hearing shall be held within five days of the request therefore, and the subject animal shall not be disposed of prior to the conclusion of the hearing. If, after five working days from the date of service of the notice specified in this subsection, no request for a hearing is received from the owner or custodian of the subject animal, such animal shall be disposed of pursuant to applicable provisions of law. 
D.  All hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted by the AC personally or by a designated employee who shall not have been directly involved in the subject action. Hearings shall be held not more than ten days from the date of receipt of the request for the hearing and shall be conducted in an informal manner consistent with due process of law. A hearing may be continued for a reasonable period of time if the AC deems such continuance to be necessary and proper or if the owner or custodian shows good cause for such continuance. Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the animal control officer shall render, in writing, his findings, decision and order to the owner or custodian of the subject animal; service of such notice shall be in accordance with the service methods specified in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 675 (part), 1991) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 8.04 - FOOD HANDLERS 
Sections: 

8.04.010 - Certain persons prohibited from handling-Health certificate required. 
A.  No person who knows he or she is infected with active communicable tuberculosis shall engage, serve or seek employment in any work, occupation or employment which requires or occasions the handling of any food, liquid or material intended for food or drink for human consumption, or the handling of any dishes or other articles used in the preparation or service of food or drink for human consumption. 
B.  No owner or manager, or the agent of such owner, or person in charge of any establishment or business shall retain in the employ thereof for the performance of such services, for a longer period than three weeks, any person who does not hold and produce a health certificate as required by this chapter, or, for any period whatsoever, any person known or reasonably believed to be infected with active communicable tuberculosis. 
C.  The requirement for a health certificate shall not apply to domestic or household work, or to temporary, occasional or intermittent functions of bona fide religious, charitable or public service organizations, including fraternal organizations, veterans' organizations, established youth organizations, parent-teacher associations and civic or community organizations or groups, the primary purpose of which is the betterment of the cultural, social or economic welfare and environment of the community. 
(Ord. 272 § 1, 1960) 
8.04.020 - Health certificate-Application. 
A.  Each person who is engaged or intends to engage in an occupation or employment for which a health certificate is required by Section 8.04.010, before or within three weeks after he begins such work, shall file, with the county health officer of the county of Riverside, an application for a health certificate, in such form as the county health officer may require. 
B.  Such application must be accompanied by a signed statement of a physician duly authorized to practice in the state, or a report from an organization acceptable to the county health officer, showing that the applicant is free of active communicable tuberculosis. 
C.  Said statement or report shall show that, within six months of the date of application, the applicant has received either: 
1.  A normal chest X-ray which shows the applicant to be free of active communicable tuberculosis, or 
2.  An intradermal Mantoux test, the results of which was negative. 
D.  The statement or report must show that in the Mantoux test no less than five tuberculin units, which is the equivalent of .0001 milligrams intermediate PPD, or one to two thousand solution of old tuberculin freshly prepared, have been used. Induration of six or more millimeters will be construed as a positive skin test. 
E.  All positive skin test reactors to the Mantoux test will be required to obtain a chest X-ray. 
F.  The statement or report shall bear a date not more than six months before the date of application. 
(Ord. 272 § 2, 1960) 
8.04.030 - Health certificate-Issuance-Temporary certificate. 
A.  If the health officer determines from an examination of the statement or report accompanying the application provided for in Section 8.04.020, or from such other evidence as he may require, that an applicant for a health certificate is free from active communicable tuberculosis, he shall immediately issue a health certificate to the applicant which shall state such fact, and which shall bear the name of the applicant and the date of issuance. Such health certificate shall expire one year after the date it was issued. 
B.  Any person whose health, in the opinion of the county health officer, requires further investigation may be issued a temporary health certificate, at the discretion of the county health officer, for a period up to three months, during which time such investigation shall be carried out to determine the presence of active communicable tuberculosis. 
(Ord. 272 § 3, 1960) 
8.04.040 - Health certificate-Display. 
    Each person required by this chapter to have a health certificate shall immediately submit such certificate to the employer of such person. It shall be the duty of every such employer to keep on continuous display at the place of employment the health certificate of all such persons employed or engaged there, and to display therewith a current list of all such persons there engaged or employed, for comparison with the displayed certificates. Upon termination of employment, each unexpired certificate shall be returned to the holder. 
(Ord. 272 § 7, 1960) 
8.04.050 - Health certificate-Duplicate. 
    The county health officer, for good cause, may issue duplicate health certificates. 
(Ord. 272 § 4, 1960) 
8.04.060 - Health certificate-Substitute. 
    A valid and effective certificate of health, indicating that the applicant is free from active communicable tuberculosis, issued by any regularly constituted public health department and bearing a date of issuance, shall be accepted in lieu of the health certificate issued by the county health officer during its period of validity, not to exceed one year from the date of its issuance. 
(Ord. 272 § 5, 1960) 
8.04.070 - Health certificate-Revocation. 
    The county health officer may revoke any health certificate, whether issued by himself or other authority, and require its surrender, whenever he determines that the holder thereof is infected with active communicable tuberculosis. 
(Ord. 272 § 6, 1960) 
8.04.080 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24. 
(Ord. 272 § 8, 1960) 
Chapter 8.08 - SALE AND PREPARATION OF FOOD AND DRINK 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Certificate required. 
    No license shall be issued under the terms of this chapter to any person, firm, corporation or partnership conducting or carrying on any business where food or drink for human consumption is handled, prepared for sale or sold, either from a fixed place of business or from a truck or other vehicle, until said place of business, truck or vehicle has been first inspected by the health officer of the city, and a certificate has been issued to the effect that said premises, truck or vehicle is sanitary or suitable for such purposes. No charge shall be made for such inspection or certificate. 
(Ord. 123 § 1 (part), 1938) 
8.08.020 - Inspection-Correction order. 
    It shall be the duty of the health officer to inspect from time to time the places of business, trucks or vehicles regulated by Section 8.08.010; and, if it is found at any time that any of such places of business, trucks or vehicles are unsanitary or unsuitable for the purpose of handling, preparing or selling food for human consumption, he shall issue an order to the person conducting or carrying on the business in such place, truck or vehicle, specifying the unsanitary condition and requiring him to correct the same within a given time from the service of such order. If the unsanitary condition is not corrected within said period of time, the certificate of the health officer and any business license issued under the terms of this chapter shall be revoked. 
(Ord. 123 § 1 (part) , 1938) 
Chapter 8.12 - LOADING AREAS FOR FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - License requirements. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain any loading area for the handling of melons, fruits or vegetables without having first obtained from the city clerk a license. 
B.  All such licenses shall be prepared and issued by the city clerk upon the payment of the sum of one dollar for the period from January 1st to and including December 31st of any one year. 
C.  Each license so issued shall state, upon the face thereof, the name of the person to whom the license is issued, the location and extent of the loading area, the license fee and the date of expiration of such license. 
(Ord. 189 § 4, 1949) 
8.12.020 - Containers for refuse-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner, agent, lessee or in any other capacity, operating or maintaining any loading area for the loading of melons, fruits or vegetables, to allow or permit refuse parts of melons, fruits or vegetables to accumulate in or upon any loading area and adjacent streets within the corporate limits of the city, other than in covered metal containers. 
(Ord. 189 § 1, 1949) 
8.12.030 - Loading area to be kept clean and clear of refuse. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation affected by this chapter to fail to maintain any such loading area and adjacent streets free from exposed broken parts of melons, fruits, or vegetables. Such loading areas shall be kept clean at all times. 
(Ord. 189 § 2, 1949) 
8.12.040 - Containers for refuse-Emptying requirements. 
    The metal containers required by Section 8.12.020 shall be emptied of all refuse at least once each day by the operators or maintainers of loading areas, and all such refuse shall be deposited at such place or places as directed by a duly authorized agent of the health department of the county of Riverside. 
(Ord. 189 § 3, 1949) 
8.12.050 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment of not more than three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 189 § 5, 1949) 
Chapter 8.16 - UNINSPECTED MEATS 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Sale or exchange prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or the agent or employee of any person, firm or corporation, to sell, barter or exchange for other thing of value within the city, for human consumption, any beef, veal, mutton, pork or meat food product without having such beef, veal, mutton, pork or meat food product first inspected by an agent of the State Department of Agriculture, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 732 Statutes 1921, and bearing the stamp, "California, Inspected and Passed," or the stamp "U.S. Inspected and Passed," or a stamp of an approved municipal meat inspection department. 
(Ord. 61 § 1, 1923) 
8.16.020 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation, or the agent or employee of any such person, firm or corporation, who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than three hundred dollars, or thirty days in the city or county jail, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 61 § 2, 1923) 
Chapter 8.20 - BREAD 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Minimum weight. 
    All loaves of bread made, or procured for the purpose of sale, sold, offered or exposed for sale in the city shall weigh, six hours after baking, not less than eight ounces avoirdupois, except as provided in this chapter, and such weight shall be the standard weight of the small loaf in the city. 
(Ord. 510 § 1, 1978: Ord. 45 § 1, 1920) 
8.20.020 - Weight inspection. 
    All inspections of the weight of bread shall be made on the premises of the maker or manufacturer by averaging the weight of not fewer than twenty loaves of bread of any one unit; and such average weight per loaf shall not be less than the minimum weight fixed by this chapter for such units. 
(Ord. 45 § 2 (part), 1920) 
8.20.030 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to crackers, pretzels, biscuits, buns, scones, rolls or loaves of fancy bread weighing less than a quarter of a pound avoirdupois, or to what is commonly known as stale bread, sold as such, provided that the seller, at the time of sale, shall expressly state to the buyer that the bread so sold is stale bread. 
(Ord. 45 § 3, 1920) 
8.20.040 - Violation deemed misdemeanor. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who makes, or procures for the purpose of sale, sells, offers or exposes for sale within the city any bread in loaves otherwise than as provided for in this chapter, or in conflict with the standard weights of bread when baked as fixed in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 45 § 2 (part), 1920) 
Chapter 8.24 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE 
Sections: 

8.24.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Bulky items" includes objects of furniture, household and industrial appliances, shipping crates and containers, and other large bulky or heavy objects not normally discarded on a regular basis by city residences, or commercial or industrial establishments. 
    "Garbage" includes all waste accumulations of animal, fruit, vegetable or other matter that attends or results from the preparation, use, cooking, processing, dealing in or storage of food, meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables, including the same or parts thereof. 
    "Landscaper" means a licensed gardener, tree trimmer or person(s) engaged in landscape maintenance who has a business license to operate in the city. 
    "Organic solid waste" means any yard type material generated through tree or shrub trimming, grass clipping/mowing or leaf raking. 
    "Refuse" means any and all waste matter and material, and includes garbage and rubbish. 
    "Rubbish" means and includes all refuse other than garbage, including papers, rags, glass, sawdust, sweepings, plaster, pasteboard boxes, metal shavings, boxes, ashes, grass, shrubbery or tree cuttings, tree trimmings or other agricultural debris and all other refuse. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.020 - Contract for collection. 
A.  The city council finds that it is for the best interest of the city to provide for periodic collections of garbage, refuse and rubbish from all places in the city, and that providing for such periodic collections thereof benefits all occupants of places and premises in the city, and that, therefore, all such occupants of places and premises within the city are made liable for the collection charges prescribed by this chapter in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The city has an exclusive right and duty to collect garbage, rubbish and refuse in the city and the city council, at such times and for such periods as in its judgment is in the best interest of the city, shall contract with any person, firm or corporation for the collection of garbage, rubbish and refuse, thereby contracting with it or them as independent contractors for such collection and the term of such contract or contracts. 
C.  The contract shall specify that the remuneration to be paid to such independent contractor or contractors shall be equal to the total amount of the charges and fees collected by the city clerk under Section 8.24.100, plus a percentage to be retained by the city as compensation for its services as collector of such fees and charges. The percentage may be changed from time to time by agreement with the independent contractor or contractors and by resolution of the city council, and the contract shall have therein a clause allowing such change. The city may also withhold from the amounts collected, insurance premiums as provided by this chapter, unless the independent contractor or contractors at all items keeps on file with the city clerk satisfactory proof that all insurance required by the contract has been complied with. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.040 - Frequency of collection. 
    The frequency of collections and removal of refuse from each private residence shall be established by the city council. The collection and removal of refuse from all meat, fish and vegetable markets, restaurants, boardinghouses, hotels, apartments, hospitals, business places and other places shall be made as often as the public works director, or his authorized representative, may order from time to time. Commercial-type bins shall be collected a minimum of once a week. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.045 - Unauthorized use of bins. 
    No person shall tamper with, remove from or deposit, solid waste into any container which has not been provided for his or her own use without the permission of the owner of the container. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.046 - Unauthorized dumping. 
    No person shall dump or cause to be dumped on any private or public land any refuse, waste, household trash, rubbish or debris. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.047 - Disposal of yard waste by landscaper. 
    A licensed gardener, tree trimmer or person(s) engaged in landscape maintenance who has a business license to operate in the city (hereafter referred to as landscaper) on commercial or private property shall be responsible for disposal of any yard type waste in one manner listed below: 
A.  Any yard waste or other organic solid waste collected pursuant hereto must be transported by the landscaper to a facility permitted by the California Integrated Waste Management Board in accordance with all laws and regulations. 
B.  Refuse disposal containers belonging to the property or business owner may be used for disposal of organic solid waste by the landscaper as long as: 
1.  No more than fifty percent of any one container is filled with the organic material; 
2.  Tree trimmings and brush shall be cut into four-foot lengths and tied into bundles of not larger than twenty-four inches in diameter; 
3.  During the season (October-December) when heavy trimming takes place, the landscaper shall request at least one (more if necessary) additional dumps of the refuse disposal bin. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.048 - Recyclable materials. 
    "Recyclable materials" are defined as materials which have an economic value in the secondary materials market. 
    From the time of placement of recyclable materials in a designated collection receptacle or in any container used for recycling provided by the city's authorized agent, said recyclable materials shall be and become the property of the city's authorized agent. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person not authorized by the city to remove or interfere with said containers and/or the recyclable materials used or deposited in said containers. Any and each such removal or interference shall constitute a separate offense punishable as a misdemeanor with, however, a maximum fine of five hundred dollars and a maximum of six months in the county jail. 
(Ord. 788 § 1, 2004: Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.049 - Overflowing trash containers. 
    It shall be the responsibility of any property owner, business or residential, to request additional dumps of their refuse disposal bin or additional refuse disposal bins if the amount of trash generated by that property exceeds the amount of trash which can be contained in the current disposal area. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.050 - Containers-Required. 
    Refuse disposal containers supplied by the city or franchised collector are required for any property within the city from which garbage accumulates or is produced. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.060 - Containers-Specifications. 
    Container specifications shall be as per the franchised collector contract for residential and commercial disposal. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.080 - Containers-Improper, deemed nuisance. 
    The keeping of garbage, refuse and rubbish in containers other than those prescribed in this chapter, or the keeping upon premises of garbage or rubbish which is offensive, obnoxious or unsanitary, is unlawful, shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner provided by law for the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.090 - Vehicle requirements. 
    All vehicles or containers used to transport refuse within the city shall have metal-lined, leakproof bodies, and from the time that the last pickup of refuse is placed upon the vehicle until the vehicle reaches the place of final disposal, the refuse shall be covered by a tarpaulin or other suitable covering, fastened down on the sides. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.100 - Fees-Set by resolution. 
    The monthly rates to be charged for garbage, refuse, and rubbish collection service shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. Said rates may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.110 - Fees-Collection. 
A.  The city clerk is designated as the collector of all garbage, refuse and rubbish fees and charges. 
B.  Each month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, he shall bill every person, firm or corporation producing garbage or trash removed by the refuse collector, by adding the amount of such refuse, garbage and rubbish collection fee or charge to the water bill of such person, firm or corporation, or if said person, firm or corporation for garbage, rubbish and refuse collection alone. 
C.  If the garbage, refuse or rubbish collection fee charged is not paid within the time provided by ordinance for payment of water bills, the water service and garbage and trash collection service to such delinquent customers shall be discontinued. The same penalties and the same rules relating to the payment of water bills and the discontinuance and removal of service shall apply to the collection of refuse, rubbish or garbage collection fees and charges, and those parts or any ordinances of the city relating thereto are incorporated in this section and made a part thereof. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.115 - Fees-Temporary service suspension. 
A.  Upon written request, the city may suspend billing for service for residential property occupied by the owner when the property will be uninhabited for a period of time in excess of sixty days. The written request must state a date to resume billing for service. The city may grant an extension of the suspended billing period upon written request stating a new date to resume billing for service and upon verification by the city that such property is still uninhabited. 
B.  Upon written request from the property owner, or manager, the city may suspend billing for service for rental property if the property will be uninhabited for an extended period. The written request must include a date to resume service billing not to exceed sixty days. A thirty-day extension may be granted upon written request from the responsible party and upon verification by the city that such property is still uninhabited. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.120 - Fees-Liability. 
A.  The council finds that the periodic collection of garbage, refuse and rubbish from all places benefits all occupants of places and premises of the city, therefore all such occupants are made liable for the garbage, rubbish and refuse collection fees prescribed by resolutions of the city council pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  In case of premises containing more than one dwelling unit, which units are served by a single water meter, such fees may be billed to the landlord or owner, who shall collect such fees levied against the occupants of the dwelling units located on the premises, and shall transmit the amounts so collected to the city clerk, said landlord shall be liable to the city for the payment of such fees. 
C.  In the case of premises containing more than one dwelling unit, which units are served by two or more water meters, such fees may be apportioned on the bills by the city clerk between the two or more water meters, such fees may be billed to the landlord or owner, who shall collect such fees levied against the occupants of the dwelling unit located on said premises, and shall transmit the amount so collected to the city clerk. In the event the landlord or owner fails to collect said fees from any such occupant and remit same to the city clerk, said landlord shall be liable to the city for the payment of such fees. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.150 - Placement restrictions. 
A.  No person shall place or deposit any refuse in or upon any public place, street, alley, sidewalk or foot path in the city except in proper containers, for the purpose of collection by the collectors, between the hours of five p.m. the day before and eight p.m. on the days when the city or its authorized agent collects from the particular premises adjacent thereto. 
B.  The director of public works shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules and regulations supplemental to and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter governing the keeping, placement for collection, collection, removal and disposal of refuse, garbage and rubbish. Any such rules and regulations shall become effective upon approval by resolution of the city council. No person having knowledge of or having been advised of such a rule or regulation shall disobey, violate, fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.160 - Burning restrictions. 
    No person shall burn any refuse within the city, except in an approved incinerator or other device for which a permit has been issued by the chief building inspector, and which complies with all applicable permit and other regulations of the air-pollution-control district, provided that any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other laws, and rules and regulations administered by the air-pollution-control district. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.170 - Enforcement. 
    The director of the public works department and his authorized representatives are empowered to inspect and supervise all containers, wagons, cars, trucks or other vehicles used in the retention, collection and disposal of refuse, and to see that the same are kept clean and sanitary. The director may also inspect places where refuse is deposited. It shall be his duty to see that all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the city are fully complied with. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
8.24.180 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 739 § 1 (part), 1997) 
Chapter 8.28 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 

8.28.010 - Designated. 
    As used in this chapter, the materials and conditions in this section are defined as public nuisances: 
A.  Fire Hazard. All dry, dead shrubs, dead trees, combustible refuse and waste, or any material growing upon the streets and sidewalks or upon private property within the city, which by reason of their size, manner of growth and location constitute a fire hazard to any building, improvements, crops or other property, or when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute such a fire hazard, are a public nuisance. 
B.  Refuse and Waste. 
1.  All refuse and waste matter, as defined in subdivision 2 of this subsection, which by reason of its location and character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, detrimentally affects property values in the surrounding neighborhood or community, or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises, is a public nuisance. 
2.  "Refuse and waste matter," for the purpose of this chapter, means unused or discarded matter and material having no substantial market value, and which consists of such matter and material as: rubbish, refuse, debris and matter of any kind, including but not limited to rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal, ferrous or nonferrous, furniture or parts thereof, inoperative vehicles, vehicle bodies and/or parts thereof, trimmings from plants or trees, cans, bottles and barrels. 
C.  Polluted Water. 
1.  Any swimming pool, pond or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted, constitutes a public nuisance. 
2.  "Polluted water" constitutes a public nuisance and, for the purpose of this chapter, means water contained in a swimming pool, pond or other body of water, which includes but is not limited to bacterial growth, including algae, remains of insects, remains of deceased animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse, debris, papers and any other foreign matter or material which because of its nature or location constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition. 
D.  Public Burning. The intentional outdoor burning of any material, structure, matter or thing is a public nuisance unless conducted by the fire department. 
E.  Zoning Ordinance Violations. Any violation of the zoning ordinance of the city is a public nuisance. 
F.  Building Code Violations. Any violation of the building code, as amended, is a public nuisance. 
G.  Uniform Housing Code Violations. Any violation of the Uniform Housing Code, as amended, is a public nuisance. 
H.  Sign Ordinance Violations. Any sign in violation of the sign ordinance, as amended, is a public nuisance. 
I.  Uniform fire Code Violations. Any violation of the Uniform Fire Code, as amended, is a public nuisance. 
J.  Weeds and Debris. "Weeds," as used in this chapter, means all weeds or plant materials growing upon streets, sidewalks, or private property which meets one of the following: 
1.  Bears seeds of a winged or downy nature; 
2.  Sagebrush, chaparral, and any other brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent properties; 
3.  Weeds and grasses allowed to grow unkempt or over eight inches in height; 
4.  Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous; 
5.  Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other flammable material which endangers the public health or safety by creating a fire hazard or vermin harborage. 
K.  Graffiti. The unauthorized inscribing, spraying or markings of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures and places within the city is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 676 § 1, 1991; Ord. 616 § 1, 1985; Ord. 487 § 1, 1977) 
8.28.020 - Enforcement authority. 
    Any officer or employee of the city shall have the right to enter upon property for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
(Ord. 487 § 2, 1977) 
8.28.030 - Notice to abate-Required. 
    Upon determination that a public nuisance exists, as defined in Section 8.28.010, on any lot or premises, or upon any sidewalk, parking or street adjacent to such lot or premises, an authorized employee of the city shall cause a notice to be issued to the proper person or persons to abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. 487 § 3, 1977) 
8.28.040 - Notice to abate-Form and contents. 
    The notice required by Section 8.28.030 shall be headed: "Notice of Public Nuisance," in legible characters, direct the abatement of the nuisance, referring to this chapter for particulars. Notices may be served by posting the property or by other methods specified in Section 8.28.050. If notice is given by a means other than posting of the property then such notice shall contain a description of the property in general terms, reasonably identifying the site and the location of the nuisance. 
(Ord. 616 § 2, 1985: Ord. 487 § 4, 1977) 
8.28.050 - Notice to abate-Service. 
    The notice required by Section 8.28.040 may be served in any of the following methods: 
A.  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; 
B.  By posting at a conspicuous place on the land or premises or the abutting public right-of-way; 
C.  By sending a copy of such notice by certified mail to the owner of the property as the owner may appear upon the last assessment roll in the county assessor's office of Riverside County; 
D.  If the council finds that the problem is of a seasonal or recurrent nature and the property owner has been duly noticed as described in subsections A, B, or C above within the last eighteen months, then notice can be made by postcard as described in Health and Safety Code Section 14900.6. 
(Ord. 616 § 3, 1985: Ord. 487 § 5, 1977) 
8.28.060 - Appeal and hearing. 
    Within ten days from the date of posting or receipt of notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling the property may appeal to the city manager. Such appeal shall be in writing and accompanied by such fee as may be set by resolution of the city council. If the appellant disagrees with the determination of the city manager he may file a written appeal to the city council with the city clerk. Such appeal from the city manager's determination must be made within ten days from the date of the determination and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be required by council resolution. 
(Ord. 616 § 4, 1985: Ord. 487 § 6, 1977) 
8.28.070 - Abatement-By owner. 
    Any nuisance found by the city council to be such under this chapter shall be abated by the owner, his agent or the occupier of the premises forthwith, or as soon thereafter as practicable, after the order to abate becomes final, but in no case more than ten days after said final order. 
(Ord. 487 § 7, 1977) 
8.28.080 - Abatement-By city. 
    If the owner fails or neglects to remove or otherwise take action to abate a nuisance, as defined in Section 8.28.010, within the time specified in Section 8.28.070, the city, through the city employees authorized, shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may be done by city crews or by private contractor. If the city council, by resolution, declares that the elimination of specific items of public nuisance is of benefit to all citizens of the city and appropriates or sets aside funds for same, the city may, upon receiving written permission of the land owner or his agent, abate fully or participate in the abatement of those so specified public nuisances. A report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost of abating the nuisance on each separate property shall be filed with the city council. 
(Ord. 676 § 2, 1991: Ord. 487 § 8, 1977) 
8.28.084 - Seasonal and recurrent nuisances. 
    If a property continues to accumulate debris or weeds on a biennial basis the council may declare that it has a seasonal and recurrent problem. If the property has been duly noticed in the preceding eighteen months then a postcard notification shall be deemed to be sufficient notice prior to commencement of city clean-up procedures under Section 8.28.080. 
(Ord. 616 § 5, 1985) 
8.28.090 - Assessment of costs-Hearing-Notice. 
    The city clerk shall set the report and account required by Section 8.28.080 for hearing by the city council at the first regular meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after the date of filing, and shall post a copy of the report and account, and notice of the time and place of hearing, in a conspicuous place in or near the entrance of the city hall. The owner who is affected by such report and account, or the person occupying or controlling such lot or premises, shall be sent a notice advising him of the date, time and place of the hearing and the notice shall be served as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 487 § 9, 1977) 
8.28.100 - Assessment of costs-Hearing-Procedure. 
    The city council shall consider the report and account provided for in Section 8.28.070 at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by any interested parties. Any owner of land or person interested therein may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall approve the report and account, either as submitted or as modified or corrected. The amounts so approved shall be liens upon the respective lots or premises. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing the amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll, before the determination that a public nuisance exists. 
(Ord. 487 § 10, 1977) 
8.28.110 - Assessment of costs-Recording of resolution. 
    The city clerk shall prepare and file with the county auditor of the county of Riverside a certified copy of the resolution of the city council provided for in Section 8.28.100. 
(Ord. 487 § 11, 1977) 
8.28.120 - Assessment of costs-Payment prior to hearing. 
    The finance department of the city may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the city council hearing, as called for in Section 8.28.090. 
(Ord. 487 § 12, 1977) 
8.28.130 - Assessment of costs-Collection. 
    The provisions of Sections 38773.5 and 39580 to 39585, inclusive, of the Government Code, as they exist and as they may be subsequently amended, are incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. The county auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and, if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. 487 § 13, 1977) 
8.28.140 - Assessment of costs-Right of city to bring legal action. 
    In addition to the remedies set forth in Sections 8.28.090 through 8.28.130, the city council is authorized to bring a legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of any monies expended by it in order to abate a nuisance as set forth in this chapter. Before the bringing of the action, the notice and procedure, as contained in Sections 8.28.030 through 8.28.120, shall be complied with and the amount set forth in the report as contained in Section 8.28.080 shall be deemed a debt owing by the owner of the property to the city. In the event that legal action is brought by the city against the property owner, reasonable attorney's fees and costs shall constitute a debt owing by the property owner to the city. After the action is brought and the service of the summons and complaint has been made upon the property owner and a judgment has been obtained by the city against the property owner, the city may enforce the judgment by execution and sale, in accordance with the procedure set forth by law for the enforcement of judgments. The judgments shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year from the time that the report is filed, as set forth in Section 8.28.120, and shall include reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit. The remedy as set forth in this section shall be nonexclusive and the city may pursue any or all of the remedies as contained in this chapter for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 487 § 15, 1977) 
8.28.150 - Penalty for violation. 
    The owner, occupant, or agent of any lot or premises within the city who permits or allows the existence of a public nuisance, as defined in Section 8.28.010, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 487 § 14, 1977) 
Chapter 8.32 - AIRBORNE PARTICLES 
Sections: 

8.32.010 - Maintenance of property so as to spread airborne particles. 
    The maintenance of any real or personal property, whether improved or unimproved, in such a manner that dust, sand, soil or any other foreign material is caused to be blown or otherwise placed into the air or atmosphere, or spread or drift upon property or premises of the city or any other person, firm or corporation, in such a manner as to cause perceptible injury to property, or to so pollute the air or atmosphere as to sensibly impair enjoyment thereof, or to be a detriment to the public health or safety or the property of such others shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. 442 § 1, 1973) 
8.32.020 - Parking so as to create certain nuisances. 
    Parking vehicles on property in the city which is zoned C-1, C-2, M-1 and M-2 on bare, unimproved, untreated or nonsurfaced ground, in such a manner as to cause the nuisances defined in Section 8.32.010, shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. 442 § 2, 1973) 
8.32.030 - Permit. 
    The building inspector of the city is authorized to issue permits, without charge, defining requirements, in individual cases to qualify any area of ground, as defined in Section 8.32.020, as qualified in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 442 § 3, 1973) 
8.32.040 - Leveling or surfacing of roads. 
    The building inspector of the city is delegated and shall have the authority to determine whether such areas of ground referred to in Section 8.32.020 require leveling, or other grading, to a gradient that will minimize the possibility of any nuisance as defined in this chapter. The building inspector of the city shall have the authority to require that any area of ground, as defined in this chapter, shall be gravelled or oil-impregnated, or surfaced with oil-impregnated road material, hard-surface asphalt or concrete, so that the placement thereof upon such areas shall prevent nuisances as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 442 § 4, 1973) 
8.32.050 - Barricades. 
    In lieu of the compliance with the provisions of this chapter relating to nuisance abatement, the owner of any such areas as defined in Section 8.32.020 shall have the right to barricade any such area by obtaining a permit, without charge, from the building inspector of the city, specifying in detail the area, and using barricades of a type approved by the building inspector to prevent nuisances as proscribed herein. 
(Ord. 442 § 5, 1973) 
8.32.060 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, whether acting for himself, or as the agent or servant of any person, firm, or corporation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars. Each day that any act continues in violation of any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 442 § 7, 1973) 
Chapter 8.34 - MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION 
Sections: 

8.34.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
A.  "City" means city of Blythe. 
B.  "Mobile source air pollution reduction program or project" means any program or project which it determines will be consistent with the intent to reduce mobile source emissions as required by Air Quality Management Plan and the Clean Air Act of 1988. 
(Ord. 682 § 1 (part), 1991) 
8.34.020 - South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)-Imposition of the vehicle registration fees. 
    The city declares its support of the South Coast Air Quality Management District's imposition of the vehicle registration fee as required by Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive its pro rate share of fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 682 § 1 (part), 1991) 
8.34.030 - Special trust fund. 
    A special trust fund entitled "mobile source reduction fees" shall be established. All revenues received shall be deposited to the special trust fund and funds shall be expended exclusively for mobile source emission reduction programs or projects implemented by the city in its effort to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. Said funds will be subject to audit each two years by an auditor selected by SCAQMD. 
(Ord. 682 § 1 (part), 1991) 
8.34.040 - Separation from SCAQMD-Conditions. 
    Should the city be separated from the SCAQMD, the council hereby declares its intent to continue to receive fees from any similar air quality management district for the purposes stated in the ordinance codified in this chapter or this chapter shall become null and void. 
(Ord. 682 § 1 (part), 1991) 
8.34.050 - Severability. 
    Should any sentence, section clause, part or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. 682 § 1 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 8.36 - SEWAGE SLUDGE 
Sections: 

8.36.010 - Definition. 
    "Sludge" means the accumulated matter produced in the treatment of waste water. This includes liquid, semi-liquid and solid material that has been mechanically dewatered or air dried. 
(Ord. 684 § 1 (part), 1991) 
8.36.020 - Application of sludge prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or the agent or employee of any person, firm or corporation, to apply, use, place, maintain, treat or store sludge, for any purpose whatsoever anywhere within the city except at a sewage or wastewater treatment facility. 
(Ord. 684 § 1 (part), 1991) 
8.36.030 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation, or the agent or employee of any such person, firm or corporation, who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than three hundred dollars, or thirty days in the city or county jail, or both such a fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 684 § 1 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 8.37 - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL AND SPA SAFETY 
Sections: 

8.37.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    Riverside County, California Ordinance 465.6 adopted by the board of supervisors on July 30, 1996, is adopted by reference, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "Riverside County Ordinance 465.6," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 736 § 1, 1997) 
Chapter 8.38 - SALE OF FIREWORKS 
Sections: 

8.38.010 - Rules and regulations effected. 
    In addition to the rules, regulations and requirements relative to the manufacture, possession, transportation, display, sale, storage, use or discharge of "Dangerous Fireworks and Safe and Sane Fireworks" set forth or referred to in Part 2 of Division 11 of the Health and Safety Code of the state (California Health and Safety Code Sections 12500, et seq.) as same now exist or may hereafter be amended, the following rules, regulations and requirements are promulgated and established. The definitions contained in Part 2 of Division 11 of the Health and Safety Code shall be a part of this chapter and are incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.020 - Fraternal organization defined. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, "fraternal organization" means any bona fide nonprofit club, society or association, organized or incorporated for civic, community service, benevolent, patriotic or charitable purposes, and having obtained a nonprofit status with either the California Franchise Tax Board or the Internal Revenue Service and may have its principal place of business in the United States of America. 
B.  Such "fraternal organization" shall have "an established local Blythe membership." "Local Blythe membership," as used in this section, means local membership consisting of juvenile or adult persons who are either: 
1.  Blythe residents; or 
2.  Employed in Blythe; or 
3.  Owners or operators of a business or other establishment located in Blythe. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.030 - Licenses for sale of safe and sane fireworks. 
    Licenses for the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall be issued only to fraternal organizations, and such fireworks shall be sold only at the outdoor sales stands, as more specifically set forth hereinafter. Nothing contained herein shall limit or preclude such fraternal organization from employing persons or otherwise contracting with persons to carry out the rights and powers provided them under their license as described herein and subject to the requirements of this chapter. No more than four such licenses shall be issued and outstanding at any time. All applications for such licenses shall be filed with the city clerk on or before June 15th of each year, containing a detailed statement of each and every kind of fireworks proposed to be sold under the license, the location of the proposed outdoor sales stand, the type of construction of the stand, the dates and hours that the applicant proposes the stand be open, the plans for staffing the stand during those days and hours, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of employees and/or contractors involved, a description of the youth activities to be provided, a signed agreement to provide the city with a full accounting of all funds spent on youth activities and such other information as the city manager shall reasonably require in order to assist the city council in evaluating the application. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.040 - Utilization of profits. 
A.  Sales permit shall be granted only to fraternal organizations which agree that the net profit from the sales shall be utilized only for youth activities in accordance with the provisions and requirements shall apply: 
1.  At least seventy-five percent of the youth participation benefitting from such activities shall be residents of the city of Blythe. 
2.  Each permit application shall contain a detailed statement of the youth activities for which the applicant proposes to use such net profits and the manner of such use. 
3.  No part of the net profits shall be disbursed to other governmental agencies or entities as a gift or contribution. 
4.  Except for organizations whose primary purpose is youth service, such net profit shall be expended for new programs or the expansion of existing programs, and shall not be used as replacement income for funds previously raised by the organization through other methods of fund raising. An organization shall be deemed to have a primary purpose of youth service if ninety percent or more of its budget is spent for youth service activities. 
B.  The fraternal organizations granted licenses shall provide the City at the end of each calendar year a statement indicating what moneys were received and how such funds were spent. The fraternal organization shall further provide the city with an agreement to provide such financial information as the city might reasonable deem necessary to indicate what monies were received and how such money was spent pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.050 - Application. 
    Each permit application shall be accompanied by an application fee of ten dollars, which shall not be refundable. The application shall contain, in addition to all other information required by this chapter, the following information: 
A.  A statement of the number and residency of the members of the applicant organization, which statement shall be certified as to accuracy by an officer of the applicant organization; 
B.  A statement of the number of youth to be served by the applicant and the residency of such youth; 
C.  A statement certifying that the applicant organization agrees to all terms and conditions of the license and this chapter. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.060 - Procedure for issuing outdoor stand permit. 
A.  Upon receipt of any application for any permit for the sale of fireworks from any outdoor stand, the city clerk shall promptly refer the application to the city manager for his consideration, report and recommendations thereon. The city manager shall cause the application to be checked for compliance with applicable law and other provisions of this code. Such report, when ready, shall be filed with the city clerk for submission to the city council. 
B.  Upon considering any such application, the city council may either grant or deny the application or may take it under further advisement or order further reference thereof to any department of the city for further port, in its discretion. 
C.  Applicant organizations shall file a statement agreeing that all profits will be utilized in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.38.040, and, if such organization has previously received a firework permit, that all previous receipts have been so expended. 
D.  No applicant for any such outdoor stand or any other person, firm or corporation shall commence to erect or make any preparation to erect, whether by deposit of material or otherwise, any such outdoor stand unless and until: 
1.  The council has finally approved the application and authorized the issuance of permit therefor, as herein required; 
2.  The authorized permittee has obtained a temporary building permit from the building department of the city for the erection of such temporary outdoor stand; and 
3.  Has obtained a temporary permit for the installation by a duly licensed electrical contractor of any electrical installations in, at or about such outdoor stand; provided, however, that if the permittee does not, and certifies to the building inspector in writing that any such outdoor stand will not be open for business after one-half hour after sunset of any day, such electrical permit shall not be required. 
E.  No such outdoor stand, or any part thereof, shall be located at any point nearer than one hundred fifty feet measured in a straight line from the nearest line of any lot or parcel of land upon which any gasoline or oil station is located. In all cases, all such outdoor stands shall be located in such places that are least likely to catch fire or communicate fire to adjacent or nearby properties, and at least five feet inside the property line, and all such location shall be subject to the approval of the city's fire chief or his authorized representative. It shall be the duty of each such permittee and of all persons engaged in or about the storage or sale of fireworks at any such outdoor stand to comply with the reasonable orders and directions of the city's fire chief or his authorized representative, and to remove from the immediate vicinity of any such outdoor stand any and all combustible materials and growths and weeds, grass or other plantings which are apt to become ignited in case of fire. 
F.  No minor under the age of eighteen years shall be permitted to be in charge of or to make sales of or to otherwise be concerned with the handling of fireworks in or from any such stand; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the sale to minors in the ordinary course of business of such fireworks from such stands. 
G.  All displays and stocks of fireworks in or at any such stand shall be stored and displayed in such manner as to be difficult of access to or by the general public, and each such stand shall be equipped with at least a two and one-half gallon soda and acid type fire extinguisher in good and immediate use, for each fifteen feet of counter space or fraction (over three feet) thereof, and such other first aid fire fighting equipment as required by the city's fire chief. 
H.  Each such stand and all materials used in or about the same shall be completely removed before midnight of the twelfth of July of the year in which same was erected, and the site restored as nearly as reasonably possible to the same condition as that in which it existed immediately prior to the erection of such stand. It shall be the duty of the permittee to make such removal within that time. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.070 - Days when fireworks may be discharged. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge any fireworks in any area of the city on any days except the 3rd, 4th and 5th of July of each year unless authorized in writing by the city council. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.080 - Obligation of sellers of fireworks. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each recipient of a permit under this chapter to comply with the following requirements: 
A.  There shall be included with each sale of fireworks a "flyer" notifying the purchaser of the restriction established by Section 8.38.070. The city shall be furnished with a copy of the flyer, in advance, which shall be reproduced by and at the expense of the permittee. 
B.  Large visible posters shall be erected at the point of sale of the fireworks to notify purchasers of the restriction established by Section 8.38.070. The city shall provide the posters, which shall be returned to the city after use. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.085 - Public fireworks displays. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city council, in its discretion, may grant permits for public displays of fireworks under the supervision of the city's fire chief. Applications for such permits shall be filed with the city clerk's office and the fire chief not less than ten days before such public display and shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of the items of such proposed displayed. 
B.  If such permit is granted, no items shall be displayed except as are contained in such statement and the city council may in granting such permit eliminate from the statement such items as it deems hazardous and it is unlawful for the grantee of such permit to exhibit or display such eliminated items. Such public display shall be under the supervision of the city's fire chief and/or such persons as he shall designate and authorize. The fee for such permit shall be one hundred dollars for each display; provided, however, that the city council may waive or reduce such fee, in its discretion, where the application is made by a fraternal organization or service club. Such display and/or displays shall be held at such place and time as designated in the permit. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.090 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations herein above set forth and adopted, or who fails or refuses to perform any duty prescribed herein to be performed by him is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
8.38.100 - Provisions supplementary. 
    The provisions of this chapter are supplementary to the provisions of the Fire Code of the County of Riverside. In case of direct conflict between the provisions of the Fire Code of the county, and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Except with respect to such direct conflict, the provisions of the Fire Code of the Riverside County shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 757 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 8.40 - FOOD HANDLERS CERTIFICATION 
Sections: 

8.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prevent the spread of infectious disease and to attain a uniform standard by requiring all food handlers in the county to demonstrate through process of examination that they possess an adequate knowledge of the sanitary principles and practices within the food industry. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    "Food worker's certificate" means a statement issued by the health officer certifying that a person is free from active communicable tuberculosis in a manner acceptable to the health officer, and has satisfactorily demonstrated his or her competency in food sanitation principles and practices. 
    "Food worker's manual" means the manual prepared and distributed to food handlers by the health officer that describes acceptable procedures and sanitary practices as it pertains to the retail food service industry. 
    "Health officer" means the health officer of the county, or his or her designated representative. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.030 - Food worker's certificate required. 
    No person shall engage or serve in any work, occupation or employment which requires or occasions the handling of any food, liquid or material intended for food or drink for human consumption, who does not hold or produce a food worker's certificate as required by this chapter within fourteen days after engaging or serving in such work, occupation or employment, and no owner, manager or agent of such owner, or person in charge of any establishment or business shall retain in the employment thereof for the performance of such services, any person who does not hold and produce a food worker's certificate as required by this chapter within fourteen days after such person engages or serves in such employment. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.040 - Exemption. 
    Any person who engages or serves or seeks employment relating to domestic or household work or to temporary, occasional or intermittent functions of bona fide religious, charitable or public service organizations, including fraternal organizations, veterans' organizations, established youth organizations, parent-teacher associations, or students in public or private schools under the age of sixteen engaged in school food operations, and civil or community organizations or groups, the primary purpose of which is the betterment of the cultural, social or economic welfare and environment of the community, shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 8.40.030. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.050 - Application for food worker's certificate. 
    Any person who is engaged or intends to engage in an occupation or employment for which a food worker's certificate is required by Section 8.40.030 shall file with the health officer an application for such certificate or a renewal thereof in such form as the health officer may require, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of seventeen dollars, provided, however, students sixteen years of age or older engaged in school food operations are exempted from such fee. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.060 - Qualification for food worker's certificate. 
    To qualify for the issuance or renewal of a food worker's certificate required by Section 8.40.030, the applicant shall have demonstrated his or her knowledge or acceptable practices in the sanitary preparation, service, storage, distribution and sale of food and beverages and the proper sanitation of equipment and facilities. Such demonstration of knowledge shall be by satisfactorily passing an examination conducted by the health officer on such subjects, based on the practices and procedures set forth in the food worker's manual. A copy of the latest edition of the manual shall be made available by the health officer to those persons applying for a food worker's certificate or renewal thereof. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.070 - Issuance of food worker's certificate. 
    When qualified pursuant to Section 8.40.060, the applicant shall be issued a food worker's certificate containing the following information: certificate number, name, home address, expiration date and attesting signature. Such certificate shall expire two years after the date it was issued. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.080 - Duplicate food worker's certificate. 
    A duplicate food worker's certificate, for good cause, may be issued by the health officer for a fee of three dollars. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.090 - Revocation of food worker's certificate. 
    The food worker's certificate may be revoked by the health officer upon evidence indicating repeated or continuing violations of accepted practices and procedures in the preparation, service, storage, distribution, or sale of food or beverages, or upon evidence indicating falsification of information required for issuance of such certificate. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.100 - Appeal. 
    Any person who has an application for a food worker's certificate denied by the health officer, or who has had such a certificate revoked by the health officer, may appeal such denial or revocation by filing with the city clerk within ten days after the date of such denial or revocation, a written notice of appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial or revocation is not proper. The clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant. 
    Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend or reverse the decision or take such other action as it deems appropriate. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.110 - Display of food worker's certificate. 
    Any person required to have a food worker's certificate shall immediately submit such certificate to his or her employer. It shall be the duty of every such employer to keep on continuous display at the place of employment the food worker's certificates of all such persons employed or engaged therein, and to display therewith a current list of all such persons therein engaged or employed for comparison with such certificates. Upon termination of employment, such unexpired certificate shall be returned to the holder. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.40.120 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by: 
A.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the second violation within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 814 § 1 (part), 2006) 
Chapter 8.42 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES 
Sections: 

8.42.010 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the inspection and enforcement of this chapter: 
    "Enforcement officer" means the Riverside County director of the department of environmental health services and his or her duly authorized environmental health specialists. 
    "Food establishment" means food establishment as defined in the California Uniform Retail Facilities Law, Section 113780 of the California Health and Safety Code. These are commonly referred to as restaurants, markets, delis or similar operations. 
    "Food facilities" means a food facility as defined in Section 113785 of the California Health and Safety Code. These are commonly referred to as wholesale food facilities, vehicles, vending machines, satellite food distribution facilities, open-air barbecues, certified farmers markets, stationary food preparation units and mobile food preparation units. This definition also includes commercial food establishments. 
    "Food preparation" means food preparation as defined in Section 113790 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
    "Official inspection form" means the form provided by the Riverside County department of environmental health services. 
(Ord. 815 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.42.020 - Grading. 
A.  All food establishments and food facilities shall be inspected and graded uniformly using an official inspection form. The grade of each food establishment shall be determined by the enforcement officer using the scoring method provided on the official inspection form. The grade of each food establishment shall be evidenced by the posting of a grade card bearing the letter "A," "B," or "C." 
1.  The letter "A" shall indicate a score of ninety percent or higher, and indicates that the food establishment passed the inspection by meeting those minimum health standards as set forth by the state of California in the California Retail Food Facilities Law, California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 4, Sections 113700, et seq., and interpreted by the enforcement officer. Grade "A" cards shall be printed in blue on high-impact white styrene plastic. 
2.  The letter "B" shall indicate a score of less than ninety percent but not less than eighty percent and indicates that the food establishment has not passed the inspection and does not meet minimum health standards. Grade "B" cards shall be printed in green on high-impact styrene plastic. 
3.  The letter "C" shall indicate a score of less than eighty percent, and indicates that the food establishment has failed the inspection and has conditions existing which may pose a potential or actual threat to public health and safety. The facility may also be ordered closed, with its permit being suspended or revoked by the enforcement officer. Grade "C" cards shall be printed in red on high-impact white styrene plastic. 
B.  The grade card shall be provided by the enforcement officer and shall be nine inches by eleven inches in size. The grade letter shall not be more than five inches in height. 
C.  The grade card shall be posted in a conspicuous place selected by the enforcement officer, at or near each entrance to the food establishment used by its patrons, and shall be removed only by the enforcement officer. 
D.  It is unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the grade card is in place as posted by the enforcement officer. 
E.  Private schools and public schools shall not be required to post a grade card. 
F.  Food facilities and food establishments which are not engaged in food preparation shall not be required to post a grade card. 
(Ord. 815 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.42.030 - Inspection. 
A.  The enforcement officer shall inspect each food facility and food establishment at regular intervals. All food establishments and food facilities shall comply with those requirements set forth in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, as amended and appearing in California Health and Safety Code Sections 113700 et seq. 
B.  A signed copy of the official inspection form shall be delivered to the owner, operator or person in charge of the food establishment or food facility who shall sign in receipt thereof. 
C.  Any food establishment or facility that has received a "B" or "C" shall receive a reinspection within five working days of the initial inspection, or as otherwise arranged with the facility operator, to assure that the violations have been corrected. The grade "B" or "C" shall remain posted at the food establishment, indicating to the public that the particular food establishment failed to maintain minimum health standards during its most recent routine inspection performed by the department of environmental health services. 
D.  If, after a reinspection of the food establishment or facility, the score is not ninety percent or higher, any or all of the following legal actions may ensue: 
1.  Administrative hearing offered for the suspension or revocation of the license pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 113950, et seq.; 
2.  Issuance of a citation; and 
3.  Initiation of civil, criminal or other legal proceedings. 
E.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the enforcement officer may order immediate closure of a facility or establishment pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 113960 whenever the officer reasonably believes the facility or establishment to present an immediate danger to the public health or safety. 
F.  Any reinspections following legal actions, other than one reinspection following an initial administrative hearing, will result in the operator being charged an hourly on-site fee. 
(Ord. 815 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.42.040 - Permits. 
    No person shall operate a food establishment or facility without holding a valid permit issued by the Riverside County department of environmental health services. Application for a permit shall be made to the department of environmental health services upon a form provided by the department and shall be accompanied by a fee as required by Riverside County ordinance. A permit shall be valid for not more than one year. 
(Ord. 815 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.42.050 - Criminal penalties. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. Such individual shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during which any violation of this chapter is committed or allowed to exist. 
B.  Any individual convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be: 
1.  Guilty of an infraction and punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars, but not to exceed one hundred dollars for the first offense; 
2.  Guilty of an infraction and punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars, but not to exceed two hundred dollars for the second offense; 
3.  The third and any subsequent offense shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars, but not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or up to six months in the county jail, or both. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a first or second offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. 
D.  Payment of any penalty herein shall not relieve an individual from the responsibility of correcting the violations as noted on the official inspection report form. 
(Ord. 815 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.42.060 - Public nuisance declaration. 
    In addition, any violation of this chapter is deemed to be a public health nuisance and may be abated by the enforcement officer, irrespective of any other remedy provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 815 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.42.070 - Civil penalties. 
    Any person who wilfully violates any provision of this chapter or any other rules or regulations adopted by the Riverside County department of environmental health services pursuant to this chapter, in addition to any criminal penalties, shall be liable for a civil penalty of between fifty dollars and two hundred fifty dollars for each day of violation. The enforcement agency shall be authorized to file and maintain an action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to collect any such civil penalty arising under this section. 
(Ord. 815 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.42.080 - Right of inspection. 
    Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 113925, the enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect any food facility or establishment, or any facility suspected of being a food establishment or facility, at any reasonable time. If inspection is refused, the permit may be suspended or revoked, and/or the owner or operator shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. 815 § 1 (part), 2006) 
Chapter 8.44 - REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ABANDONED PROPERTIES 
Sections: 

8.44.010 - Purpose and scope. 
    It is the purpose and intent of the Blythe city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish an abandoned or vacant property registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods and commercial areas from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned and vacated properties. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
8.44.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Abandoned" means a property that is vacant and is: (1) under a current notice of default; (2) under a current notice of trustee's sale; (3) pending a tax assessor's lien sale; (4) any property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; and (5) any property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
B.  "Accessible property" means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached window, gate, fence, wall, etc. 
C.  "Accessible structure" means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
D.  "Beneficiary" means a lender or holder of a note secured by a deed of trust. 
E.  "Beneficiary/trustee" means both the beneficiary and the trustee. When any act is required of the beneficiary/trustee by this chapter, both are responsible for performing such act and may be charged with a violation of this code for failure to act. However, it is sufficient if it is accomplished by either one. If information is required to be provided, then both must provide such information. 
F.  "Deed of trust" means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan and often used in California instead of a mortgage. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deed of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc. 
G.  "Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale" means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust. 
H.  "Distressed" means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale and/or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
I.  "Evidence of vacancy" means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant and not occupied by authorized persons. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation, and statements by neighbors, passerby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
J.  "Local" means within forty-road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
K.  "Notice of default" means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale. 
L.  "Out of area" means in excess of forty-road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
M.  "Responsible person" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having legal or equitable title to or any interest in any real property and includes trustees and beneficiaries of a deed of trust on the property and any other lien holder on the property. 
N.  "Owner of record" means the person having recorded title to the property at any given point in time the record is provided by the Riverside County recorder's office. 
O.  "Property" means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
P.  "Securing" means such measures as may be directed by the director of planning/designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of door, window and/or other openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current HUD securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required. 
Q.  "Trustee" means the person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a property. 
R.  "Trustor" means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
S.  "Vacant" means a building/structure that is not occupied by authorized persons. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
8.44.030 - Registration. 
    Any beneficiary/trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the city of Blythe, shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust, upon default by the trustor, prior to recording a notice of default with the Riverside County recorder's office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the planning director on forms provided by the city. 
A.  If the property is occupied but remains in default it shall be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee, or an agent/designee of the beneficiary/trustee, monthly until: (1) the trustor or another party remedies the default; (2) the foreclosure is completed and ownership is transferred to a new owner who is not the former beneficiary or trustee; or (3) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten days of that inspection, register the property with the planning director on forms provided by the city. 
B.  The beneficiary/trustee shall also register any property, which becomes vacant after a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any property, which becomes vacant after being transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
C.  Such registration shall contain the following information for both the beneficiary and the trustee: name (corporation or individual); the street/office address (not a P.O. box) and if different, the mailing address; a direct contact name and phone number for the person handling the deed of trust and/or foreclosure; and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary or trustee, the local property manager responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. 
D.  The annual registration fee established by city council resolution, shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1st of each year and must be received no later than January 31st of the year due. 
E.  Persons required to register properties pursuant to this chapter shall keep such properties registered and all required information updated and comply with all the security and maintenance requirement of this chapter for the entire time such properties remain vacant. When such properties become occupied or title is transferred, the beneficiary/trustee or prior responsible person shall notify the planning director in writing. 
F.  Any person, firm or corporation required to register a property pursuant to this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
8.44.040 - Inspection and registration of previously abandoned properties. 
    Any beneficiary/trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the city of Blythe, which property is, on the effective date of this chapter: (1) under a current notice of default; (2) under a current notice of trustee's sale; (3) pending a tax assessor's lien sale; (4) that has been subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; and (5) which was transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale, shall, on or before January 1, 2009, perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the planning director on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
8.44.050 - Maintenance requirements. 
    Responsible persons, including beneficiaries/trustees shall maintain properties subject to inspection and/or registration pursuant to this chapter, as required by Chapter 8.36 and any other applicable provisions of federal, state or local law, and shall keep such properties free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, or printed material and shall take any other action necessary to prevent giving the appearance that the property is abandoned, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  The property shall be kept free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
B.  Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with city requirements and neighborhood standards. 
C.  Permitted landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. 
D.  Permitted landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
E.  Required maintenance includes but is not limited to regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
F.  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. In either case properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the state of California and city of Blythe. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
8.44.060 - Security requirements. 
    Responsible persons, including beneficiaries/trustees shall secure properties subject to inspection and/or registration pursuant to this chapter, in a manner to prevent access by unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the following: the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows securing means the re-glazing or boarding of the window. Responsible persons shall do the following: 
A.  If the responsible person is a corporation and/or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property manager shall be hired to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
B.  The property shall be posted with name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the local property manager. The posting shall be no less than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five feet and shall contain along with the name and twenty-four-hour contact number the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL." The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with weather resistant materials. 
C.  The responsible person or local property manager shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
8.44.070 - Additional authority. 
    In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapters 8.24, 8.28, 10.12 and 17.82 of this code, the director of planning/designee shall have the authority to require the responsible person of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to securing any/all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard, disconnecting utilities and removing the meter boxes, or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property and prevent unauthorized entry. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
8.44.080 - Enforcement. 
    Violations of this chapter may be enforced in any combination as allowed in Chapters 8.24, 8.28, 10.12 and 17.82 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
8.44.090 - Violation and penalty. 
    Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any portion of this section shall be subject to prosecution and/or administrative enforcement as provided in Titles 8, 10 and 17 of this code and subject to the penalties set forth therein. It shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision or requirement of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by any person, and such person shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 
Chapter 9.24 - GAMBLING 
Sections: 

9.24.010 - Playing certain games prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deal, play, carry on or open, or cause to be opened, or to conduct, either as owner, employee or otherwise, whether for hire or not, any game not mentioned or included in Section 330 of the Penal Code of California, or not mentioned in Chapter 5.24, played with cards, dice or any device for money, checks, credits or any other representative of value. 
(Ord. 499 § 1, 1978: Ord. 49 § 5, 1920) 
9.24.020 - Barricaded place containing three or more persons-Display of gambling implements prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to exhibit or expose to view, in any barred or barricaded house or room, or in any place built or protected in a manner to make it difficult for access or ingress to police officers, when three or more persons are present, any cards, dice, dominoes, fan-tan tables, or any gambling implements whatsoever. 
(Ord. 499 § 2, 1978: Ord. 68 § 1, 1923: Ord. 49 § 5A, 1920) 
9.24.030 - Barricaded place containing three or more persons-Visiting prohibited when gambling implements are exhibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to visit or resort to any barred or barricaded house or room, or other place protected in a manner to make it difficult of access or ingress to police officers, where any cards, dice, dominoes, fan-tan tables or layout, or any part of such layout, or any gambling implements whatsoever, are exhibited or exposed to view, when three or more persons are present. 
(Ord. 68 § 2, 1923: Ord. 49 § 6A, 1920) 
9.24.040 - Visiting place where gambling practiced prohibited. 
    It is unlawful in the city for any person to become an inmate of or a visitor at any place where gambling is practiced or carried on. 
(Ord. 49 § 6, l920) 
9.24.050 - Permitting gambling prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any keeper of any hotel, roominghouse or any other place to allow or permit any kind of gambling or gaming for money, goods, merchandise or anything representing value. 
(Ord. 49 § 13, 1920) 
9.24.060 - Enforcement authority. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all police officers of the city to use all legal means in detecting and convicting persons violating any provision of this chapter, and to exercise the right of search given by the law of the state, and to seize and safely keep all chips, checks, cards, apparatus and things used for gambling purposes at any place that may exist contrary to this chapter or laws of the state, and to produce the same in court and retain them until the final disposition of any case in which such articles may be required as evidence. Such articles shall be destroyed by the order of the court after proof has been made of their use for gambling purposes in the city. 
(Ord. 752 § 11, 1998; Ord. 49 § 12, 1920) 
9.24.070 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and every person found guilty of violating any of said provisions, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the sum of not more than three hundred dollars, or imprisoned in the city or county jail for not more than three months, or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 49 § 17 (part), 1920) 
CHAPTER 9.29 - CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL OR OTHER INTOXICATING SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 

9.29.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Alcohol and Intoxicating Substance Consumption Ordinance" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of these regulations to aid in the reduction of the crimes and reported incidents involving alcohol and other intoxicating substances including, but not limited to, public intoxication, disturbances, fights, thefts, vandalism, and driving under the influence. Because alcohol and other intoxicating substances cause physical impairments and decrease the ability of persons to make sound decisions, many of these incidents would not occur independent of the presence of alcohol and intoxicating substances. The city desires to restrict the public consumption of alcohol and intoxicating substances where state law and current city regulations are silent, in furtherance of the goal of creating a safer community. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.030 - Definitions. 
    The terms as used in this chapter or in any resolution or standard adopted by the city council pursuant to this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Alcohol" or "alcoholic beverage" shall have the same meaning as that set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 23004. 
    "Consume," "consuming," or "consumption" shall be determined by the following, in addition to any reasonable indicia of consumption: the act or appearance of drinking or ingesting any intoxicating or any controlled substance based upon a totality of circumstances, including, but not limited to, any observations by a peace officer or any other person reporting the offense; the offender's appearance of drinking or ingesting any intoxicating or controlled substance; any statements or admission to drinking or ingesting any intoxicating or controlled substance by the offender; any smells or odors emanating from the offender's person; any results of any chemical test which measures the alcohol or intoxicating substance content of the offender; any other objective symptom of intoxication or use of an intoxicating or controlled substance; or the presence and control of open containers or instruments used to administer or ingest any intoxicating or controlled substance. 
    "Drug paraphernalia" shall have the same meaning as that set forth in Health and Safety Code sections 11014.5, 11364, or 11364.5. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.040 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public. 
    The drinking or consumption of any alcoholic beverage shall be prohibited at the following locations within the city: 
A.  On any public street, roadway, boulevard, alley, parking lot, sidewalk, or any other property owned, controlled and/or operated by the city, county of Riverside, school district, or any public agency; 
B.  In the public parking lot of any multi-family housing property; and in the public parking, loading, access and areas accessible to the public of nonresidential property, except on the premises of a commercial establishment holding a valid on-sale license or permit from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; or 
C.  Within any public park, recreational area, or recreation facility owned, controlled and/or operated by the city, county of Riverside, school district, or any public agency, except for golf course and Quechan Park and Marina. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.050 - Public places-Furnishing. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons, while in or upon any public park, street, alley, highway or other public place, or the entrance to any store, in the city, except in or upon those places where the drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law, to offer, furnish or give, or cause to be offered, furnished or given, any alcoholic beverages to any other person or persons with the intention that such other person or persons shall drink or consume said alcoholic beverages while such other person or persons are in or upon any public park, street, highway, alley or other public place, or the entrance to any store, in the city, except in or upon those public places where the drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.060 - Public places-Municipal Golf Course. 
    The city council finds and determines that customers of the Blythe Municipal Golf Course shall be prohibited from bringing alcoholic beverages onto the Blythe Municipal Golf course not purchased on the premises. Further, no person shall possess or use any alcoholic beverages while on the Blythe Municipal Golf course unless said alcoholic beverages are purchased on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.070 - Consumption or possession of intoxicating or controlled substances and instruments used to administer intoxicating substances in public places. 
A.  No person shall consume within any public place or business in the city, or on the grounds of any public or private park, recreation area, open space or school, or in the public parking, loading, access and areas accessible to the public, or private or commercial property which is open and accessible to the public, any non-alcoholic intoxicating substance possessed for the purposes of intoxication or any illegal or controlled substance, including marijuana. 
B.  No person shall have in his or her possession within any public place or business in the city, or on the grounds of any public or private park, recreation area, open space or school, or in the public parking, loading, access and areas accessible to the public, or private or commercial property which is open and accessible to the public, any instrument used to administer or ingest any intoxicating or controlled substance, including marijuana pipes or similar smoking devices, and including drug paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.080 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages or other intoxicating substance on homeowner association properties. 
    No person shall consume any beer, wine, liquor, fermented malt beverage, intoxicating liquor, or other alcoholic beverage or intoxicating substance, upon property, including greenbelt areas, common walkways and common driveways, owned or controlled by a homeowner's association where: 
A.  The homeowners' association has requested in writing that the city extend its prohibition on drinking and consuming other intoxicating substances upon the homeowner's association property and the city council has adopted a resolution approving such request; and 
B.  The homeowners' association has posted on the property a notice in substantially the following form: 
Drinking or consuming of liquors, beers, wine or other intoxicating beverages or intoxicating substances on this property, including greenbelt areas, common walkways, and common driveways, is prohibited by Chapter 9.29 of the Blythe Municipal Code and violators are subject to criminal prosecution which could result in a fine. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.090 - Open-air public assembly-Admitting persons possessing alcoholic liquor. 
    No person in charge of or assisting in the conduct of any open-air public assembly where an admission fee is charged, within the territorial limits of the city, shall permit any person to enter or remain in such assembly who has any form of alcoholic liquor in his possession. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.100 - Open-air public assembly-Taking alcoholic liquor into. 
    No person shall take any form of alcoholic liquor into any place where an open-air public assembly is being conducted and where an admission fee is charged within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.110 - Open-air public assembly-Furnishing beer. 
    Unless a license has been first obtained pursuant to state law, and an event permit obtained at city hall, (235 North Broadway, Blythe, Calif.) no group, association, corporation or person shall sell, furnish, serve or give away any beer, as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 23006, in any place of open-air public assembly where an admission fee is charged within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.120 - Open-air public assembly-Furnishing intoxicating liquor. 
    No group, association, corporation or person shall sell, furnish, serve or give away any intoxicating liquor, except beer, as defined by business and Professions Code Section 23006, in any place of open-air public assembly where an admission fee is charged within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
9.29.130 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person or persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by: 
A.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Chapter 9.36 - INDECENT EXPOSURE 
Sections: 

9.36.010 - Legislative authorization-Definitions. 
A.  This chapter is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. 
B.  All words used in this chapter which also are used in said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words used in said Sections 318.5 and 318.6. 
(Ord. 445 § 1, 1974) 
9.36.020 - Waiters, waitresses and entertainers. 
A.  No person, while acting as a waiter, waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves food, beverages, or food and beverages, including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages, for consumption on the premises of such establishment, shall: 
1.  Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
2.  Expose any device, costume or covering, which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
3.  Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
B.  For purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person is paid by compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity is performed. 
(Ord. 508 § 1, 1978; Ord. 445 § 2, 1974) 
9.36.030 - Performers. 
    Exposure by performers in public. No person, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, shall: 
A.  Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
B.  Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
C.  Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
(Ord. 508 § 2, 1978; Ord. 445 § 3, 1974) 
9.36.040 - Counseling or assisting. 
    No person shall cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist any person to expose or simulate exposure, as prohibited in Sections 9.36.020 and 9.36.030. 
(Ord. 445 § 4, 1974) 
9.36.050 - Exemption of theatrical establishments. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. 
(Ord. 445 § 5, 1974) 
9.36.060 - Penalty for violation. 
    A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24. 
(Ord. 445 § 6, 1974) 
IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
Chapter 9.40 - ADVERTISING BY LOUDSPEAKER 
Sections: 

9.40.010 - Use prohibited-Exceptions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in advertising or attracting attention to the existence or location of a place of business or a place of assembly of persons, by means of sound emitted through a loudspeaker, sound amplifier, musical instrument, phonograph, radio speaker or similar device located within the city limits, or so close to the city limits that the sound carries within the city limits; provided that such activity is not unlawful if in conformance with the following regulations: 
1.  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech. 
2.  Human speech amplified by the sound device shall not be lewd, indecent nor slanderous, nor shall it be specifically addressed to individual pedestrians or motorists as distinguished from the public in general. 
3.  The volume of the sound shall be controlled so that it is not audible for a distance in excess of fifty feet from the place of origin. 
4.  Sound shall be issued from one loudspeaker or similar device only. 
B.  The operation of any such sound-amplifying device in such a manner as to be audible at any distance in excess of fifty feet from the place of business or place of assembly in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of, and a rebuttable presumption of, an intent of advertising or attracting attention to the existence or location of the place of business or place of assembly. 
(Ord. 213 § 1, 1952) 
9.40.020 - Providing for use of employees prohibited-Exceptions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to provide the facilities for their employees to engage in advertising or attracting attention to the existence or location of their place of business or place of assembly by means of sound emitted through a loudspeaker, sound amplifier, musical instrument, phonograph, radio speaker or similar device located within the city, or so close to the city limits that the sound carries within the city limits; provided that it is not unlawful if the activity by the employee or employees conforms to the regulations set forth in Section 9.40.010. 
B.  The operation of any such sound-amplifying device in such a manner as to be audible at any distance in excess of fifty feet from the place of business or place of assembly in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of an intent of advertising or attracting attention to the existence or location of the place of business or place of assembly. 
(Ord. 213 § 2, 1952) 
9.40.030 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding ten days. 
(Ord. 213 § 3, 1952) 
VII. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS 
Chapter 9.73 - CURFEW AND TRUANCY OF MINORS ORDINANCE 
Sections: 

9.73.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Curfew and Truancy of Minors Ordinance" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect minors, who due to their immature age and limited experience, are particularly vulnerable to falling victim to crime and/or being influenced to participate in delinquent behavior. These regulations are intended to prohibit any minor from loitering at inappropriate times in public places or on the premises of any establishment, subject to the exemptions and pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.030 - Definitions. 
    The terms as used in this chapter or in any resolution or standard adopted by the city council pursuant to this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Curfew hours" means the period from ten p.m. until six a.m. the following day. 
    "Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or similar situation. 
    "Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    "Guardian" means: 
1.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
2.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
    "Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
    "Parent" means: 
1.  A person who is a minor's biological, adoptive, or step-parent and who has legal custody of a minor, including either parent, if custody is shared under a court order or agreement; 
2.  A person who is the biological, adoptive, or step-parent with whom a minor regularly resides; and/or 
3.  A person eighteen years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in subsection(s) 1 or 2 of this definition, above, for the person to assume the care or physical custody of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances). 
    "Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
    "Responsible adult" means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have care and custody of a minor, including, but not limited to, a babysitter, nanny, relative, coach, teacher or tutor. 
    "School administrator" means any person employed by a public or private school or school district who typically serves in the capacity and title of principal, assistant principal, or his or her designee, who has the authority to permit students to leave the school campus during school hours, excuse absences and discipline students. 
    "School hours" means the period between seven-thirty a.m. and two-thirty p.m. on any day when school is in session. 
    "Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.040 - Curfew restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
B.  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow a minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.050 - Exemptions to violations of curfew restrictions. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.73.040 that the minor was: 
A.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or by a responsible adult; 
B.  On an errand, without any detour or stop, at the direction of, and with confirmation from, the minor's parent or guardian; 
C.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
D.  Engaged in a legitimate employment activity, or going to or returning home from a legitimate employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
E.  Involved in an emergency or actively seeking medical assistance due to an emergency; 
F.  In the right-of-way abutting the minor's residence which is lawfully owned, occupied, or possessed by the minor, the minor's parent(s) or guardian(s); 
G.  Engaged in or going directly to or returning directly from an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
H.  Engaged in, or going directly to or returning directly from, any other lawful activity with confirmation from the minor's parent or guardian; 
I.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or 
J.  Emancipated pursuant to California Family Code Section 7000 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.060 - Truancy restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during school hours on days when the minor's school is in session. This provision shall also apply to minors whose enrollment status is that of suspension, expulsion, or transfers in progress. 
B.  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during school hours on days when the minor's school is in session. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.070 - Exemptions to truancy restrictions. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.73.060 that the minor was: 
A.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or by a responsible adult; 
B.  Involved in an emergency or actively seeking medical assistance due to an emergency; 
C.  Engaged in a legitimate employment activity, or going to or returning home from a legitimate employment activity, with a valid school work permit; 
D.  Engaged in, going directly to, or returning directly from a medical appointment for the minor or the minor's parent or guardian; and can show proof of that appointment; 
E.  Authorized to spend the lunch period off campus and possesses a valid, school-issued off campus permit; and has conformed to all the conditions and restrictions of the lunch pass; 
F.  Absent from school as a result of the minor's school, either on a particular day or as a matter of routine, having a start time after seven-thirty a.m. or a dismissal time prior to two-thirty p.m., or the student has an abbreviated school schedule which allows the student to start later or be dismissed earlier than the standard start or dismissal time; 
G.  Authorized to engage in a school-sponsored event or activity, or going directly to or returning directly from an official school sponsored event or activity, such as a sporting event, field trip, or other such school activity; 
H.  Absent with the prior authorization of a school administrator; 
I.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; 
J.  Receiving instruction by a qualified tutor pursuant to California Education Code Section 48224, or is receiving home or private school instruction pursuant to California Education Code Section 48222, and is current in his or her assignments and studies; 
K.  Authorized to be absent from school pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, or any other applicable state or federal law; or 
L.  Emancipated pursuant to California Family Code Section 7000 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  Before taking any enforcement action under this section a police officer shall ask the minor's age and reason for being in the public place, establishment or other location covered under this section during curfew hours or school hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under this section is applicable. 
B.  Power of Law Enforcement Officers. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting in any way the power or right of law enforcement officers to make investigations, detentions or arrests as would have been permitted had this section not been enacted. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.090 - Violation. 
    Each violation of the provisions set forth in this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be treated as an infraction pursuant to the provisions of Blythe Municipal Code Section 1.24.040. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.100 - Penalties for minors. 
A.  Any minor violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with Blythe Municipal Code Section 1.24.030 and/or any other penalty provided by California Welfare and Institutions Code section 258. 
B.  1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
9.73.110 - Penalties for parents or guardians. 
A.  Any parent or guardian violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with Blythe Municipal Code Section 1.24.030. 
B.  1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(Ord. No. 843, § 1, 2-9-10) 
VIII. - WEAPONS 
Chapter 9.84 - DISCHARGING WEAPONS 
Sections: 

9.84.010 - Prohibited-Exceptions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the city limits except as provided below: 
A.  Where such person is authorized by law to carry such firearm and the same is discharged in the lawful performance of duty; 
B.  During applicable California hunting season(s) the chief of police shall designate areas within the city limits where those who hold valid California hunting licenses may discharge firearms in the pursuit of game animals. 
(Ord. 693 § 3, 1993: Ord. 49 § 2, 1920) 
9.84.020 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, and every person found guilty of violating any of said provisions, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the sum of not more than three hundred dollars, or imprisoned in the city or county jail for not more than three months, or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 49 § 17 (part), 1920) 
IX. MISCELLANEOUS 
Chapter 9.90 - MISUSE OF THE 9-1-1 SYSTEM 
Section: 

9.90.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance codified in this chapter is to establish a process and fee to recover city of Blythe costs resulting from misuse of the 9-1-1 system which result in unnecessary and preventable responses to 9-1-1 "hang-up" calls. 
(Ord. No. 840, § 1, 1-26-10) 
9.90.020 - Definitions. 
    "9-1-1 call" means any telephone call using any form of communications device that results in a completed connection to the Vallejo police department emergency communications center. 
    "9-1-1 hang-up call" means any telephone call made using any telephone instrument or other communications device that results in a completed connection to the Blythe police department emergency communications center where the caller, unless physically unable to do so, either: (1) fails to remain on the line and advise communications operator of the nature of the call, or (2) fails to answer a call-back from the police department to verify the nature of the call, or (3) fails to permit an operator to interrupt if the line is busy on call-back and it is subsequently determined that the caller was not attempting to report a police, fire or medical emergency. 
    "Telephone subscriber" means any individual, group of individuals, business or businesses that cause or are responsible for the installation, purchase or lease of any form of telephone equipment or other communications device that provides access to the 9-1-1 emergency calling system. The individual or business name and/or address transmitted to the police department's emergency communications center shall be presumed to be that of the telephone subscriber. 
    "Telephone user" means any person, including the telephone subscriber, who actually places a 9-1-1 call to the Police Department Emergency Communications Center using any telephone instrument or other communications device. 
(Ord. No. 840, § 1, 1-26-10) 
9.90.030 - 9-1-1 user and subscriber duties and responsibilities. 
A.  Any telephone user who intentionally, unintentionally or negligently uses any telephone or other communications device to call 9-1-1 shall, unless physically unable to do so, remain on the line until the call is answered by a police department emergency communications operator and shall: (1) provide information concerning the nature of the police, fire or medical emergency or other reason for placing the 9-1-1 call, or (2) confirm that no emergency situation exists. 
B.  Any telephone user who intentionally, unintentionally or negligently uses any telephone or other communications device to call 9-1-1 and terminates (hangs-up) the call prior to confirming the nature of the police, fire or medical emergency or confirming that no emergency exists shall, unless physically unable to do so, immediately answer any call-back telephone call from the police department emergency communications center and either: (1) confirm the nature of the police, fire or medical emergency, or (2) confirm that no emergency exists. 
C.  All telephone subscribers are responsible for ensuring that the telephone users who use the telephone subscriber's service to call 9-1-1 do so in compliance with subsections A and B above. Telephone users are responsible for the fee assessed under this ordinance as a result of a telephone user's failure to comply with A or B above. However, if the identity of the telephone user may not be ascertained upon police response to the 9-1-1 call and reasonably diligent inquiry, the telephone subscriber shall be presumed to be responsible for the fee. If the user is a minor child, the parent or guardian is responsible for the fee. If the parent or guardian is not ascertained, the subscriber shall be presumed to be responsible for the fee. 
(Ord. No. 840, § 1, 1-26-10) 
9.90.040 - Administration. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police or designee. The chief of police or designee shall have the authority to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 840, § 1, 1-26-10) 
9.90.050 - Cost-recovery fee. 
A.  An administrative citation in the amount of fifty dollars shall be issued to every telephone user in violation of this ordinance, and if the user can not be ascertained, an administrative citation shall be issued to the phone subscriber for each and every 9-1-1 "hang up" call received by the Blythe police department emergency communications center where it is subsequently determined that no police, fire or medical emergency existed. 
B.  Each violation of the provisions set forth in this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be treated as an infraction pursuant to the provisions of Blythe Municipal Code Section 1.24.030. 
(Ord. No. 840, § 1, 1-26-10) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Adoption-Copies on file. 
A.  All of the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, 1964 Edition, adopted by the League of California Cities, except Sections 2.7, 2.8, 11.8, 13.(a), 13.(b), 13.2 and 14.11, are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this section. 
B.  Three copies of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance are on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 342 § 1, 1966) 
10.04.020 - Title. 
    There is adopted as the title of the ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04,010 the following: "Uniform Traffic Ordinance, City of Blythe." 
(Ord. 342 § 2, 1966) 
10.04.030 - Certain sections repealed. 
    The following sections of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, are repealed: 
    Sections 2.5, 3.2, 3.4, 3.7, 4.2, 8.1, 10.3, 10.13, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 14, 14.1 through 14.12, and 15. 
(Ord. 5.12 § 1, 1978) 
10.04.040 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.24.030. 
(Ord. 610 § 1, 1984: Ord. 342 § 32, 1966) 
10.04.050 - Section 1.2 added-Central traffic district. 
    There is adopted Section 1.2, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 1.2. Central Traffic District. 
 All streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by Rice Street, from the west edge of Commercial Street to the east edge of First Street; Commercial Street, from the south edge of Rice Street to the north edge of Barnard Street; Barnard Street, from the west edge of Commercial Street to the east edge of First Street; First Street, from the north edge of Barnard Street to the south edge of Rice Street; Hobsonway, both sides of street from the west city limits to the east city limits. 
(Ord. 342 § 3, 1966) 
10.04.060 - Section 1.4 added-Council. 
    There is adopted Section 1.4, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 1.4. Council. 
 The Council of the City of Blythe. 
(Ord. 342 § 4, 1966) 
10.04.070 - Section 1.17 added-Grade separation. 
    There is adopted Section 1.17, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 1.17. Grade Separation. 
 Every structure by means of which any street passes over or under any stationary rails, tracks or another street. 
(Ord. 342 § 5, 1966) 
10.04.080 - City traffic engineer. 
    There is established within the development services department the office of city traffic engineer. There is also established a traffic safety committee. 
A.  The city traffic engineer shall be appointed by the city manager with concurrence of the city council. 
1.  The city traffic engineer shall be a duly qualified licensed California engineer. 
2.  The city traffic engineer shall serve at the pleasure of the city. 
3.  All references to the city traffic engineer in this code or the Uniform Traffic Code as it applies to the city shall be interpreted to refer to the city traffic engineer as appointed in this section. 
B.  The traffic safety committee shall advise the city traffic engineer. 
1.  The membership of the committee shall be made up of the chief of police, the development services director and the public works director or their designees. The city manager shall serve as an ex-officio member. 
2.  The committee shall advise the city traffic engineer from their areas of responsibility. 
3.  The committee may act in behalf of the engineer on minor decisions. 
(Ord. 696 § 2, 1993: Ord. 342 § 6, 1966) 
10.04.090 - Section 3.9 added-Authority of police in crowds. 
    There is adopted Section 3.9, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 3.9. Authority of Police in Crowds. 
 At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have gathered, nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent any police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or sidewalk, and said police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey the said police officer's order, signal or command, regardless of any other provision of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 342 § 7, 1966) 
10.04.100 - Section 8.9 added-Traffic barriers. 
    There is adopted Section 8.9, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 8.9. Traffic Barriers. 
 No person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of any barrier or sign erected: (a) pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of the City of Blythe, or (b) by any public utility, or (c) by any department of the City of Blythe, or (d) by any other person pursuant to law or contract with the city, nor shall any unauthorized person move or alter the position of any such barrier or sign. 
(Ord. 342 § 8, 1966) 
10.04.110 - Section 9.2 added-Pedestrians to obey special pedestrian traffic signals. 
    There is adopted Section 9.2, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 9.2. Pedestrians to Obey Special Pedestrian Traffic Signals. 
 Pedestrians shall obey the indication of special traffic signals installed for pedestrians only and shall disregard the indication of a vehicular traffic signal at any location where special pedestrian traffic signals are in place. 
(Ord. 342 § 9, 1966) 
10.04.120 - Section 9.3 added-Traffic engineer to establish marked crosswalks. 
    There is adopted Section 9.3, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 9.3. Traffic Engineer to Establish Marked Crosswalks. 
 (a) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish and maintain crosswalks and to designate them by appropriate devices or painted signs upon the surface of the roadway. 
 (b) The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Ord. 342 § 10, 1966) 
10.04.130 - Section 11.9 added-All night parking prohibited. 
    There is adopted Section 11.9, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 11.9. All Night Parking Prohibited. 
 No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street, excepting Hobsonway for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day, providing that this section shall not apply to a vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls. 
(Ord. 342 § 11, 1966) 
10.04.140 - Section 11.10 added-All night parking prohibited. 
    There is adopted Section 11.10, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 11.10. All Night Parking Prohibited. 
 No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on Hobsonway for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of any day provided that this section shall not apply to a vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls. 
(Ord. 342 § 12, 1966) 
10.04.150 - Section 11.11 added-Parking time limited in central traffic district. 
    There is adopted Section 11.11, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 11.11. Parking Time Limited in Central Traffic District. 
 When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within the central traffic district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than forty (40) minutes. 
(Ord. 342 § 13, 1966) 
10.04.160 - Section 11.12 added-Parking time limited in other business districts. 
    There is adopted Section 11.12, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 11.12. Parking Time Limited in Other Business Districts. 
 When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within a business district outside of the central traffic district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one (1) hour. 
(Ord. 342 § 14, 1966) 
10.04.170 - Section 11.13 added-Stopping, standing or parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. 
    There is adopted Section 11.13, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.40.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 11.13. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain Streets. 
 When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street in the central traffic district between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
(Ord. 342 § 15, 1966) 
10.04.180 - Section 11.14 added-No parking zones to prevent flooding. 
    There is adopted Section 11.14, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 11.14. No Parking Zones to Prevent Flooding. 
 In order to prevent flooding of adjacent property, the city traffic engineer shall designate established no parking zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that parking of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when parking is prohibited. 
 During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as such no parking zones. 
(Ord. 342 § 16, 1966) 
10.04.185 - Overnight parking in motor vehicles limited. 
    Overnight parking for the purpose of sleeping by any person in a motor vehicle shall not exceed twelve hours in duration, unless said overnight parking is incidental to the operation of a business approved by the city, whether on public or private land (including commercial parking lots) unless said property complies with all applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code and is licensed by appropriate regulatory agencies including county of Riverside health department and the city. 
(Ord. 738 § 1, 1997) 
10.04.190 - Section 11.15 added-Overnight permit parking. 
    There is adopted Section 11.15, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 11.15. Overnight Permit Parking. 
 (a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle to allow such vehicle to remain standing upon any street or alley in the City for a period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. without a permit therefor; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to vehicles of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls. 
 (b) In cases of hardship where the owners or vehicles cannot obtain suitable storage or parking facilities, permits for parking for more than one hour during all the time between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. may be issued by the Chief of Police. The application for a permit shall be signed by the applicant, shall state the make, model and license number of the vehicle and shall contain a statement of the necessity and reasons for the permit. If, upon investigation, it is found that the necessity exists therefor and that the applicant has no reasonable means for night storage of the vehicle during the above stated hours, the Chief of Police shall issue the permit for a period not to exceed 6 months. Before using such permit, the permittee shall pay the City Clerk or Finance Officer a fee of $2.00 for 6 months. The permit shall not be transferable and shall be displayed on the left side window to the rear of the driver of the vehicle for which it is issued at all times during which the vehicle is parked upon the street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The Chief of Police shall revoke the permit when the necessity under which it was issued and the reasons therefor cease to exist or may renew such permit if the hardship still exists. No permit shall be granted for commercial vehicles. 
(Ord. 342 § 17, 1966) 
10.04.200 - Section 11.16 added-Parking-Commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
    There is adopted Section 11.16, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 11.16. Parking-Commercial Vehicles in Residential Districts. 
 No person shall park any commercial vehicle more than five hours in any residential district except (a) while loading or unloading property and time in addition to such five hour period is necessary to complete such work, or (b) when such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on the property in the block in which such vehicle is parked and time in addition to such five hour period is reasonably necessary to complete such service. 
(Ord. 342 § 18, 1966) 
10.04.210 - Section 12.7 added-Taxicab stands. 
    There is adopted Section 12.7, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 12.7. Taxicab Stands. 
 (a) The city traffic engineer shall establish taxicab stands and determine the locations thereof. 
 (b) The curb surface within each taxicab stand shall be painted white and marked "Taxicab Stand" in red lettering, or shall be designated by signs of a type and size approved by the city traffic engineer. 
 (c) No operator of any vehicle, other than a taxicab or automobile for hire shall park said vehicle in such taxicab stand. 
(Ord. 342 § 19, 1966) 
10.04.220 - Section 13.A added-Certain vehicles prohibited in central traffic district. 
    There is adopted Section 13.A, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 13.A. Certain Vehicles Prohibited in Central Traffic District. 
 No person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the central traffic district, except on Hobsonway, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day. 
 1. Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet in width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than twenty (20) feet to the front or rear of said vehicle. 
 2. Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the central traffic district. 
(Ord. 342 § 20, 1966) 
10.04.230 - Section 13.B added-Certain vehicles prohibited in central traffic district. 
    There is adopted Section 13.B, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 13.B. Certain Vehicles Prohibited in Central Traffic District. 
 The city traffic engineer may by written permit authorize the operation of any vehicle for the purpose of making necessary emergency deliveries to or from points within the central traffic district. 
(Ord. 342 § 21, 1966) 
10.04.240 - Section 13.2a added-Horse-drawn vehicles. 
    There is adopted Section 13.2a, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, section to read as follows: 
 SECTION 13.2a. Horse-Drawn Vehicles. 
 No person shall ride, or drive any animal, or animal drawn vehicle into or within central traffic district at any time without first obtaining a special permit from the traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 342 § 22, 1966) 
10.04.250 - Section 16 added-Establishment/increasing/decreasing state speed limit in certain zones. 
    There is adopted Section 16, which section is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
 SECTION 16. Establishment/Increasing/ Decreasing of State Speed Limit in Certain Zones. 
 It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed permitted by state law upon the following streets is necessary for the safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the designation and sign posting of said streets and through highways and by reason of widely spaced intersections, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as hereinafter set forth on these streets or parts of streets herein described when signs are erected giving notice thereof: 
Name of Street or Portion Affected Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit (MPH) 14th Avenue from West City Limits to Broadway 35 14th Avenue from Broadway to Seventh Street 35 14th Avenue from Seventh Street to Cottonwood Lane 40 14th Avenue from Cottonwood Lane to Intake Boulevard 40 Barnard Street from Lovekin Boulevard to Tesoro 30 Broadway from South City Limits to Hobsonway 40 Broadway from Hobsonway to Juniper Trail 35 Broadway from Juniper Trail to 10th Avenue 40 Chanslorway from West City Limits to Lovekin Boulevard 35 Chanslorway from Lovekin Boulevard to Earle Street 35 Chanslorway from Earle Street to Intake Boulevard 45 Dekema Street from Main to Seventh Street 35 Donlon Street from Main to Seventh Street 35 Eucalyptus Street from Chanslorway to Montezuma Street 30 Fifth Street from Hobsonway to Chanslorway 30 Hobsonway from Defrain Boulevard to "C" Canal 45 Hobsonway from "C" Canal to Lovekin Boulevard 35 Hobsonway from Lovekin Boulevard to Ninth Street 30 Hobsonway from Ninth Street to Intake Boulevard 35 Lovekin Boulevard from South City Limits to Hobsonway 30 Lovekin Boulevard from Hobsonway to Chanslorway 35 Lovekin Boulevard from Chanslorway to Seville Lane 35 Lovekin Boulevard from Seville Lane to 10th Avenue 45 Lovekin Boulevard from 10th Avenue to 8th Avenue 55 Main Street from 14th Avenue to Hobsonway 35 Main Street from Hobsonway to Chanslorway 35 Riviera Drive from Donlon to 100' S. of 14600 35 Seventh Street from South City Limits to Hobsonway 35 Seventh Street from Hobsonway to 11th Avenue 35 Third Street from 14th Avenue to Donlon 25 Wells Road from Defrain Boulevard to 4th Avenue 40  
(Ord. 820 § 1, 2007: Ord. 768 § 1, 2000: Ord. 765 § 1, 2000: Ord. 709 § 1, 1995: Ord. 602 § 1, 1984: Ord. 559 § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 342 § 27 (part), 1966) 
10.04.260 - Article XVII added-Miscellaneous use of streets and sidewalks. 
    There is adopted Article XVII, which article is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
ARTICLE XVII 
MISCELLANEOUS USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
 SECTION 17.1. Use of Coasters, Bicycles, Rollerskates and Similar Devices Restricted. 
 It shall be unlawful for any person upon rollerskates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, to go upon any roadway or upon the sidewalk in the Blythe Central Traffic District as that is defined in Section 10.04.050 of the Blythe Municipal Code. It shall further be unlawful for any person upon a bicycle or any similar device, to go upon any sidewalk in the Central Traffic District as that term is defined in Section 10.04.050 of the Blythe Municipal Code. 
 SECTION 17.2. Protective Equipment Required While Using a City of Blythe Skateboard/Skating Facility. 
 No person shall use a City of Blythe Skateboard/Skating Facility who is not wearing a helmet, knee pads, and elbow pads suitable to provide protection in the event of falls or collisions. A first violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. Subsequent violations may constitute either an infraction or a misdemeanor pursuant to applicable City Code. 
(Ord. 731 § 1, 1996; Ord. 609 § 1, 1984: Ord. 342 § 28, 1966) 
10.04.270 - Article XVIII added-Obstruction to visibility at intersections. 
    There is adopted Article XVIII, which article is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
ARTICLE XVIII 
OBSTRUCTION TO VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS 
 SECTION 18.1. Shrubbery Obstructing Visibility of Intersections. 
 Whenever the traffic engineer finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing in a parkway obstructs the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the street approaching such intersection, he shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be immediately removed or reduced in height. 
(Ord. 342 § 29, 1966) 
10.04.280 - Article XIX added-Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment. 
    There is adopted Article XIX, which article is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
ARTICLE XIX 
MOVEMENT OF HEAVY VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 
 SECTION 19.1. Movement of Heavy Vehicles and Equipment-Permit Required. 
 No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the Vehicle Code without a written permit from the city traffic engineer. 
 The city traffic engineer may, by written permit, authorize a load or loads in excess of those allowed for in the Vehicle Code, if, in his judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight, or if the applicant will guarantee to the city that all costs of repair to the streets or to the public property of the city damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the city traffic engineer in his discretion may require. 
 SECTION 19.2. Flange Wheel Machinery. 
 No person shall operate over the city streets any vehicle, piece of equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges, or other projections on the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times. 
(Ord. 342 § 30, 1966) 
10.04.290 - Article XX added-Grade separations. 
    There is adopted Article XX, which article is to be a part of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference in Section 10.04.010, to read as follows: 
ARTICLE XX 
GRADE SEPARATIONS 
 SECTION 20.1. Use of Grade Separations by Pedestrians. 
 No pedestrian shall be in or upon any grade separation, except such grade separations as shall have pedestrian walks specifically designated or constructed thereon, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply, in the event of an emergency, to persons employed to do work or labor upon such grade separation, or to members of the Police Department when engaged in law enforcement or traffic regulation. 
 SECTION 20.2. Use of Grade Separations by Bicycles. 
 No person shall ride a bicycle upon any grade separation. 
 SECTION 20.3. Use of Grade Separations by Animals. 
 No person shall ride or drive any animal, even though tethered or harnessed in or upon any grade separation. 
 SECTION 20.4. Operation of Vehicles on Grade Separations. 
 Unless otherwise directed by a member of the Police Department or other authorized person, vehicles in or upon any grade separation shall at all times stay to the right of the center of all grade separations; slow moving vehicles shall remain as close as possible to the right hand side or curb of the grade separation; and where a grade separation is marked with traffic lanes, vehicles shall cross the markings only when overtaking and passing other vehicles. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to cross any such marking unless such movement can be made with safety. 
 SECTION 20.5. Stopping, Standing or Parking on Grade Separations. 
 No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle in or upon any grade separation, except in the event of an emergency, or when necessary to avoid injury or damage to persons or property, or in compliance with the direction of a member of the Police Department or other authorized person, or with the direction of a sign or signal. 
 SECTION 20.6. Removal of Vehicles from Grade Separations. 
 When any vehicle in or on any grade separation is stopped for any reason and is obstructing or may obstruct the flow of traffic, any member of the Police Department may move such vehicle or have such vehicle moved to the nearest terminus of said grade separation and beyond to a place of safety. The registered owner or owners and the operator of such vehicle shall be responsible for all reasonable charges for the moving services. 
(Ord. 342 § 20.5, 1966) 
Chapter 10.08 - PARKING REGULATIONS 

10.08.010 - Paved thoroughfares. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any motor vehicle on any paved thoroughfare within the city, other than Hobsonway, between the hours of two and five a.m. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.030. 
(Ord. 610 § 2, 1984: Ord. 135 §§ 2, 3 (part), 1940) 
10.08.020 - Hobsonway. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any motor vehicle on Hobsonway between the hours of two and four a.m. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.030. 
(Ord. 610 § 3, 1984: Ord. 135 §§ 1, 3 (part), 1940) 
10.08.030 - U.S. Highway 60 and 70. 
A.  No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: on U.S. Highway 60 and 70 between Lovekin Boulevard and the most westerly city limits. 
B.  Where the parking of vehicles is permitted, between the East City limits and Lovekin Boulevard on U.S. Highway 60-70 in the city, the operator of any vehicle parking such vehicle shall park the vehicle parallel to the curb or parallel to the boundary lines of U.S. Highway 60-70 where no curbs exist. Angle parking is prohibited in the above-described area. 
C.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.030. 
(Ord. 610 § 4, 1984: Ord. 309 §§ 1, 3, 1964: Ord. 305 §§ 1, 2, 1963) 
10.08.040 - Two-day parking restriction. 
A.  There shall be no parking or the standing of any vehicle on Monday and Thursday during the times of five a.m. until twelve noon in the following areas: 
1.  Earle Street from Barnard to Chanslorway: East side; 
2.  Seventh Street from Linda Lane to North City Limits; 
3.  Wisconsin Street from Fifth Street to Seventh Street; 
4.  Michigan Street from Fifth Street to Seventh Street; 
5.  Fifth Street from Barnard to Chanslorway, east side; 
6.  Fifth Street from a point 190 feet North of Barnard to Chanslorway: west side; 
7.  Chanslorway from Third Street to Fifth Street: South side; 
8.  Third Street from Barnard Street to Chanslorway: East side; 
9.  Fourth Street from Linda Lane to Canal; 
10.  North Fourth Street South from Chanslorway to the Cul-de-sac. 
B.  There shall be no parking or the standing of any vehicle on Tuesday and Friday during the times of five a.m. until twelve noon in the following areas: 
1.  Broadway from Chanslorway to North City Limits: West side; 
2.  Chanslorway from Broadway to Main Street: North side; 
3.  California Street from Eucalyptus Avenue to Lovekin Blvd.: South side; 
4.  California Street from a point 310 feet West of Eucalyptus Avenue to Lovekin Blvd.: North side; 
5.  Nevada Street from Eucalyptus Avenue to alley: West side; 
6.  Eucalyptus Avenue from Nevada Street to Downs Court; 
7.  Downs Court; 
8.  Glider Court; 
9.  Montezuma Street from Eucalyptus to alley: East side; 
10.  Cortez Street from Coronada Street to alley: West side; 
11.  Ocotillo Road from Lovekin Blvd. to Eucalyptus Avenue; 
12.  Joshua Tree; 
13.  Eucalyptus Avenue from Ocotillo Road to Tenth Avenue; 
14.  Lovekin Blvd. from Hobsonway to Chanslorway: West side; 
15.  Lovekin Blvd. from Chanslorway to Holley Lane: East side; 
16.  Solano Avenue from Chanslorway to Hobsonway; 
17.  Carlton Avenue from Chanslorway to Hobsonway; 
18.  West Barnard from Lovekin Blvd. to San Jacinto Street; 
19.  San Gorgonio Street from San Luis Way to San Jacinto Street; 
20.  San Luis Way from Barnard to Wisconsin Street; 
21.  San Jacinto Street from Barnard to Wisconsin St.: West side; 
22.  West Michigan Street from San Luis Way to San Jacinto Street; 
23.  Wisconsin from Carlton to San Jacinto Street. 
C.  There shall be no parking or the standing of any vehicle on Wednesday and Saturday during the times of five a.m. until twelve noon in the following areas: 
1.  South Solano Street from Donlon to end of street: South of Southern Avenue; 
2.  West Wells from Lovekin Blvd. to Solano Street; 
3.  Southern Avenue from Lovekin Blvd. to Solano Street; 
4.  South Willow from Hobsonway to Rice Street: East side; 
5.  South Palm Drive from Hobsonway to Rice Street; 
6.  South Ash Street from Hobsonway to Rice Street: West side. 
D.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.030. 
(Ord. 618, 1985; Ord. 610 § 5, 1984; Ord. 574 §§ 1-4, 1981) 
10.08.050 - Commercial vehicles in residential zones. 
    Unless excepted pursuant to paragraph A below, no commercial or construction vehicle, or towed or commercial equipment, or agricultural equipment, shall be parked on private property or on public right-of-way in residential zones unless the vehicle or equipment is screened from public view and adjacent properties. The term "commercial or construction vehicle, or towed, or commercial equipment, or agricultural equipment" includes, but is not limited to, utility body trucks, construction or agriculture tractors, construction vehicles and towed equipment, semitruck tractors, semitruck trailers, dump trucks, step van delivery trucks or any parts or apparatus of any of the above. 
A.  Commercial Vehicles Exempted. The following commercial vehicles are exempted from the above paragraph: 
1.  Pickup trucks, utility vans and similar utility vehicles, each of which does not exceed eight feet in height or twenty feet in combined total length; 
2.  All vehicles while being used in actual construction work on a permit-approved construction site; 
3.  All vehicles in the process of making a pickup or delivery; 
4.  All vehicles used to load or unload agriculture products or supplies, and all vehicles used in cultivation or harvesting of crops, pertaining to that specific property; 
5.  Government, utility and emergency service vehicles; and 
6.  All vehicles used in gardening or landscaping businesses, each of which does not exceed eight feet in height or twenty feet in length. 
B.  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.030. 
(Ord. 696 § 1, 1993) 
10.08.060 - Recreational vehicles and trailers. 
A.  No person shall park or leave standing any recreational vehicle or trailer, regardless of length or width, upon any public street or highway in the city for a period of time exceeding forty-eight (48) hours. 
B.  No person shall run electrical cords, extension cords, hoses, cables, or other items across, above or on the parkway or sidewalk from a residential or commercial property to a recreational vehicle or trailer parked on a public street. 
C.  The following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this section: 
1.  "Recreational vehicle" shall have the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 18010, and shall include house cars as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 362 and attached trailers. 
2.  "Trailer" shall mean a trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer (including tent trailers), unmounted camper, trailer bus, or trailer coach as defined in Sections 242, 243, 550, 630, 635, and 636 of the California Vehicle Code, or fifth-wheel travel trailer, as defined in Section 324 of the Vehicle Code. 
3.  Successive acts of parking within a two-tenths of a mile area shall be presumed to be a single act of parking for purposes of this chapter. 
D.  Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and will be subject to citation, towing, or both. 
E.  The time limitations on standing or parking in this section will not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code or the Blythe Municipal Code prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 1, 9-11-12) 
Chapter 10.12 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Findings and declarations. 
    In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
    The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted by this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 412 § 1 (part), 1971) 
10.12.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street. 
B.  "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
C.  "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
D.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
E.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 412 § 1 (part), 1971) 
10.12.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; and this chapter shall not apply to a vehicle, or parts thereof, which is located behind a solid fence six feet in height or which is not plainly visible from a highway. 
2.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance, as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 412 § 2, 1971) 
10.12.040 - Chapter to supplement other provisions. 
    This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, or Riverside County, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 412 § 3, 1971) 
10.12.050 - Enforcement authority. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 412 § 4, 1971) 
10.12.060 - Right of entry of persons contracted by city. 
    When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 412 § 5, 1971) 
10.12.070 - Cost of removal. 
    The city council, from time to time, shall determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof, under this chapter. This cost of administration may be set as a fixed sum per removal, or as a percentage of the actual cost of removal. 
(Ord. 412 § 6, 1971) 
10.12.080 - Abatement and removal authorized. 
    Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the building inspector shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 412 § 7, 1971) 
10.12.090 - Abatement-Notice. 
    A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
 (Name and address of owner of the land) 
 As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Ordinance No. 412 of the City of Blythe has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ____________ , license number ____________ , which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 412 of the City of Blythe. 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Blythe and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to your as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
 As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, your are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council of the City of Blythe or the City Manager of the City of Blythe within such 10 day period, the Building Inspector of the City of Blythe shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle, or in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed 
(Date) 
s- 
 Building Inspector of the City of Blythe. 
 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
 (Name and address of last registered and-or legal owner of record of vehicle-notice should be given to both if different) 
 As last registered (and-or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle-make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Ordinance No. 412 of the City of Blythe has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle), exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (described location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 412 of the City of Blythe. 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
 As registered (and-or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that your may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council of the City of Blythe or the City Manager of the City of Blythe, within such 10-day period, the Building Inspector of the City of Blythe shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed 
(date) 
s- 
Building Inspector of the City of Blythe. 
(Ord. 412 § 8, 1971) 
10.12.100 - Abatement-Hearing-When required. 
    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the building inspector within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city council, or city manager, on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
    If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city council shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 412 § 9, 1971) 
10.12.110 - Abatement-Hearing-Procedure. 
A.  All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city council, or city manager, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The city council, or city manager, shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
B.  The city council, or the city manager, may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council, or city manager, may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked or dismantled, or is inoperative, on private or public property, order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
C.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land, and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city council, or city manager, shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
D.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council, or city manager, but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 412 § 10, 1971) 
10.12.120 - Abatement-Appeal of decision. 
A.  Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer, who is the city manager, by filing a written notice of appeal with the city council within five days after the decision of the city manager, acting as the hearing officer. 
B.  Such appeal shall be heard by the city council, which may affirm, amend or reverse the order, or take other action deemed appropriate. 
C.  The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 10.12.090. 
D.  In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. 412 § 11, 1971) 
10.12.130 - Abatement-Disposal. 
A.  A notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notice shall contain a statement of hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. 
B.  A notice of intention to abate shall not be required if: 
1.  The property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof; or 
2.  All the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The vehicle or part thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission or wheels and is incapable of being towed; 
b.  The vehicle or part thereof is valued at less than two hundred dollars by the development services director or his designee; 
c.  The department of building and safety has determined that the vehicle or part thereof is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety; 
d.  The property owner has signed a release authorizing the removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof; and 
e.  The vehicle is located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units. 
C.  If a vehicle is removed pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section, prior to final disposition, the registered or legal owner shall be notified of the intent to dispose of the vehicle or part thereof. If the vehicle or part thereof is not claimed and removed from the scrapyard, automobile dismantler's yard or public disposal area within twelve days after the notice to dispose of vehicle is mailed, final disposition may proceed. 
D.  Upon a timely request by the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located or the owner of the vehicle, a public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs, including attorney fees, and the cost of removal of the vehicle or part thereof against the property on which it is located. This request shall be made in writing to the department of building and safety within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or at the time of signing a release authorizing the removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. 
(Ord. 700 § 1, 1993) 
10.12.140 - Abatement-Notice and transfer of documents to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
    Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 412 § 13, 1971) 
10.12.150 - Abatement-Assessment of costs. 
A.  If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.12.110 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
B.  This cost of administration may be set as a fixed sum per removal, or as a percentage of the actual cost of removal. 
C.  The cost of removal would be the billing, if any, against the city for the removal by the dismantler or other commercial enterprise. If the city finds that commercial channels of disposition are not available, then costs of removal and disposition could be determined in somewhat the same manner as costs of administration. In any event, the cost of removal should be a fixed amount if possible. 
(Ord. 412 § 14, 1971) 
10.12.160 - Violations designated-Deemed infraction. 
A.  It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave, or permit the abandonment, parking, storing, or leaving, of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property, not including highways, within the city for period in excess of ten days, unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and an infraction for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter, or state law where such state law is applicable. 
(Ord. 610 § 6, 1984: Ord. 412 §§ 15, 16, 1971) 
Chapter 10.16 - BICYCLE REGISTRATION 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - License-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the city without first obtaining from the police department a license therefor. 
(Ord. 290 § 1, 1962) 
10.16.020 - License-Issuance-Effect. 
A.  The police department is authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, bicycle licenses which shall be effective from the first day of May, 1962, and thereafter during the usable life of the licensed bicycle. 
B.  Said licenses, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to operate the bicycle for which the license has been issued upon all the streets, alleys and public highways, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, in the city. 
(Ord. 290 § 2, 1962) 
10.16.030 - License-Plate and registration card. 
    The city shall provide such license plates or other license designation which shall be suitable for attachment upon the frames of bicycles, and it shall be the duty of the police department to attach such plate or other designation to the frame of each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee, upon the payment of the license fee provided for in this chapter. Such license plate or other license designation shall remain attached to the bicycle during the existence of such license. The police department shall also keep a record of the date of issuance of each license, to whom issued and the number thereof. 
(Ord. 290 § 3, 1962) 
10.16.040 - Removal or alteration of number or license. 
    It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter; it is also unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate or other license designation or registration card during the time in which such license is operative; provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or which number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Ord. 290 § 4, 1962) 
10.16.050 - License-Fee. 
    The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be the sum of seventy-five cents. 
(Ord. 439 § 1, 1973: Ord. 290 § 5, 1962) 
10.16.060 - Penalty for violation. 
    Every person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.030. In addition to the penalty set forth in this section, the police department or any of the members thereof, may impound and obtain possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and retain possession of same until a license provided for in this chapter is obtained by the owner of the bicycle. 
(Ord. 610 § 7, 1984: Ord. 290 § 6, 1962) 
Chapter 10.20 - MEETINGS, ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES IN PUBLIC PLACES* 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Activity" means a parade or public meeting or assembly. 
    "Funeral procession" means a single direct movement from a mortuary or church to the place of burial of a human body, under direction of an authorized funeral director. 
    "Parade" means a march or procession of any kind. 
    "Public meeting or assembly" means a planned or organized gathering of a group of persons, or any ceremony, show, exhibition or pageant which may reasonably be expected to result in the gathering of a group of persons, upon any public street, park or other public grounds. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.020 - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to hold, manage, conduct, aid, participate in, form, start or carry on any parade or public meeting or assembly, as defined in this chapter, in or upon any public street, park or other public grounds in the city of Blythe unless and until a permit to conduct such meeting, assembly or parade has been obtained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, except as herein provided. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.030 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Funeral processions; 
B.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; 
C.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such activity is authorized by the school district and is under the immediate direction and supervision of the school authorities authorized by the school district to approve and supervise such activity. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.040 - Application. 
    Application for permits under this chapter must be filed with the chief of police not less than thirty days in advance of the proposed activity. Late applications may be accepted if filed sufficiently in advance of the date of the proposed activity to enable the chief of police to determine that such activity will meet the requirements set forth in Section 10.20.050. 
    The application shall be in writing and shall give the following information: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized head of such organization shall be stated; 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be directly in charge of and responsible for the activity; 
C.  The purpose of the activity; 
D.  The date, time and location or route of the proposed activity; 
E.  The approximate number of persons who will participate in the activity and the number and kind of vehicles, equipment and animals which will be used; 
F.  Plans for the assembly and dispersal of the parade, including times and locations thereof; 
G.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
H.  A statement as to whether a permit has been requested or obtained from any other city within which said activity shall commence, terminate or occur in part; 
I.  A certificate of insurance coverage in an amount that shall be set by resolution of the city council; 
J.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a determination of the findings required by Section 10.20.050. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.050 - Findings required. 
    The chief of police or his designated representative shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained he finds that: 
A.  The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic; 
B.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas where the activity will take place or areas contiguous to such area; 
C.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment enroute to a fire, or the movement of other emergency equipment; 
D.  The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
E.  Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising the goods, wares, or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendors; and 
F.  Applicant has on file a certificate of insurance as required by Section 10.20.040(I). 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.060 - Conditions to permit. 
    The chief of police shall have authority to impose such conditions as are necessary to insure that all of the findings mentioned in Section 10.20.050 shall exist during the continuation of the activity. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.070 - Prior application. 
    If a prior permit application shall have been made for an activity proposed to be held at the same time or place, the chief of police may refuse approval of the later application. In case of such refusal, he shall forthwith send the applicant a written notice that he may apply for an alternate time and place. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.080 - Notice of issuance or denial. 
    The chief of police shall act upon the permit application within three days of the filing thereof. If he disapproves of the application, he shall mail to the applicant within that three-day period notice of the denial and the reason for it. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.090 - Appeal procedure. 
    The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the city council. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within two days after receipt of notice of the denial. The city council shall act upon the appeal at its next meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.100 - Contents of permit. 
    Conditions to the issuance of any permit shall be set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.110 - Duty of permittee. 
A.  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms and conditions of such permit and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
B.  The written permit obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be carried by the person heading or leading the activity for which the permit was issued. Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.120 - Revocation of permit. 
    The chief of police may revoke any permit issued hereunder upon the failure of the permittee to comply with the terms and conditions of such permit or if the activity, because of the manner in which it is being conducted, or for any other reason, is jeopardizing those elements of the public safety or welfare set forth in Section 10.20.050. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
10.20.130 - Public conduct during a meeting, assembly or parade. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to unreasonably obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or public meeting or assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating in such a parade, meeting or assembly for which a permit has been granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (part), 1998) 
Chapter 10.30 - OFF-ROAD USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.30.010 - Driving on lands without permission prohibited. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle on lands belonging to or occupied by another without having in his immediate possession and, upon request of a peace officer, displaying written permission from the owner of such lands, his agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof; but this section shall not apply to a person having lawful business with the owner. 
(Ord. 596 § 1 (part), 1983) 
10.30.020 - Exempt locations. 
    This chapter shall not apply on public or private lands expressly set apart for the use of motor vehicles by or with permission of the owner of such lands pursuant to any zoning permit or other permit or licensing procedure authorized by law. This chapter shall not apply upon any public highway, street, road or alley within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 596 § 1 (part), 1983) 
10.30.030 - Exempt vehicles. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the use of farm vehicles for agricultural purposes, vehicles being used for grading or construction purposes, vehicles being used for governmental purposes, or golf carts being used on golf courses. 
(Ord. 596 § 1 (part), 1983) 
10.30.040 - Government property. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to interfere with the right of any government agency to regulate, prohibit or permit the use of motor vehicles on property owned by it or under its control and under its jurisdiction, nor to permit or authorize any trespass or nuisance. 
(Ord. 596 § 1 (part), 1983) 
10.30.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    A violation of this chapter is an infraction, and shall be punishable as follows: 
A.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the second violation of the same chapter within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same chapter within one year. 
(Ord. 603-A § 2, 1984) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.04 - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - Specifications. 
A.  Streets. Those certain specifications furnished by the city engineer, designated as "Specifications No. 1, General Specifications for Street Work in the City of Blythe, California," and now on file in the office of the city clerk, and are adopted as the general specifications for street work and improvements in the city. 
B.  Sidewalks. Those certain specifications furnished by the city engineer, designated as "Specifications No. 2, for Construction of Concrete Sidewalks in the City of Blythe," and now on file in the office of the city clerk, are adopted as the specifications for the construction of sidewalks in the city. 
C.  Curbs. Those certain specifications furnished by the city engineer, designated as "Specifications No. 3, for the Construction of Concrete Curbs in the City of Blythe," and now on file in the office of the city clerk, are adopted as the specifications for the construction of concrete curbs in the city. 
(Ord. 19 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1916) 
12.04.020 - Lighting and barricade requirements. 
    Every person, firm or corporation holding a permit for the excavation of or the contract for doing any work upon any street or sidewalk in the city shall place on all excavations and piles of materials all necessary guards, barriers and lights for the protection of the public at night, and for the protection of said work during the time of construction. Said lights shall be equipped with red globes, and shall be of such size and number as is acceptable to the superintendent of streets. Said lights shall be lighted each night before dark and kept burning until daylight; and the holder of the permit shall be responsible for their maintenance. 
(Ord. 27 § 1, 1917) 
12.04.030 - Riding, driving and walking on location of street work in progress. 
    It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive or cause to be ridden any animal, or to ride or drive or to propel any vehicle of any kind, or to walk or go upon or across any portion of any public street or sidewalk where street work is in progress, and where there is a guard or barrier to prevent such travel, or at or near which there is a sign stating that any street is closed, or where red lights are maintained to indicate that said street is closed, or that cement work is being put in. 
(Ord. 27 § 2, 1917) 
12.04.040 - Riding, driving or walking over sidewalk or curb work in progress. 
    It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive or cause to be ridden any animal, or to ride or drive or to be caused to be ridden or driven any vehicle, of any kind whatsoever likely to produce damage, upon, over or across any sidewalk or curb unless the same has first been protected by earthwork or other cushioning material. Nothing in this section shall prevent the use of regular approaches or sidewalk crossings and all dirt or other materials used temporarily to protect sidewalks and curbs shall be removed as soon as practical, and within twenty-four hours upon order of the superintendent of streets. 
(Ord. 27 § 3, 1917) 
12.04.050 - Irrigating water on streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow or permit or cause to be run any irrigating water upon any of the streets of the city, except upon permission of the street superintendent; and any person, firm or corporation shall be entitled to such permit without charge whatsoever where the water is going to be used to allay the dust or to irrigate trees and shrubs planted along any street or highway. 
(Ord. 27 § 4, 1917) 
12.04.060 - Grazing of animals on streets, alleys and sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stake, tie or fasten any animal to any tree, shrub or other plant upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the city in such a manner as to permit the animal to graze and feed in and upon such street, alley and sidewalk. 
(Ord. 27 § 5, 1917) 
12.04.070 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in a sum not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the branch county jail located in the city for a period not exceeding ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 27 § 6, 1917) 
Chapter 12.08 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Permit-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or cause to be made any ditch, trench or excavation, or to do or cause to be made or done any grading, gravelling or paving, or to construct or cause to be constructed any curb, sidewalk or gutter or any other work of improvement upon any street, lane, alley, place, court, avenue, highway or other public place within the city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the superintendent of streets, except that nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person, firm or corporation from maintaining any pipe or conduit in any public street, lane, alley, place, court, avenue, highway or other public place within the city or from making such excavation therein as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the office of the superintendent of streets is closed, provided that the person, firm or corporation maintaining such pipe or conduit or making such excavation shall obtain a permit therefor within one day after the office of the superintendent of streets is first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. 
(Ord. 218 § 1, 1953: Ord. 215 § 2, 1953) 
12.08.020 - Permit-Application. 
    Applications for the permits required by Section 12.08.010 shall be presented in writing to the superintendent of streets and shall state the name of the applicant, his address, the location and description of the proposed work or improvement, and the authority for doing the same, and said application shall be accompanied by sufficient money or a certified check in a sum sufficient to cover the estimated cost of engineering, inspection and other incidental expenses to be incurred by the city. An estimate of costs shall be furnished by the superintendent of streets. The superintendent of streets shall refund to the applicant any deposits, if the application is refused, and any sum remaining after the payment of all expenses. 
(Ord. 215 § 3, 1953) 
12.08.030 - Permit-Denial-Work to conform to applicable regulations. 
A.  The superintendent of streets may refuse any permit, if he is satisfied that the work described in the application for permit, plans filed therewith, do not conform to the requirements of the pertinent ordinances and laws of the city. 
B.  Any and all work shall be done in accordance with the plans, profiles and cross-sections and specifications applicable thereto, adopted by the city council, and shall be done to the official line and grade and subject to the supervision and control of the superintendent of streets. All grade stakes shall be set by or under the direction of the superintendent of streets. 
(Ord. 528 § 1, 1978: Ord. 215 § 4, 1953) 
12.08.040 - Permit-Minimum charge. 
    The minimum charge for any permit issued under terms of this chapter shall be two dollars. 
(Ord. 215 § 5, 1953) 
12.08.050 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 215 § 6, 1953) 
Chapter 12.12 - USE RESTRICTIONS ON PAVED STREETS 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Inch of width of tires" is equivalent to the manufacturer's rating of width in inches stamped upon such tire. 
B.  "One motor power," when applied to motor vehicles, means the power furnished by one motor, and, when applied to horse drawn vehicles, means one team, regardless of the number of horses composing such team. 
(Ord. 81 § 1, 1925) 
12.12.020 - Weight restrictions. 
    No motor or other vehicle, or other object or contrivance for moving loads, shall be operated or moved upon or over any paved street within the city, the weight of which, resting upon the surface of said street, exceeds seven hundred pounds upon any inch of width of tire, when said vehicle is equipped with pneumatic tires, nor more than six hundred fifty pounds upon any inch of width of tire, when said vehicle is equipped with solid rubber tires or rubber tires other than pneumatic. No motor or vehicle, object or contrivance for moving loads shall be operated or moved upon or over any paved street within the city, the weight of which, resting upon the surface of said street, exceeds six hundred pounds upon any inch of width of tire, roller, wheel or other objects, supported on the surface thereof, when such tires or the rolling surface of such rollers, wheels or other objects are made in whole or in part of metal; provided, however, that traction engines or tractors, the propulsive power of which is exerted not through wheels resting upon the ground, but by means of a flexible band or chain known as a moveable track, shall not be subject to the foregoing limitations upon permissible weights per inch per width of tire; if the portions of moveable tracks in contact with the surface of the street present plain surfaces; provided, further, that the aggregate of any load including the weight of loads and vehicles drawn by any one motive power shall in no case exceed thirty-six thousand pounds in weight; and provided, further, that in no case shall the load carried by any motor vehicle or trailer equipped with solid rubber tires exceed a fifty percent overload, as shown by the manufacturer's rating of such truck or trailer; provided, however, that in no case shall any motor or other vehicle be operated on or over any paved street within the city, nor any object be moved over or upon any paved street within the city, on wheels, rollers or otherwise, regardless of the width of tires, in excess of a total weight, including vehicle and load of twenty-two thousand pounds, when said motor or other vehicle or contrivance is equipped with four wheels running on the paving, or in excess of a total weight, including vehicle and load of thirty thousand pounds when said motor or other vehicle or contrivance is equipped with six wheels running on the paving and with three axles, not less than ninety-six inches apart. 
(Ord. 81 § 2, 1925) 
12.12.030 - Tractors, farm implements and machinery. 
    No tractor or other farm implement, or machinery of any kind, shall be dragged, rolled, propelled or otherwise moved over or upon any paved street within the city, unless said tractor, implement or machinery is equipped with a band or planked crossing, so as to present a flat metal surface to the paving, and rating requirements to comply with Section 12.12.020. 
(Ord. 81 § 3, 1925) 
12.12.040 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars nor more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 81 § 4, 1925) 
Chapter 12.16 - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Definitions. 
    Whenever, in this chapter, the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
B.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees. 
C.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.16.030. 
E.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 369 § 1, 1968) 
12.16.020 - Public hearing. 
    The council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures, within designated areas of the city, and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electricity, communication or similar or associated services. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment role, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearing at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 501 § 1, 1978: Ord. 369 § 2, 1968) 
12.16.030 - Declaration of district. 
A.  If, any such public hearing as provided for in Section 12.16.020, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation, as set forth in Section 12.16.020, within a designated area, the council, by resolution, shall declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Further, the city council shall determine that the public utility has., voluntarily agreed to pay over fifty percent of all costs of conversion, excluding costs of user's connections to underground electric or communication facilities. 
B.  Such resolution shall include a description of the area, comprising the underground utility district, and shall fix the time within which removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
C.  Pursuant to Street and Highway Code Section 5895.5 through 5896.8, proceedings for a conversion may also be initiated by a petition signed by not fewer than five owners of assessable land in the proposed assessment district, as shown by the last equalized assessment role used by the city, owning lands constituting more than one-half of the area of all assessable lands within the proposed assessment district. The petition shall be filed with the clerk, who thereupon shall check or cause said petition to be checked. If the petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified signers, the clerk shall execute a certificate of sufficiency and present said petition and certificate to the legislative body. 
D.  Upon presentation of the petition and certificate of sufficiency, or upon determination by the city council, pursuant to subsection A of this section, the legislative body may adopt a resolution declaring its intention to order the conversion. 
(Ord. 501 § 2, 1978: Ord. 369 § 3, 1968) 
12.16.040 - Maintenance of overhead facilities following date of required removal. 
A.  Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein, as provided in Section 12.16.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service, as provided in Section 12.16.070, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
C.  In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions: 
1.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
2.  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
3.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
4.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
5.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
6.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
7.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
8.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 369 §§ 4, 5, 6, 1968) 
12.16.050 - Notice to property owners and utilities of creation of underground utility district. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption of the resolution. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location. 
B.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 369 § 7, 1968) 
12.16.060 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
    If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 369 § 8, 1968) 
12.16.070 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.16.060 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served. 
B.  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting said property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and, thirty days thereafter, may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. 
C.  The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that, if said work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
D.  If, upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided or upon receipt of a written request by the owner to do so, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility services to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council, setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which said cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing of protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall be not less than ten days thereafter. 
E.  The city engineer, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, forthwith shall give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in Section 12.16.050 for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
F.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
G.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as property taxes are due and payable, and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. 
(Ord. 501 § 3, 1978; Ord. 369 § 9, 1968) 
12.16.080 - Responsibility of city. 
    The city shall remove, at its own expense, all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under the provisions of this chapter, in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.030. 
(Ord. 369 § 10, 1968) 
12.16.090 - Extension of time. 
    In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 369 § 11, 1968) 
12.16.100 - Penalty for violation. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be decreed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.24. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 369 § 12, 1968) 
Chapter 12.20 - BUILDING NUMBERS 
Sections: 

12.20.010 - Uniform numbering system. 
A.  All entrances from the public streets of the city to buildings shall be numbered as provided in this chapter. 
B.  The numbering of each and every entrance shall be placed upon or immediately above the door or gate closing the entrance. Each figure of said number shall be at least two inches in height and of corresponding width. 
C.  The appropriate number of any entrance to any building shall be placed thereon within five days after the receipt by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of such building of a notice from the building inspector of the number or numbers designated for such building, and all numbers designated for such building not in conformity shall be immediately removed from the building by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant thereof. 
D.  It shall be the duty of the building inspector to designate the respective numbers for buildings fronting on streets laid out by the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, or laid out or extended after such time. 
(Ord. 72 § 1, 1924) 
12.20.020 - Dividing lines designated. 
    The following shall be respective starting points or dividing lines for numbers on buildings fronting on streets laid out by the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, or to be laid out or extended after such time: 
A.  East and west, from Broadway; and 
B.  North and south, from Hobsonway. 
(Ord. 79 § 1, 1925: Ord. 72 § 2, 1924) 
12.20.030 - Odd and even numbers. 
    The numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of the street shall be odd numbers, and the numbers on the southerly and easterly side shall be even numbers. 
(Ord. 72 § 3, 1924) 
12.20.040 - Numbers designated. 
A.  A block, within the meaning of this chapter, shall be that portion of any street between two cross streets, or between a cross street and an abutting street, or between two abutting streets. In cases of abutting streets, the prolonged center line of the abutting street shall be the dividing line of the blocks. 
B.  One hundred numbers, or as many thereof as may be necessary, shall be allowed to each block. Number 100 shall be the first number used at the respective beginning point on the sides of the street which are to contain the even numbers, and number 101 for the sides which are to contain the odd numbers. At the beginning of the second block from the starting point, the first numbers shall be 200 and 201, respectively, and so continued throughout the system. 
(Ord. 78 § 1, 1925: Ord. 72 § 4, 1924) 
12.20.050 - Frontage. 
    Twelve and one-half feet of frontage shall be allowed for each number, to be calculated from the end of the block at which the numbers begin. On all streets the number shall be done as if the streets extended to the dividing line for the city, as defined in Section 12.20.020. 
(Ord. 72 § 5, 1924) 
12.20.060 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, persons, firm or corporation who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars nor more than thirty dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail not fewer than ten days nor more than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 72 § 6, 1924) 
Chapter 12.24 - PUBLIC LIBRARY 
Sections: 

12.24.010 - Established. 
    A public library is established in and for the city. 
(Ord. 37 § 1, 1919) 
Chapter 12.28 - CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PARKS AND MARINA*[] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 619. 

12.28.011 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, certain words are defined as follows: 
    "Annual" means July 1st through June 30th. 
    "Annual pass" means a pass for entrance into Quechan Marina purchased on an annual. 
    "Boat launch" means that facility, including designated parking areas, located in Quechan Marina which is constructed and maintained for the launching and retrieving of water craft into the waters of the Colorado River. 
    "Daily pass" means a pass purchased on a specific day for use until marina closing on that day. 
    "Day use" means use of facilities provided within Quechan Marina exclusive of boat launch. 
    "Director" means the director of parks. 
    "Fee" means a designated sum of money to be paid for entering Quechan Marina for "day use" or "boat launch" purposes. 
    "Marina" means Quechan Marina and all facilities contained therein. 
    "Park" means a park, playground, swimming pool, recreation center, or any other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to public recreation. 
    "Pass" means the approval granted by the city on a daily or annual basis for use of day use or boat launch facilities located within Quechan Marina. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.021 - Recreation swimming. 
    No person in a park shall swim, bathe, or wade in the water of any fountain, pond, lake or stream, except that wading and swimming shall be permitted in pools and marina areas designated for these purposes. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.030 - Operating hours. 
A.  All parks shall be closed, and no person shall enter or remain in any park, between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. without prior written permission of the director. 
B.  Quechan Marina park and beach areas shall be open from seven a.m. to ten p.m., Monday through Sunday from October to April; from seven a.m. to ten p.m., Sunday through Thursday from May through September and from seven a.m. to eleven p.m., Friday and Saturday from May through September. 
C.  Boat launch at Quechan Marina shall open at dawn with retrieval before closing hours. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.031 - Picnic areas. 
    No person in a park or marina shall use any portion of the group picnic areas or similarly designated areas, or any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics or other activities to the exclusion of other persons, unless a permit has been previously obtained from the director as specified in Section 12.28.061. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.040 - Fires prohibited. 
    No person in a park or marina shall make or kindle a fire for any purpose, except in facilities provided for such purpose unless prior written permission has been obtained from the director. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.042 - Areas restricted. 
A.  No person in a park or marina shall enter an area posted as "CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC," nor shall any person use, or abet the use of, any area in violation of posted notices. 
B.  No person shall park any vehicle or trailer in areas designated and posted "NO PARKING". 
C.  No person shall park any vehicle or trailer or vehicle and trailer within Quechan Marina without first having properly obtained and displayed a day use or boat launch pass. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.043 - Use of restrooms. 
    No person over the age of eight years shall use restrooms or washrooms designated for the opposite sex. Children less than eight years of age shall be accompanied by an adult when entering/using restroom and washroom facilities. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.044 - Use of bicycles. 
    No person in a park or marina shall ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.045 - Protection of park and marina property. 
    No person in a park or marina shall climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or public art. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.046 - Animals prohibited. 
    No person shall lead, ride, drive or in any way bring into any park or marina any animal other than a domestic cat or a dog upon a leash or in a cage unless prior written consent has been obtained from the parks director. All animal droppings shall be removed and properly disposed of by the animal owner or person responsible for the animal. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.047 - Consumption of alcohol. 
    No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any park except in such areas designated by the director for such consumption. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.051 - Selling of merchandise. 
    No person in a park or marina shall expose or offer for sale any articles or thing, or station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of such article or thing, except a regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulations of the city council. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.052 - Advertising of merchandise. 
    No person in a park or marina shall use the park or marina to expressly advertise in any way any article or service for sale or hire. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.061 - Application for permit. 
    A permit shall be obtained from the director for exclusive use of any park or marina (or specific area thereof) facility. The application for said permit shall state: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any; 
C.  The day and hours for which the permit is desired; 
D.  The park or marina for which such permit is desired; 
E.  An estimate of anticipated attendance; 
F.  Whether or not a system for amplifying sound is proposed to be used and the purpose or purposes for which it shall be used; 
G.  Any other information which the director shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.062 - Standards for issuance. 
    The director shall issue a permit hereunder when the following findings can be made: 
A.  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park or marina; 
B.  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
C.  That the proposed activity or use is not anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
D.  That the proposed activity will not require any police support services, unless the same shall have been contracted for with off-duty Blythe police officers. Said officers shall continue to be in the employ of and shall be paid by the city. The permit applicant shall reimburse the city for any cost of said protection prior to the issuance of the permit; 
E.  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application; 
F.  Applicant may be required to provide portable restroom facilities. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.063 - Permit rules. 
    A permittee shall be bound by all applicable sections of the Blythe Municipal Code fully as though the same were inserted in the permit. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.064 - Revocation of permit. 
    The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit after a hearing thereon upon finding that: 
A.  The activity or use unreasonably interferes with public health, welfare, safety, recreation and enjoyment of the park or marina; or 
B.  The activity or use is anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; or 
C.  The activity or use entails unusual, extraordinary and/or burdensome expense or police supervision by the city; or 
D.  The system for amplifying sound, if being used, would unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park or marina. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.065 - Bounce houses. 
A.  A bounce house shall not be erected or used in any city park, or on any other city property, unless the user first obtains a bounce house permit from the city. Bounce house permits shall be issued pursuant to the process in Blythe Municipal Code Section 12.28.061. The city manager shall adopt regulations governing the issuance of bounce house permits, which regulations shall be incorporated into the permit requirements. 
B.  Bounce houses must be operated pursuant to the terms of the bounce house permit, and in accordance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. City employees are authorized to remove any bounce house determined to be in violation of this section or any applicable requirement. 
C.  Bounce house permits will only be issued to people renting from a company on the city's list of authorized providers. The city will provide applicants with a list of authorized providers. To qualify as an authorized provider, a company must: 
1.  Demonstrate that it has a current city business license; 
2.  Provide evidence of liability insurance in an amount of at least one million dollars combined single limit, and endorsed to name the city as additionally insured; 
3.  Sign an agreement with the city, agreeing to abide by all laws, rules and regulations concerning bounce houses, and agreeing to indemnify and hold the city harmless. 
D.  For purposes of this section the term "bounce house" means inflatable recreational equipment containing landing surfaces on which users may jump or bounce, which equipment is intended for outdoor use. 
(Ord. No. 860, § 1, 9-10-13) 
12.28.066 - Use pass required. 
    Each vehicle entering Quechan Marina shall pay for and secure either a day use or boat launch pass. Use passes may be purchased on a daily or annual basis. All user costs associated with Quechan Marina shall be established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.067 - Application for and display of use pass. 
A.  Daily Pass. All vehicles not having in their possession an annual pass must stop at the entrance gate to pay, register and receive the appropriate vehicle pass. The application for a daily pass shall state: 
1.  Date on which the pass is being purchased; 
2.  The name of the vehicle owner/operator; 
3.  Vehicle license number; 
4.  Vehicle type; 
5.  Type of Pass. Day use vehicle parking; boat launch and parking; launch only. 
B.  Display of Daily Pass. All vehicles entering Quechan Marina with a daily pass shall display the pass in a conspicuous location visible from the exterior of the vehicle. 
C.  Annual Pass. Application for an annual pass may be made through the city of Blythe. The life of an annual pass shall run from July 1st through June 30th of the following year. Annual pass fee shall be prorated by purchase date consistent with resolution "fee amounts"; purchase of an annual pass shall be based on a flat fee as provided for by council resolution. The application for an annual pass shall state: 
1.  Applicant name; 
2.  Applicant phone number; 
3.  Applicant vehicle license number; 
4.  Pass year; 
5.  Pass number. 
D.  Display of Annual Pass. All vehicles entering Quechan Marina with an annual pass shall display the pass in the driver's side lower left corner of the windshield. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.068 - Use pass revocation. 
    A daily annual pass may be revoked by the director or his/her representative if abuses occur or the health, safety or welfare of an individual, group or the general public is put at risk by actions of the pass holder or a member of their group. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.069 - Use pass rules. 
    The pass holder shall be bound by all applicable sections of the Blythe Municipal Code fully as though the same were inserted in the pass. The pass holder shall be bound by all Quechan Marina rules and regulations adopted by council resolution as though the same were inserted in the pass. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.070 - Use pass fee and conditions for issuance. 
    A fee for issuance of "day use" and "boat launch" annual and daily passes is hereby established for passes obtained for use of Quechan Marina and the facilities located therein. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee which shall be used for the operation and maintenance of park and marina facilities. As described in the fee resolution, the pass fee shall be paid by the operator of each motor vehicle prior to entering Quechan Marina for "day use" or "boat launch" purposes. Conditions for issuance of day use and boat launch pass shall be set forth in the fee resolution and shall hereafter be referred to as "Quechan Marina Rules and Regulations." On a bi-annual basis, the city council shall review the fees to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the burden of operation and maintenance of the facility. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.071 - Closing sections of park or marina. 
    Any section or part of the park or marina may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find reasonably necessary to allow construction herein, or in situations where there exists a substantial and immediate danger to the public. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.073 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phase of the ordinance codified in this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The city council declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
12.28.074 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or of any permit or pass or exception granted hereunder, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as follows: 
A.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the second violation of the same chapter within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same chapter within a twelve-month period. 
(Ord. 824 § 1 (part), 2007) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

13.04.010 - Meter-Required. 
    All consumers, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, shall be supplied with water measured through a meter furnished by the city, which meter, together with the service connection, shall remain the property of the city and shall be installed in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 51 § 3 (part), 1920) 
13.04.020 - Application-Required. 
    Before water is supplied to any person or for any premises from the city mains, the owner or occupant shall make a written application for such service upon forms provided by the superintendent of waterworks. 
(Ord. 51 § 3(a), 1920) 
13.04.030 - Application-Payment of installation charges in advance. 
    All charges for installation of service connections and meters shall be paid in advance at the time the application for service is made. 
(Ord. 51 § 3(b), 1920) 
13.04.040 - Application-Subject to approval of city council. 
    All applications shall be subject to the approval and acceptance of the city council. 
(Ord. 51 § 3(c), 1920) 
13.04.050 - Application-Deposit. 
    Where any applicant makes application for water service he shall in addition to complying with other requirements in this chapter, provide a deposit with the city in the amount to be set by the city council of the city by resolution, and the amount shall be retained by the city as a guarantee for the payment of water charges and may be applied only for the payments of closing bills on premises where water service was furnished, and in no case shall such deposit affect the right of the city to discontinue water service in the event bills for same are not paid as provided in this chapter. After two years from the time of deposit should there be no default in payment of water bills, the city may refund the deposit to the then assessed owner of record. 
(Ord. 573 § 2, 1980: Ord. 419 § 1, 1972: Ord. 51 § 8, 1920) 
13.04.060 - Connection. 
    The applicant having properly executed the application form or forms, and having complied with all the requirements of this chapter, relating to application for meter and service, and said application having been approved and accepted by the city council, the superintendent of waterworks shall cause the property described in the application to be connected with the city water mains in the following manner: 
A.  Where the property is located upon a street, alley or right-of-way in which a water main of not less than two inches in diameter is laid, the property shall be connected with the water system by a service pipe extending at right angles from the main. The service pipe, with meter attached, shall extend to the property line of the premises to be served; provided, however, nothing in this section shall interfere with the city installing a service pipe of sufficient size from the water main for the purpose of leading branches to the right and left in the street, alley or right-of-way, to supply not more than three separate properties. 
B.  Where the property is located on an alley in which there exists no water main opposite the premises applied for, the superintendent of waterworks shall extend the nearest water main in the direction of the property, provided that in no instance shall an extension of any water main exceed fifty feet for any one applicant who has in all other respects complied with this chapter, excepting that the superintendent of waterworks may estimate the cost of any extension in excess of the fifty feet allowed by this chapter and, upon payment by the applicant of the charges estimated, the extension may be installed by the city. 
C.  Not more than two services shall be allowed upon a three-quarter-inch pipe and not more than four services upon a one-inch pipe. 
D.  No more than the occupants of three twenty-five foot city lots or the equivalent thereof may under any circumstances be served through one meter except where one building covers a greater area than three twenty-five foot city lots. 
E.  No one service shall supply water to properties under separate ownership. 
(Ord. 51 § 4, 1920) 
13.04.070 - Installation charges-To be set by city council. 
    Charges to be paid by applicants for installation of services, including meters and boxes for the same, shall be in such sum or sums as the city council may from time to time establish, by resolution adopted at regular meetings of said city council. 
(Ord. 176 § 1, 1948: Ord. 51 § 5(a), 1920) 
13.04.080 - Installation charges-Cost of tearing up and replacing pavement. 
    Where services are made in paved streets or alleys the applicant shall pay in addition to the charges provided for in Section 13.04.070, the cost of tearing up and replacing the pavement. 
(Ord. 51 § 5(b), 1920) 
13.04.090 - Rate-To be set by city council. 
    For water furnished for any purpose by the city, the rate shall be in such sum or sums as the city council may from time to time establish by resolution adopted at regular meetings of said city council. 
(Ord. 447 § 1, 1974: Ord. 51 § 6, 1920) 
13.04.100 - Rate-Construction work. 
A.  For water furnished for construction work where meters are not installed or used, the rate to be charged shall be as follows: 
1.  For mixing and wetting concrete used in street paving, one dollar and fifty cents per one thousand square feet of paving laid; 
2.  For sidewalk and curbing, one dollar and fifty cents per one hundred square feet of concrete laid; 
3.  For water supplied for street grading or any construction work for the city not otherwise specified in this chapter, when not used through a meter, the amount of water used and the charges for the same shall be fixed by the city council; 
B.  Contractors or any person desiring to use water in construction work for the city, where connections must be made with city hydrants or stand pipes, in each and every instance shall obtain a written permit from the superintendent of waterworks before connecting with any such hydrant or stand pipe or using water therefrom, and such permit shall be exhibited upon the work for which issued. 
C.  In each and every instance enumerated in subsections A and B of this section the amount of the charge shall be estimated by the city council. 
(Ord. 51 § 7, 1920) 
13.04.110 - Payment of bills. 
    All bills for water service shall be due and payable in the finance office of the city on the billing date and become delinquent after tenth day of the month following that for which the bill is rendered. 
A.  Failure to pay the bill within the ten-day period will cause a delinquent notice to be mailed. The delinquent notice will be mailed not earlier than nineteen days after mailing the bill for services. The delinquent notice will notify of impending disconnection of the service fifteen days (ten days plus a five-day time allowance for mail delivery) after the mailing of the notice. Personal notice of impending disconnection for nonpayment will be issued by means of a door hanger at least forty-eight hours prior to the turn-off date. 
1.  Upon written request by the customer, the utility billing clerks are authorized to extend a normal payment period fifteen days beyond the impending disconnection date. 
B.  The water department will not terminate service for nonpayment in any of the following situations: 
1.  During the pendency of an investigation by the water department of a customer dispute or complaint; 
2.  When the customer has been granted an extension of the period for payment of a bill; 
3.  On the certification of a licensed physician and surgeon that to do so will be life threatening to the customer and the customer is financially unable to pay for service within the normal payment period and is willing to enter into an amortization agreement with the water department pursuant to subsection E of this section with respect to all charges that the customer is unable to pay prior to delinquency. 
C.  Any residential customer who has initiated a complaint or requested an investigation within five days of receiving the disputed bill, or who has, before termination of service, made a request for extension of the payment period of a bill asserted to be beyond the means of the customer to pay in full within the normal period for payment, shall be given an opportunity for review of the complaint, investigation, or request by the city director of finance, review manager for the water department. The review shall include consideration of whether the customer shall be permitted to amortize an unpaid balance of the delinquent account over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed twelve months. No termination of service shall be effected for any customer complying with an amortization agreement, if the customer also keeps the account current as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period. 
D.  Any customer whose complaint or request for an investigation pursuant to subsection B of this section has resulted in an adverse determination, in the review process, by the water department may appeal the determination to the city council. 
E.  Any customer meeting the requirements of subsection (B)(3) of this section shall, upon request, be permitted to amortize, over a period not to exceed twelve months, the unpaid balance of any bill asserted to be beyond the means of the customer to pay within the normal period for payment. 
F.  If a residential customer fails to comply with an amortization agreement, the water department shall not terminate service without giving notice to the customer at least forty-eight hours prior to termination of the conditions the customer is required to meet to avoid termination. This notice will be the final notice and does not entitle the customer to further investigation by the water department. 
G.  No termination of service may be effected without compliance with this section, and any service wrongfully terminated shall be restored without charge for the restoration of the service. 
(Ord. 701 § 1, 1994: Ord. 51 § 9, 1920) 
13.04.120 - Reconnection of discontinued service. 
    In the event that water service of consumer has been turned off for nonpayment of water service charges, as provided in Section 13.04.110, the consumer shall be entitled to have the water turned on again only upon the payment of all moneys due plus a reconnect fee to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 585 § 1, 1981: Ord. 419 § 2, 1972: Ord. 51 § 10, 1920) 
13.04.130 - Discontinuance of service. 
    Should any consumer desire to have the water service discontinued, he shall notify the superintendent of waterworks in writing at least twenty-four hours before service is to be discontinued, and service shall continue to be charged against such consumer until twenty-four hours after such notice is given. Where the consumer desires the water service temporarily discontinued, or where the water service is turned off on account of nonpayment of bills, a charge for turning on water shall be paid by the consumer before the superintendent of waterworks causes the water to be turned on and service again reestablished. Such charge shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 585 § 2, 1981: Ord. 419 § 3, 1972: Ord. 51 § 11, 1920) 
13.04.140 - Meter-Maintenance and repair. 
    All water meters installed by the city shall remain at all times the property of the city, and shall be maintained and repaired when rendered unserviceable through fair wear and tear; provided that, where replacements, repairs and adjustments of any meters are rendered necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, the same shall be paid for by the owner of the premises. 
(Ord. 51 § 12, 1920) 
13.04.150 - Meter-Testing. 
A.  Any consumer shall have the right to demand that the meter through which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the superintendent of waterworks for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the amount of water which is being delivered through it, provided that, when any consumer makes application therefor in writing to the superintendent of water works, he shall deposit with said application the amount charged for the various sizes, as follows: 
1.  For testing a five-eighth-inch meter, two dollars; 
2.  For testing a three-fourth-inch meter, two dollars; 
3.  For testing a one-inch meter, two dollars and fifty cents. 
B.  Upon the application for meter testing being made, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of waterworks to cause the meter to be examined and tested for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the water being delivered through it. If, on such an examination and test, the meter is found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor and the fee charged the applicant for such test shall be repaid to him. 
(Ord. 51 § 13, 1920) 
13.04.160 - Meter-Charge for water when out of order. 
    Whenever a meter gets out of order and fails to register correctly, the consumer shall be charged with the average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in good working order and registering correctly. 
(Ord. 51 § 14, 1920) 
13.04.170 - Pipes less than two inches in diameter not considered mains. 
    No water pipes laid in the streets, alleys or rights-of-way of the city of less than two inches in diameter shall be considered as mains and the superintendent of waterworks may, at any time, order the same removed and a larger pipe installed. 
(Ord. 51 § 15, 1920) 
13.04.180 - Waiver of certain rights. 
    All subscribers for water service and consumers of water, by their act of applying for such service and using the water furnished, and in consideration of the city supplying such service and water, agree to pay the rates, charges and penalties and abide by the rules and regulations established by the city council, by ordinance or otherwise, and for the same consideration, waive any claims against the city or the superintendent of waterworks for damage by water or otherwise, resulting from defective plumbing, broken or faulty service or water mains or resulting from any condition of the water itself, or any substance that may be mixed with or be in the water, as delivered to any consumer. The city expressly reserves the right to change the rates and charges and rules and regulations, and to temporarily discontinue service, at any time without notice to the subscriber or consumer. 
(Ord. 51 § 16, 1920) 
13.04.190 - Use of water during fire. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use the city water for any purpose other than extinguishing a fire when the members of the city fire company or other persons are using the same to extinguish a fire within the city limits. 
(Ord. 51 § 17, 1920) 
13.04.200 - Tampering with equipment. 
    It is unlawful for any person to meddle or tamper with, damage or deface any fire hydrants, sprinkling stands, water meters, meter boxes, pipes, fittings, machinery or equipment appertaining to or a part of the city water system without the consent of the superintendent of waterworks. 
(Ord. 51 § 18, 1920) 
13.04.210 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. All fines collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city waterworks operating fund. 
(Ord. 51 § 19, 1920) 
Chapter 13.05 - WATER CONSERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 884, § 1, adopted August 8, 2017, repealed the former Chapter 13.05, §§ 13.05.010-13.05.110, and enacted a new Chapter 13.05 as set out herein. The former Chapter 13.05 pertained to similar subject matter [or X] and derived from Ord. No. 871, adopted May 26, 2015. 

13.05.010 - Purpose and policy. 
    It is declared that due to the water conditions prevailing in the state of California, it is necessary and appropriate for the city council to adopt and implement a water conservation program to reduce the quantity of water used by persons in the city. Furthermore, the general welfare requires the reasonable and efficient use of the city's water resources, the waste or unreasonable use of water to be prevented, and the implementation of water conservation measures that will reduce water consumption within the city's service area. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.020 - City council authority. 
    The city council shall authorize and direct implementation of the applicable provisions of this chapter upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety, or when any water shortage is declared by resolution by the city council or state of California. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.030 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meaning hereinafter designated: 
A.  "City council" means the council of the city of Blythe. 
B.  "Customer" means any person, persons, association, corporation or governmental agency supplied and/or billed for water service by the city. 
C.  "Graywater" means untreated household wastewater which has not come into contact with toilet waste. Graywater includes used water from bathtubs, showers, bathroom wash basins and clothes washing machines. 
D.  "Landscape irrigation system" means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system. 
E.  "Persons" means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or intuition, including all agencies and departments of the city, or any other user of water provided by the city. 
F.  "Potable water" means water which is suitable for drinking. 
G.  "Recycled water" means treated domestic water (effluent) from a wastewater treatment plant that is suitable for a direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur. 
H.  "Single pass cooling systems" means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed. 
I.  "Water shortage" means a determination by the city in consideration of the existing conditions of water production and/or an announcement by any state water agency. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.040 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers or property, wherever situated, utilizing potable water provided by the city. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.050 - Part responsible for compliance. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, it shall be presumed that a person, corporation or association in whose name the water service account with the city is or was last billed or who is receiving the economic benefit of said water supply will be responsible for complying with this chapter. 
B.  For the purposes of this chapter, a use of water by a tenant or by an employee, agent, contractor or other acting on behalf of a customer, whether with real or ostensible authority, shall be imputed to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.060 - Adequate water conditions-Permanent measures. 
    The following activates are hereby prohibited at all times: 
A.  Allowing irrigation water to run off into a gutter, ditch, drain, driveway, sidewalk, street or onto pavement or other hard surface. 
B.  Outdoor irrigation of landscape on rainy days and following forty-eight hours of measurable rain. 
C.  Excess use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions in the plumbing system or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected. 
D.  Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment, unless done with a hand held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. 
E.  Restaurants serving water to their customers, except when specifically requested by their customers. 
F.  Operating a decorative water fountain or feature, built or installed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter that does not include re-circulated water. 
G.  Operating a commercial car wash or laundry, built or installed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, that does not use re-circulated water. 
H.  Operating a single-pass cooling system built or installed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
I.  Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments shall not launder towels and linens daily, except when specifically requested by their customer. 
J.  Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, patio and alleys, except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards. 
K.  The irrigation with potable water of ornamental turf on public street medians. 
L.  The irrigation with potable water of landscapes outside of newly constructed homes and buildings in a manner inconsistent with regulations or other requirements established by the California Building Standards Commission. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.070 - General provisions. 
A.  Recycled water shall be used instead of potable water for landscaped irrigation, construction, dust control and other approved used to the extent feasible where recycled water is available to supply all or some of the water demand. 
B.  All restrictions resulting from any water shortage shall remain in effect until such time that the city council changes a particular restriction or declares that drought conditions no longer exist. 
C.  Additional restrictions may be implemented as determined by the city, after notice to customers. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.080 - Exemptions to provisions. 
    None of the restrictions outlined in this chapter shall apply to the following: 
A.  The routine and necessary use of water by a governmental entity in pursuit of its functions for protecting the public health, safety and welfare. This exception does not apply to landscape irrigation by a governmental agency. 
B.  The necessary use of water for the routine maintenance and/or repair of water distribution facilities, residential and commercial plumbing and existing landscape irrigation systems. 
C.  The prohibited uses set forth in this subsection do not apply to Graywater. This provision shall not be construed to authorize the use of Graywater if such use is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.090 - Hardship and special cases-Implementation/review board. 
A.  A review board is established to review hardship and special cases which cannot follow the letter of this chapter. The review board shall consist of any two of the following or their respective designees: Chief building inspector, finance director or public works director. Appeal of any board decision shall be made to the city manager. 
B.  It is the purpose of the review board to review hardship or special cases and to determine whether or not said case warrants an exemption. The decision of the review board shall be prepared in writing, include terms and conditions, if any, set forth findings in support of the decision, and are promptly sent to the applicant. The board shall consider the facts of each case and decide whether to grant an exemption within five working days of the receipt of a properly completed "application for exemption from mandatory water restrictions" form. The application must include pertinent information and a written statement for the applicant. An exemption shall be granted for reasons of economic hardship which is defined as, but not limited to, a threat to an individual business's primary source of income (but under no circumstances shall inconvenience or the potential for damage of landscaping be considered an economic hardship which justifies an exemption). An exemption may also be granted in the instances where the water use restrictions cannot be met without threatening public health or safety or there has been a significant change in the customer's circumstances. No exemption will be granted to any customer for any reason in the absence of a demonstration that the customer has achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption. The board shall authorize only the implementation of equitable water use restrictions which further the purpose and intent of the emergency water conservation plan. The special water use restrictions authorized by the board in each special or hardship case shall be set forth on the face of the exemption. 
C.  An exemption to any element of this chapter granted under any adequate water supply condition or water shortage condition shall not be valid upon implementation of any more sever water supply condition of this chapter. An exemption expires under its own terms and conditions. 
D.  Any person, corporation or association who is granted an exemption and makes use of the water utility of the city pursuant to said exemption shall provide proof of said exemption upon demand by any peace officer or person authorized by the city to enforce this chapter. Upon conviction of any person, corporation or association for violating any provision of this part, the review board shall revoke any exemption previously granted. However, the board shall notify applicant of the proposed revocation in writing no less than five working days before taking such action, and application shall be given the opportunity to be heard by the review board prior to its taking such action. 
E.  Persons wishing to appeal the decision of the board shall have the right of appeal to the city manager. Appeal shall be made in writing within ten working days of the board decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
13.05.100 - Failure to comply-Violation/penalty. 
A.  Penalties. It is unlawful for any water customer to fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the city code, the penalties set forth herein shall be exclusive and not cumulative with any other provisions of this code. Furthermore, any and all violations that occur on any one day shall be treated as one violation for the purposes of determining a penalty under subsection B. The penalties for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be set out in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Range of Penalties. 
1.  For the first violation by any customer of any of the provisions of Sections 13.05.030 and 13.05.070, the city shall issue a written notice of the fact of such violation to the customer. 
2.  For a second violation by any customer of any of the provisions of Sections 13.05.030 and 13.05.070 within the same twelve-month period beginning with the first violation, the city shall issue a final written notice of the fact of such violation to the customer. 
3.  For a third violation by any customer of any of the provisions of Sections 13.05.060 and 13.05.070 within the same twelve-month period beginning with the first violation, a surcharge in the amount of one hundred dollars shall be added to the customer's water bill. 
4.  For a fourth violation by any customer of any of the provisions of Sections 13.05.060 and 13.05.070 within the same twelve-month period beginning with the first violation, a surcharge in the amount one hundred and fifty dollars shall be added to the customer's water bill. 
5.  For a fifth and any subsequent violation by any customer of any of the provisions of Sections 13.05.060 and 13.05.070 within the same twelve-month period beginning with the first violation, a surcharge in the amount of two hundred dollars shall be added to the customer's water bill. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Chapter 13.06 - WATER CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 
Sections: 

13.06.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is (1) to protect the public water supply against actual or potential contamination through cross-connections by isolating sources of contamination that may occur within a water user's premises because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; (2) to eliminate existing connection between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; (3) to eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination; (4) to prevent the making of cross-connections in the future. 
    These regulations are adopted pursuant to the State of California Administrative Code, Title 17, Public Health, entitled "Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections." 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city water department and any other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which, by reason of their construction, may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the city. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Air-Gap Separation. The term "air-gap separation" means a physical break between a supply pipe and receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch. 
B.  Approved Backflow Prevention Device. The term "approved backflow prevention device" means devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services. 
C.  Approved Water Supply. The term "approved water supply" means any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency. 
D.  Auxiliary Supply. The term "auxiliary supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply. 
E.  AWWA Standard. The term "AWWA Standard" means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
F.  Backflow. The term "backflow" means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Backsiphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause. 
G.  Contamination. The term "contamination" means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health, or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water. 
H.  Cross-connection. The term "cross-connection" as used in this chapter means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections. 
I.  Double Check Valve Assembly. The term "double check valve assembly" means an assembly of at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
J.  Health Agency. The term "health agency" means the California Department of Health Services, or the local health agency with respect to a small water system. 
K.  Local Health Agency. The term "local health agency" means the county or city health authority. 
L.  Person. The term "person" means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution. 
M.  Premises. The term "premises" means any and all areas on a water user's property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system. 
N.  Public Water System. The term "public water system" means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption that has five or more service connections or regularly serves an average of twenty-five individuals daily at least sixty days out of the year. 
O.  Reclaimed Water. The term "reclaimed water" means a wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable use. 
P.  Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device. The term "reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device" means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing. 
Q.  Service Connection. The term "service connection" refers to the point of connection of a user's piping to the water supplier's facilities. 
R.  Water Supplier. The term "water supplier" means the person who owns or operates the approved water supply system. 
S.  Water User. The term "water user" means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.030 - Type of backflow protection required. 
TABLE 1 
Degree of Hazard Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention A. Sewage and Hazardous Substances 1. Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply. AG 2. Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is not interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. AG 3. Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. AG 4. Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of AG if approved by the health agency and the city. AG 5. Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be, injected. RP B. Auxiliary Water Supplies 1. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. AG 2. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and city. RP C. Fire Protection System 1. Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected). DC 2. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and city. AG 3. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used. DC D. Dockside Watering Points and Marine Facilities 1. Pier hydrants for supplying water to vessels for any purpose. RP 2. Premises where there are marine facilities. RP E. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist. RP F. Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished. RP  
    Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an interstreet main flow may occur, shall have at least a standard check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the city's mains from pollution or contamination; in such cases the installation of approved backflow devices at such service connections shall be required. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.040 - Backflow prevention devices. 
A.  Approved Backflow Prevention Devices. 
1.  Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the city shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city's potable water system. 
2.  The city will provide, upon request, to any affected customer with a list of approved backflow prevention devices. 
B.  Backflow Prevention Device Installation. 
1.  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user's connection. The city shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention device. 
a.  Air-gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank. 
b.  Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches above grade and not more than thirty-six inches above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of twelve inches side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device, shall be protected in a manner approved by the city. 
c.  Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user's connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, so there is a minimum of six inches of clearance between the side of the device with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of three inches clearance between the other side of the device and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the "Y" type. These devices must be installed on their "side" with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the device. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three inch layer of gravel. 
C.  Backflow Prevention Device Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person who has demonstrated their competency in testing of these devices to the city. Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The city may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the city shall be filed with the city each time a device is tested, relocated, or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
2.  The city will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the city to test backflow prevention devices. The city will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired. 
3.  (Optional) Upon request the city will test a water user's backflow prevention device to fulfill the requirements of this chapter. The water user will be charged for the test and any maintenance found necessary to keep the device in working order on the next regular water bill. 
D.  Backflow Prevention Device Removal. 
1.  Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated, or replaced. 
a.  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future; 
b.  Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device; 
c.  Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required following the repair of the device; and 
d.  Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the city and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.050 - User supervisor. 
    At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the city, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the city shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the city of the user supervisor's identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.060 - Administrative procedures. 
A.  Water System Survey. 
1.  The city shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the city upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted. 
2.  The city may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of his piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary. 
3.  The city may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of his piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary. 
B.  Customer Notification-Device Installation. 
1.  The city will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing the corrective actions to be taken, if any are required. A period of sixty days will be given to complete all corrective actions required, including installation of backflow prevention devices. 
2.  A second notice will be sent to each water user who does not take the required corrective actions prescribed in the first notice within the sixty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. 
D.  Customer Notification-Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The city will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city. 
2.  A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have his/her backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his/her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.070 - Water service termination. 
A.  General. When the city encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city water service. 
B.  Basis for Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
1.  Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device; 
2.  Refusal to test a backflow prevention device; 
3.  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device; 
4.  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device; 
5.  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
6.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
7.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public system and an auxiliary water system; 
8.  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
C.  Water Service Termination Procedures. 
1.  For subdivisions 1, 2, 3, or 4 of subsection B of this section, the city will terminate service to a customer's premise after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period, water service may be terminated. 
2.  For subdivisions 5, 6, 7, or 8 of subsection B of this section, the city will take the following steps: 
a.  Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to terminate water service; 
b.  Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.080 - Requirements for the certification as a backflow prevention device tester. 
A.  Each applicant for certification as a tester of backflow prevention devices shall file an approved application with the city clerk, together with a fee as may be established by the city council. 
B.  Competency in all phases of backflow prevention device testing and repair must be demonstrated by means of education and/or experience in order to obtain certification. 
C.  The following are minimum requirements: 
1.  Applicants shall have had at least two years experience in plumbing or pipe fitting or equivalent qualifications. 
2.  Applicants shall hold a valid certification from the American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.) California-Nevada Section, from a county certification program, or have equivalent training in the opinion of the city and the health department. 
3.  Each applicant for certification as a tester of backflow prevention devices shall furnish evidence to show that he has available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test such devices. He shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports prepared by him. 
D.  The certificate issued to any tester is valid for a period of one year and may be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the city for improper testing, repairs, and/or reporting. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.090 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any part thereof. The council declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
13.06.100 - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect thirty days from the date of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 640 (part), 1988) 
Chapter 13.08 - SEWERS-USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
A.  "Discharge to the ground" means discharge of wastewater to or into the soil. 
B.  "Exchange type water conditioning apparatus" means water conditioning apparatus that is removed from the premises upon which it normally operates and is regenerated at a commercial regeneration plant when in need of regeneration. 
C.  "Floatable hydrocarbon oil" means the amount of hydrocarbon oil floating to the surface of a sample of the water under the same conditions as prescribed in the definition of "floatable oil and grease." 
D.  "Floatable oil and grease" means the oil and grease floating to the surface of a sample of water when it is retained for one hour in a quiescent condition in a vessel with vertical walls, filled to the depth of thirty centimeters. 
E.  "Hydrocarbon substances" means petroleum hydrocarbon substances, as may be defined from time to time, by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or in the absence thereof, by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
F.  "Industrial wastewater" means the wastewater arising from or associated with an industrial operation. Such operation shall be understood to include the following: Production or refining of petroleum; production, processing, packing or canning of fruits, vegetables, meat or beverages; laundering of clothes in public laundries, public self-service laundries, or hospitals; production of fertilizer, keeping of livestock or poultry and operation of dairies; production or dying textiles; production of soap or other detergents or chemicals; production and processing of plastics; cleaning of tanks, tank cars or barrels; plating or other processing of metals; processing or reclamation of refuse; all kinds of similar manufacturing, processing and servicing operations. 
G.  "Operation" includes the washing of equipment or spaces used in industrial operations. 
H.  "Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group and includes the plural as well as the singular. 
I.  "Public sewer" means any sewer located in or maintained by the city in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights. The term as used in this chapter does not include storm drains or channels for conveyance of natural surface waters. 
J.  "Public works director" means the public works director of the city or his authorized representative or deputy. 
K.  "Plumbing official" means the public works director of the city or his authorized representative or deputy. 
L.  "Total oil and grease" means the amount of residue extracted by the Partition-Gravimetric Method No. 502A, described in the 14th Edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water." 
M.  "Water supply" means the city's annual average water supply serving the area tributary to the city's main sewage treatment plant. "Water supply" also means the average annual supply actually served to a specific establishment or location as determined by testing and compositing samples and analysis approved by the director of community service. 
(Ord. 650 § 1, 1988: Ord. 548 § 2, 1979) 
13.08.020 - Prohibited substances. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to discharge or to cause to be discharged into any public sewer or any opening leading to a public sewer of the city any of the following: 
A.  Any earth, sand, rocks, ashes, gravel, plaster, concrete, glass, metal filings, or metal or plastic objects, garbage, or solid or semisolid material in quantities or volume which will obstruct the flow of sewage in the sewer or any object which will cause clogging of a sewage pump or sewage sludge pump, or interfere with the normal operation of the sewer treatment plant; 
B.  Any compound which will produce noxious odor in the sewer or sewage treatment plant; 
C.  Any volatile liquid or substance which can produce a toxic or flammable atmosphere in the sewer; 
D.  Any overflow from any septic tank or cesspool, or any liquid or sludge pumped from a cesspool or septic tank, except at such place and in such manner as may be prescribed by the public works director; 
E.  Any stormwater or any runoff from any field, roof, yard, driveway, or street; 
F.  On and after the first day of March, 1980, no person, firm or corporation, without exception, connected to or using the public sewer system, shall dispose of, or suffer or permit the disposal of, water which has passed through or been used in refrigeration cooling mechanisms into the public sewers, whether or not such disposition is now being made or has been made into the public sewers prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. 
    On or after the date the ordinance codified in this section is in effect, no person, firm or corporation shall dispose of, or suffer or permit the disposal of water which has passed through or been used in refrigeration cooling mechanisms into the public sewers of the city, or any main or pipe connected to the public sewers, except those persons, firms or corporations connected to or using the public sewer system before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, and those persons, firms, or corporations, excepted by this section may continue such disposition of refrigeration cooling water into the public sewers only up to, but not after, the first day of March, 1980; 
G.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit; 
H.  Any radioactive wastes in excess of federal, state or county regulations; 
I.  Any material or quantity of material which will cause significant damage to any part of the sewerage system or sulfide generation or maintenance or operation costs of any part of the sewerage system or become a nuisance or menace to public health, or which will cause the city sewage plant effluent to exceed the concentration limits set by the Regional Water Quality Control Board No. 7, in accordance with Order No. 73-13R attached to Ordinance 548, codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the city clerk, or such subsequent amendments as shall be duly adopted from time to time by the Colorado River Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
J.  Any hydrocarbon substances, as defined herein, except as expressly authorized pursuant to Section 13.08.145. 
(Ord. 650 § 2, 1988; Ord. 548 § 4, 1979) 
13.08.030 - Construction plans. 
    No person, other than employees of the city, persons contracting to do work for the city, or maintenance workers of the city shall construct or cause to be constructed, or alter or cause to be altered, any public sewer, lateral sewer, house connection or industrial connection sewer over six inches in diameter, sewage pumping plant, pollution control plant, or other sewerage facility within the city where existing or proposed wastewater flows with discharge directly or indirectly to facilities of the city without first obtaining approval of sewerage construction plans from the city public works department. 
    The applicant shall submit to the public works department for approval construction plans and such specifications and other details as required to describe fully the proposed sewerage facility. The plans shall have been prepared under the supervision of and shall be signed by an engineer of suitable training registered in the state. Approval of the plans by the city engineer shall be obtained before approval of the plans by the public works director. 
(Ord. 548 § 5, 1979) 
13.08.040 - Vehicle-servicing facility-Interceptor-Required. 
    Any facility maintained for the servicing or repair of roadway machinery shall install and maintain a sand-and-oil interceptor. Wastewaters from toilets shall not be allowed to pass through this interceptor, but all wastewaters arising from the servicing and repair of vehicles shall pass through this interceptor before discharge to a public sewer of the city. If the vehicle-servicing facilities do not include facilities for the washing of more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have an operation fluid capacity of not less than six cubic feet and an accessible effective water surface not less than four square feet. "Accessible effective water surface" means a surface which is easily accessible for cleaning and which at the same time will retain oil floating on the surface of water passing through the trap under conditions of use. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle-servicing facilities to keep sand and oil out of the sewer. If his interceptor is not adequate under the conditions of use, he shall construct one which is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose. 
(Ord. 548 § 6, 1979) 
13.08.050 - Vehicle-servicing facility-Interceptor-Plumbing approval. 
    The plumbing official shall not approve the plumbing of a vehicle servicing facility or repairing facility if it does not have a sand-and-oil interceptor meeting the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 548 § 7, 1979) 
13.08.060 - Vehicle-servicing facility-Interceptor-Maintenance. 
    The sand-and-oil interceptor of a vehicle-servicing facility shall be properly maintained. It shall be cleaned as often as is necessary to assure that sand and oil do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the interceptor. When an interceptor is cleaned, the accumulated sediment and floating material shall be removed and legally disposed of otherwise than to a sewer. An interceptor is not considered to be properly maintained if for any reason it is not in good working condition. It is not considered to be properly maintained if sand and oil accumulations total more than twenty-five percent of the operating fluid capacity. The owner of any vehicle-servicing facility, the lessee and sublessee if there be such, and any proprietor, operator or superintendent of such facility are individually and severally liable for any failure of proper maintenance of such interceptor. 
(Ord. 548 § 8, 1979) 
13.08.070 - Water-softening devices. 
A.  The restrictions in this section do not apply to exchange type water-conditioning apparatus. Water-conditioning apparatus includes zeolite anion or cation exchange softeners, demineralizers and other like devices. No water conditioning equipment in use after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may discharge its wastes to the sewer or to the ground if the equipment has a mineral capacity in excess of fifteen cubic feet. Multiple units installed to supply water to the same premises shall be considered as a single apparatus for the purpose of this section. 
B.  After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is unlawful to install or replace water-conditioning apparatus of any size which discharges its regeneration wastes to the sewer or to the ground. 
(Ord. 548 § 9, 1979) 
13.08.080 - Discharging industrial wastewater-Letter of approval-Required. 
A.  Any person desiring to discharge industrial wastewater into a public sewer in Blythe shall submit a letter to the public works director presenting information as to the kind and amount of industrial wastewater produced and discharged by the industrial operations producing the wastewater, plans for any pretreatment facilities planned to prevent discharge of improper materials to the sewer, and any other pertinent information necessary to control discharge to the sewerage system as requested by the public works director. Within forty-five days, the public works director shall reply to this letter. If the public works director finds that the quality of the wastewater and the existing facilities for which the person furnishes a commitment to install within a reasonable period for discharge to the sewer, conform to the requirements of this and other ordinances of the city; that any existing or committed pretreatment facilities are adequate; and that the sewer capacity is available, he shall reply approving discharge of that wastewater to the city. 
B.  A letter of approval shall state the nature of the industry and the nature of the amount of flow which the applicant may discharge to the sewer, any controls which the public works director finds necessary in order that the sewerage system may serve its intended purpose, those chemical constituents to be analyzed and reported upon, and, in the event that installation of pretreatment or other facilities are deemed necessary, the letter shall specify the period of time granted for the installation of pretreatment or other facilities. If the public works director finds that the proposed discharge will not be lawful under this chapter or other applicable laws, he shall so notify the applicant; such notification to be within forty-five days of the finding. 
(Ord. 548 § 10, 1979) 
13.08.090 - Discharging industrial wastewater-Alteration of facility or wastes. 
    If the discharger wishes to make alterations of pretreatment facilities or alterations of connections to the sewer, or if he wishes to discharge additional waste or to discharge wastes in excess of the amounts which have been approved, or wastes of a different kind, he shall submit to the public works director a letter requesting approval of such alteration. The public works director shall treat this in the same manner as an original application under Section 13.08.080. 
(Ord. 548 § 11, 1979) 
13.08.100 - Discharging industrial wastewater-Unlawful acts. 
    It is unlawful after one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for any person to discharge into the public sewerage system of the city, directly or indirectly, any industrial wastewater which is not approved as to kind and amount by a letter from the public works director. Any such discharge shall be in accordance with any restrictions and conditions imposed in the public works director's letter of approval, except that the public works director shall grant such reasonable extensions of time in excess of the one hundred eighty-day period as may be necessary for plant alterations, changes in process or the design, acquisition, manufacture, installation and testing of the committed treatment or other facilities, which additional time the public works director agrees is required to effect compliance. 
(Ord. 548 § 12, 1979) 
13.08.110 - Discharging industrial wastewater-Conformance required. 
    Except as set forth in this chapter, no industrial waste shall be discharged to a public sewer unless it conforms to the requirements set forth in this chapter for all discharges to public sewers, and no industrial wastewater shall be discharged to a public sewer unless it conforms also to the requirements set forth in this section. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be based on the mean values obtained from analysis of industrial waste samples representative of the quality and quantity of discharge to the sewer at the point of entry of industrial waste to the public sewer system, or if this is not feasible, at other points up the stream of the individual industrial waste discharge. All such samples shall be weighted with the flow at the sampling point to furnish values weighted with time and quantity for each required chemical constituent. Wherever deemed practical by the public works director, these industrial wastewater samples may be composited with regard to time and quantity and the analysis made from such composite samples. 
(Ord. 548 § 13, 1979) 
13.08.120 - Discharging industrial wastewater-Constituent limitations. 
    The following constituent items A through H, are those for which the Colorado River Regional Water Quality Control Board specifies limitations in terms of not exceeding the water supply plus a given increment of the constituent. The increments given in this section have been increased above those specified by the board to give industrial waste dischargers the benefit of the dilution of domestic waste discharges. If such discharge dilution is insufficient, this chapter may be amended to decrease the increment values. 
A.  The content of dissolved solids shall at no time exceed the yearly average dissolved solids in the water supply plus three hundred milligrams per liter. 
B.  The content of chloride-ion shall at no time exceed the yearly average of chloride-ion in the water supply plus fifty milligrams per liter. 
C.  The content of sulphate shall at no time exceed the yearly average sulphate in the water supply plus forty milligrams per liter. 
D.  The content of fluoride shall at no time exceed the yearly average of fluoride in the water supply plus 0.5 milligrams per liter of fluoride. 
    The following items, E through I, are those which related to the city's operation of its own sewers and sewage treatment works. 
E.  The content of total oil and grease shall at no time exceed five hundred milligrams per liter. 
F.  The total content of floatable oil and grease including hydrocarbon oil shall at no time exceed one hundred milligrams per liter. 
G.  The standard five day biochemical oxygen demand shall at no time exceed six hundred fifty milligrams per liter. 
H.  The suspended solids content shall at no time exceed six hundred fifty milligrams per liter. 
I.  The pH shall at no time be less than six or greater than nine. 
(Ord. 548 § 14, 1979) 
13.08.130 - Sampling and measuring discharge. 
    The point of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be at the point of discharge to the public sewerage system or such other upstream sampling point on the private lateral as mutually agreed upon by the industry representative and the public works director. Where certain wastes are critical, the public works director may specify procedures for obtaining necessary samples, and the public works director may require that any persons discharging industrial wastewater through the sewer install a measuring device, and that samples be analyzed and measurements of flows be taken and reported to the city, and such sampling and measuring device shall be made accessible to the public works director or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 548 § 15, 1979) 
13.08.140 - Discharging industrial wastes-Letter of approval-Discharge. 
    The letter of approval which shall be predicated upon compliance with the provisions of Section 13.08.110 and Section 13.08.130 may be revoked by the public works director upon a minimum notice of three days when it is found that the discharge which the letter approves is in fact in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 548 § 16, 1979) 
13.08.145 - Discharging hydrocarbon substances-Limitations/agreements. 
A.  Any person desiring to discharge petroleum or other hydrocarbon substances into the public sewer, in the city, shall submit to the city clerk for the city council approval an application presenting information as to the kind, duration and quantity of hydrocarbon substances to be so discharged, with a request for approval to discharge. Within sixty days thereafter, the city council shall reply to this letter. If the city council finds the extent of hydrocarbon discharge does not exceed a total sum of twenty-five parts per million (ppm) and further determines that there is sufficient sewer capacity available, then it may approve such discharge into the wastewater of the city, provided an agreement in a form approved by resolution of the city council providing for durations, fees for discharge, and the like is first signed by such person desiring to so discharge. 
B.  The agreement shall provide for the quantity and duration of such discharge, together with any and all reasonable and necessary additional controls and/or approvals the city council determines necessary and appropriate to protect the city sewer system. If the city council finds that the proposed hydrocarbon discharge would be unsafe to the system or unlawful under applicable laws and regulations of either the state or the United States government, it shall so notify the applicant within forty-five days of said findings. 
(Ord. 650 § 3, 1988) 
13.08.150 - Application of provisions. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as lessening the applicability of other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 548 § 17, 1979) 
13.08.160 - Discharging hazardous fluids or solids. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into any storm drain or stormwater channel or natural watercourse, whether currently carrying water or not, or into any pipe or waterway leading to such drain, channel, or watercourse, any solid or fluid material which will impair the useful functioning of such drain, channel, or watercourse, or which will cause expense to the city, or other public agency, in maintaining the proper functioning of same, or which will cause public nuisance or public hazard or which will cause detrimental pollution of natural surface or subsurface waters. 
(Ord. 548 § 18, 1979) 
13.08.170 - Discharges into sumps, wells, watercourses. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge or cause to be deposited or discharged into any sump which is not impermeable or into any pit or well, or on to the ground, or into any storm drain or watercourse any material which by seeping underground or by being leached or by reacting with the soil is detrimental to the usable underground waters and exceeds the range of the effects of ordinary nonindustrial land uses on underground waters into which such wastes may seep, or which will violate any requirements of Water Quality Control Board No. 7. 
(Ord. 548 § 19, 1979) 
13.08.180 - Appeals. 
    Decisions, judgments or findings made by the public works director pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city council. The city council may amend, modify, confirm or reject any such decision, judgment or finding (including waivers); provided the purpose and intent of this chapter is not violated. No appeal shall be made with respect to the specific requirements pertaining to quality, content or type of disposal of wastewater that may be discharged, as contained in Sections 13.08.020, 13.08.040 and 13.08.110. 
(Ord. 548 § 20, 1979) 
13.08.190 - Determining time limits. 
    Wherever in this chapter time limits are established or periods of compliance or extensions thereof are specified, the commencement date for computing such periods or time limits for areas annexed to the city subsequent to enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be the official annexation date. This section shall have no application to firms or industries established subsequent to the annexation date. 
(Ord. 548 § 23, 1979) 
13.08.200 - Interpretation of provisions. 
    All the provisions of this chapter are to be reasonably interpreted. It is the intent of this chapter to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard to the underground waters and to apply the principal that the degree of protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(Ord. 548 § 24, 1979) 
13.08.210 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable therefor as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 548 § 21, 1979) 
Chapter 13.12 - SEWERS-CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 

13.12.010 - Connection fee. 
    A fee of fifty dollars shall be charged by the city for connection to the city sewers, payable when the permit is issued. 
(Ord. 420 § 1, 1972: Ord. 82 § 3, 1925) 
13.12.020 - House sewers. 
A.  All house sewers constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be of cast-iron pipe or vitrified earthenware sewer pipe, not less than four inches in diameter. 
B.  In the construction after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section of sewers which extend from one building underneath another, cast-iron pipe shall be used. 
C.  Whenever a house sewer is connected to a main or lateral street sewer, a suitable reducer must be used to connect to the Y. 
D.  The joints of each and every section of vitrified pipe shall be made with oakum and a copper antiroot ring, and the joint shall be grouted with a mixture of two-thirds sand and one-third portland cement. The line shall be provided with a test tee at the main sewer, and the pipe shall be subjected to a full-line water test for four pounds. Cast-iron pipe shall be calked with lead and oakum, and subjected to the water test described in this subsection. Each and every joint, whether of vitrified or cast-iron pipe, shall be thoroughly cleaned with a scraper from the inside before the next joint is laid. 
E.  All sewer lines shall be laid on a perfect line on the bottom and side, with a fall of not less than one-quarter inch to the foot, toward the cesspool or sewer. 
F.  The pipe must be perfectly watertight, and it shall not be covered or concealed until it has been approved by the plumbing inspector. All backfilling of ditches shall be done in a satisfactory manner. 
G.  Sections of vitrified pipe between sections of cast-iron pipe, or the reverse, will not be allowed. 
H.  More than one building on each fifty-foot frontage may be connected into one sewer, provided the work can be done in an approved way, and provided the fifty-foot frontage is owned by one individual. 
(Ord. 130 § 1, 1939: Ord. 82 § 4, 1925) 
13.12.030 - Soil and waste pipes. 
A.  All soil and waste pipes must be of cast-iron or wrought-iron pipe, provided that in the use of wrought-iron pipe all fittings shall be of the type known as Durham System recessed fittings, and in no case may fittings of the ordinary wrought type be used, except on vents. 
B.  The ends of all wrought pipe used for waste pipes shall be properly reamed to the full diameter of the pipe. Changes of direction in waste lines shall be made by fittings of the same degree angles, as specified for cast-iron work. 
C.  Every sink shall have not less than two-inch waste pipe up to the trap, which may be one and one-half inches. 
D.  Y openings left for future connections must be plugged with iron plugs calked in permanently. 
E.  Quarter bends with heel inlets shall not be used except at the top of vertical lines. 
(Ord. 82 § 5, 1925) 
13.12.040 - Garage washbasins. 
    Public or private garages may have washbasins connected to the city sewers, provided that such basins are used only for washing of motor vehicles. Said washbasins shall be of two compartments and the smaller, nearest the sewer, shall not be less than twelve inches by sixteen inches by eighteen inches deep. The cast-iron pipe connections shall not be less than three inches in diameter. The whole shall be constructed in an approved manner. 
(Ord. 82 § 6, 1925) 
13.12.050 - Vents for fixtures. 
A.  Vents for fixtures shall not be less in size than as follows: 
1.  For sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, washtubs, urinals, one and one-half inches; 
2.  For slop sinks and toilets, two inches. 
B.  In all buildings where there are more than three fixtures, if new work, the toilet shall be ventilated by a four-inch vent or stack. 
C.  No vent shall be allowed to terminate less than five feet from a window or opening into any building, and all vents shall be carried to a point at least one foot above the roof. 
D.  All fixtures shall be separately trapped or vented, but any two wastes entering the waste line on the same level may be vented by one vent of approved size for such fixture taken from the top of the double fitting serving both fixtures. 
E.  Where vent pipes pass through a deck or roof, they shall be made watertight by a proper flashing of galvanized iron. 
F.  Vent pipes shall be of cast-iron or galvanized wrought pipe. 
(Ord. 82 § 7, 1925) 
13.12.060 - Waterclosets. 
    No watercloset bowl of the washout type shall be used after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 82 § 9, 1925) 
13.12.070 - Urinals. 
    Urinals shall be enameled cast iron or vitrified earthenware, supplied with approved flushing facilities. 
    Stalls for urinals may be lined with galvanized sheet metal not less than No. 22 gauge, with all seams and corners soldered tight, or may be lined with smooth-finished concrete of a thickness not less than two inches and coated with an impervious material. 
    Urinals now in use not complying with this ordinance shall be replaced with approved fixtures. 
(Ord. 82 § 10, 1925) 
13.12.080 - Water supply cutoffs. 
    Every water line shall have a service cock or shutoff placed in a convenient location or, if under the ground, shall be placed in a suitable box to ensure easy access. 
(Ord. 82 § 11, 1925) 
13.12.090 - Closet lead stubs. 
    Closet lead stubs or elbows may be of the raymond type, with iron or brass ferrule inside the lead. On cement of tile floors, cast-iron closet flanges may be used. 
(Ord. 82 § 12, 1925) 
13.12.100 - Slip-joint nuts. 
    Nickled slip-joint nuts may be used on nickle lavatory or sink traps for connecting to the waste pipe. 
(Ord. 82 § 13, 1925) 
13.12.110 - Connecting to sewers under concrete pavement or sidewalks. 
    In all cases where a sewer connection must be made under a street, alley or sidewalk which is surfaced with concrete or other hard surfaced pavement, the city shall make a charge, payable when the permit is issued, amounting to two dollars per square foot of such pavement removed. Said money shall be used for the replacement of such pavement removed. 
(Ord. 82 § 14, 1925) 
13.12.120 - Lights and barricades. 
    Any person or firm making excavation in the city streets or alleys for the purpose of sewer connections, or any other purpose, shall maintain proper barricades and lights during the time said excavation is open, and shall assume full responsibility for such excavation. 
(Ord. 82 § 15, 1925) 
13.12.130 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, whether acting for himself or as agent or servant of any other person, firm or corporation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars or more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a term of not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 82 § 16, 1925) 
Chapter 13.16 - SEWERS-SERVICE CHARGE 
Sections: 

13.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the sewer service charge is to raise revenue for the payment of the proper and reasonable expenses of operation, repair, replacement and maintenance of the city's sewage facilities, used for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage, industrial sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. 493 § 1, 1977) 
13.16.020 - Set by resolution of council. 
    The sewer service charge shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 493 § 2, 1977) 
13.16.025 - Fees-Temporary service suspension. 
A.  Upon written request, the city may suspend billing for service for residential property occupied by the owner when the property will be uninhabited for a period of time in excess of sixty days. The written request must state a date to resume billing for service. The city may grant an extension of the suspended billing period upon written request stating a new date to resume billing for service and upon verification by the city that such property is still uninhabited. 
B.  Upon written request from the property owner, or manager, the city may suspend billing for service for rental property if the property will be uninhabited for an extended period. The written request must include a date to resume service billing not to exceed sixty days. A thirty-day extension may be granted upon written request from the responsible party and upon verification by the city that such property is still uninhabited. 
(Ord. 705 § 2, 1994) 
Chapter 13.20 - SEWERS-SERVICE OUTSIDE TERRITORIAL LIMITS 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Authority. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in Section 5471 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, and within the discretion of the city council, sewer services may be provided for contiguous land outside the boundaries of the city and eligible for annexation to the city. 
(Ord. 312 § 1, 1964) 
13.20.020 - Charges. 
    Charges imposed for the providing of sewer services pursuant to this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 312 § 2, 1964) 
13.20.030 - Agreement with city. 
    Before sewer service is provided and any tie-in to the sewer system of the city is made by any person who is an owner of land outside the boundaries of the city, such owner shall first sign, execute and deliver an agreement in the manner and form to be provided by the city council, setting forth the agreements and conditions under which the city will provide sewer service to such owner during the temporary period of time when annexation proceedings of the land involved are in progress. At such time as the land involved located outside the city has become finally annexed to the city, and is listed on the equalized assessment roll as real property subject to taxation by the city, then said agreement shall terminate and the land so annexed shall be treated the same as all other land within the city. 
(Ord. 312 § 3, 1964) 
13.20.040 - Inspection and approval. 
    All sewer construction and installation, later to be connected to the sewer system of the city, shall be subject to the inspection of the city inspector during any such construction and installation, and shall meet the standards as set forth in the ordinances of the city in force at the time of such construction and installation. No connection and tie-in shall be made to the sewer system of the city without the approval of the city inspector being first had and obtained. 
(Ord. 312 § 4, 1964) 
Chapter 13.22 - WASTE WATER HAULING AND DEPOSAL-REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

13.22.010 - Liquid waste haulers. 
    It is unlawful for any commercial liquid waste hauler to discharge to the city's designated disposal site without a current city liquid waste hauler's permit, a current city business license, Riverside County Department Of Environmental Health Liquid Waste Hauler permit, and decal or to otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
A.  "Director" shall mean the director of the public works department, or equivalent office, and/or his designee. 
B.  "RCRA" shall mean the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
C.  "POTW" and "city designated disposal site" shall mean the water waste treatment plant owned by the city of Blythe located at 15901 S. Broadway in Blythe, CA. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.030 - Restrictions on acceptance of waste waters by city's POTW. 
    The city shall only accept wastewater from liquid waste haulers. No other waste shall be accepted or discharged to the city's POTW. No truck or trailer vacuum tank that exceeds six thousand gallons in volume shall be permitted unless the truck or trailer has been modified to only contain six thousand gallons of total volume at all times. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.040 - Liquid waste hauler permit conditions. 
    No person shall violate any term or condition of a city liquid waste hauler permit, liquid waste hauler permit conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Liquid waster hauler's obligation to comply with all permit terms and conditions; 
B.  Liquid waste hauler's obligation to comply with the terms of this chapter; 
C.  Liquid waste hauler's obligation to comply with the Riverside County Health Department's applicable rules and regulations regarding cleanliness and sanitary conditions; 
D.  Restrictions on operating hours for city's designated disposal site; 
E.  The revocation, suspension or placement on probation on the permit and imposition of other enforcement actions against the liquid waste hauler for violation of the permit terms or conditions, or of this chapter; 
F.  Record keeping and reporting requirements; 
G.  The obligation to notify the director immediately of any unusual circumstances observed during liquid waste pumping operations; 
H.  Compliance with all applicable California Motor Vehicle Codes; and 
I.  Other conditions, limitations or prohibitions deemed appropriate by the director. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.050 - City's waste water treatment plant-Designated. 
    The city's waste water treatment plant is the only designated liquid waste haulers disposal site for liquid waste disposal in the city of Blythe. All liquid waste disposed in the city shall be at the city's waste water treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.060 - Permit application requirements. 
    No person shall be issued a city liquid waste hauler permit without first: 
A.  Obtaining a valid city business license; 
B.  Paying liquid waste hauler permit fees, if applicable, established by resolution of the city council; and 
C.  Completing and submitting to the city an application for a city liquid waste hauler permit signed under penalty of perjury certifying that the following information provided by the liquid waste hauler applicant is true and correct: 
1.  Name, address and phone number of the liquid waste hauler; 
2.  Number of vehicles (vehicles include trucks, tankers and trailers), gallon capacity, license plate number, registered owner's name, and make and model of each vehicle operated by the liquid waste hauler for the purpose of hauling liquid wastes; 
3.  Name of the liquid waste hauler's authorized representative; 
4.  Name and policy number of the liquid waste hauler's insurance carrier and bonding company if applicable; 
5.  The number of the current permit issued to the liquid waste hauler by the Riverside County Department of Environmental Health for transportation and disposal of liquid wastes; and 
6.  Any other information as may be required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.070 - Inspection of liquid wastes. 
    Liquid wastes disposed at the city's designated disposal site shall be subject to inspection, sampling and analysis to determine compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter by authorized personnel who may perform or supervise such inspection, sampling and analysis at any time before or during delivery of the liquid waste. If the city finds the wastes do not comply with this chapter, the liquid waste hauler shall pay the city for all of the city's costs associated with such inspection, sampling, and analysis, and any other fees, charges or penalties assessed by the director. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.080 - Prohibition against hazardous waste. 
    No liquid waste hauler shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city's designated disposal site any material defined as hazardous by RCRA. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.090 - Prohibition against grease, oil, or diluting grease or oil. 
    No liquid waste hauler shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city's designated disposal site grease, oil or diluting grease or oil into the city's designated disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.100 - Prohibition against hazardous substances-Violation. 
    If the city determines the wastes contain hazardous substances, then the liquid waste hauler shall remain at the city's designated disposal site until the hazardous substances is transferred to a waste hauler lawfully authorized to transport and dispose of the hazardous substances. The director may notify the appropriate law enforcement agency of all violations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.110 - Liquid waste manifest-Requirements. 
    All liquid waste manifest forms shall be completed in full and signed by the liquid waste hauler, and signed by the director, before any load is discharged into the city's designated disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.120 - Providing false information on permit application. 
    Providing false information to the city in any permit application, hauler's report or manifest, or correspondence is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.130 - Record keeping and retention. 
    Liquid waste haulers shall retain all records and reports required to be retained by this chapter for a minimum of three years and shall make such reports and records immediately available to the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.140 - Time to pay fees, charges, and penalties. 
    A liquid waste hauler shall pay all fees, charges and penalties imposed by the director pursuant to this chapter within thirty days of receiving notice to pay such fees, charges, or penalties. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.150 - Permissible types of liquid wastes. 
    Only liquid wastes, from septic tanks, seepage pits, cesspools, or any other similar receptacles, that contain no industrial waste, shall be disposed of at the city's designated disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.160 - Industrial wastes-Prohibition. 
    Any liquid waste hauler that hauls both industrial wastes and domestic wastes shall remove all industrial waste contamination from the interior of the vacuum tank prior to loading any domestic wastes into such tank. 
    Liquid waste haulers are prohibited from discharging industrial waste into the POTW. No liquid waste hauler shall mix industrial waste and domestic wastes to discharge the mixture to the city's designated disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.170 - Certification of origin of liquid wastes. 
    Any liquid waste hauler seeking to discharge to the city's designated disposal site shall first certify under penalty of perjury as to the origin of the wastes and shall provide documentation as to the address of any location(s) where the liquid waste hauler obtained the wastes. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.180 - Disposition of liquid waste rejected by inspection. 
    If the wastes hauled by a liquid waste hauler are found unacceptable for discharge into the POTW, the liquid waste hauler shall dispose of the wastes at a legal disposal site. The liquid waste hauler shall provide the city with a true and correct copy of the waste hauler's manifest documenting the legal disposal of the rejected wastes within fourteen calendar days form the date the wastes were rejected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.190 - Disposition of liquid waste rejected by inspection-Prohibited means. 
    No liquid waste hauler shall dispose of any rejected load into any septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or similar devices, any grease interceptor or trap, and storm drain, or the POTW except as authorized in writing by the director. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.200 - Dilution of impermissible liquid waste-Prohibition. 
    No liquid waste hauler shall mix or dilute any rejected load in order to achieve compliance with this chapter without prior written authorization from the director. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.210 - Denial of liquid waste hauler permit. 
    The director may deny a liquid waste hauler permit for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The applicant knowingly falsified information on the application or any document required by the application; 
B.  The applicant's previous liquid waste hauler permit was suspended or otherwise revoked and the condition upon which such action was taken still exists; or 
C.  The applicant is not current on all disposal and permit-related reports and charges. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.220 - Denial of liquid waste hauler permit-Notice and appeal. 
    If an application is denied, the director shall notify the applicant in writing of such denial and the appeal procedures. The notification shall state the grounds for such denial and any actions required for the applicant to obtain a permit. All liquid waste hauler permits issued may be suspended, revoked, or placed on probation up to one year upon finding by the director that any of the following facts exist: 
A.  The permittee failed to display the authorization document upon request; 
B.  The permittee has changed, altered or otherwise modified the face of a permit or authorization document without the permission of the director; 
C.  The permittee has violated any term or condition of the permit; 
D.  The permittee has falsified any application, record, report or monitoring results required to be maintained, has failed to make them immediately available to the director upon request, or has withheld required information; 
E.  The permittee failed to stop immediately the discharge from his or her truck into the designated disposal facilities of the city upon the order of any authorized public works department employee; 
F.  The permittee discharged or attempted to discharge hazardous substances into the designated disposal site; 
G.  The permittee failed to comply with the terms of subsection I of this section; 
H.  The permittee discharged or attempted to discharge industrial waste into the designated disposal site; 
I.  The permittee has repeatedly filed documents with falsified or incorrect information; 
J.  The permittee has discharged or attempted to discharge waste to the city's designated disposal site; that has been previously rejected by another regulatory agency, municipality, or entity having authority to grant permission for the disposal of the waste, and has failed to notify the director of the rejected status of the waste; 
K.  The permittee has done physical violence or harm to any city employee; or 
L.  The permittee has made threatening remarks or threatening acts toward any city employee. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.230 - Reinstatement after revocation, suspension, probation. 
    Any liquid waste hauler permit which has been revoked, suspended or placed on probation pursuant to this section may be reinstated upon a finding by the director that the condition which resulted in such revocation, suspension or probation no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.240 - Violation of this chapter. 
    Upon director's determination of a violation of this chapter, the liquid waste hauler shall be subject to the enforcement actions set forth in this section and Section 13.22.040 of this chapter, and to such enforcement actions contained in the liquid waste hauler permit as necessary to protect the POTW, the public, the environment or city employees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.250 - Authority of POTW employees. 
    Any authorized POTW employee can order a liquid waste hauler to immediately stop their discharge. The order shall be based on the employee's professional judgment that the discharge may violate this chapter, threaten or harm the POTW, its employees, the public or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
13.22.260 - Permit nontransferable. 
    Liquid waste hauler permits are exclusive to that permittee. Transfer or assignment of a permit is prohibited and will void the current permittee's permit. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-26-11) 
Chapter 13.24 - RECOVERY OF INSTALLATION COSTS 
Sections: 

13.24.010 - Connection to lines installed by city-Payment required. 
    Whenever the city installs sewer or water lines in areas in the city not served by sewer or water lines prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and such sewer or water lines are paid for by the city and not by the individual property owner, no person shall be authorized to connect on to any part of such constructed or installed sewer or water line without first paying a proportionate part of the cost of such construction or installation, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 307 § 1, 1963) 
13.24.020 - Connection to lines installed by city-Payment in cash in advance-Connection charge. 
    All proportionate charges required to be paid by Section 13.24.010 shall be paid for in advance and in cash. In addition to the charge to be paid as set forth in this chapter, the property owner desiring to connect to such constructed or installed sewer or water line shall also pay the connection charge for sewer or water line established by city ordinances. 
(Ord. 307 § 2, 1963) 
13.24.030 - Property required to pay charge. 
    The only property required to pay the charge set forth in this chapter is the property which abuts on both sides of the street or alley or easement in which the sewer or water line is constructed or installed. All property abutting on any lateral sewer or water line connected to the principal sewer or water line shall not be charged for the principal sewer or water line, but shall be charged solely for the cost of the lateral sewer or water line. The property abutting on both sides of a street or alley or easement in which a sewer or water line is constructed or installed, which is a lateral sewer or water line, shall be charged a proportionate part of the cost of such lateral line. 
(Ord. 307 § 3, 1963) 
13.24.040 - Proportionate share-Based on front footage. 
    The proportionate share to be paid for a property abutting on any principal line or lateral line shall be based on a front-footage basis. 
(Ord. 307 § 4, 1963) 
13.24.050 - Proportionate share-Borne by property on both sides of street. 
    The charge to be paid by the abutting property on the proportionate share basis, as set forth in this chapter, shall be borne by the property located on both sides of the street or alley or easement where any sewer or water line is constructed or installed, it being the intent that the property located on one side of such constructed or installed sewer or water line shall be charged with only one-half of the cost of such sewer or water line at the front-footage rate. 
(Ord. 307 § 5, 1963) 
13.24.060 - Connection to lines installed by city-Unlawful without payment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to any sewer or water line paid for by the city as provided in this chapter without first having paid to the city the proportionate charge as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 307 § 6, 1963) 
13.24.070 - Liability for charges. 
    At any time that any person desires to connect on to any water or sewer line constructed or installed and within the purview of this chapter, the person who is the then property owner of record of any such parcel or parcels of property shall be considered the person who shall be required to pay the charges as set forth and allocated pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 307 § 11, 1963) 
13.24.080 - Contribution by city to installation costs. 
    The city council reserves the right to contribute to the construction or installation of sewer or water lines to the extent that the city council deems equitable and to prevent hardship in individual cases with regard to any sewer or water line constructed or installed and paid for by the city. 
(Ord. 307 § 8, 1963) 
13.24.090 - Provisions not to apply to certain subdivisions. 
    This chapter shall have no application to the construction or installation of sewer or water lines in subdivisions within the city, accepted by the city council after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 307 § 7, 1963) 
13.24.100 - Additional rules and regulations passed by council. 
    The city council may, by resolution, provide such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary or advisable to accomplish the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 307 § 16, 1963) 
13.24.110 - Records. 
A.  The city clerk shall keep and maintain the records concerning all construction and installation of sewer or water lines coming within the purview of this chapter. 
B.  The director of public works shall furnish the city clerk with a front-foot unit cost to be allocated to the property abutting the sewer or water line constructed or installed, and such map shall have a list of the parcels of property involved and the charges to be allocated to each parcel. 
(Ord. 307 § 9, 1963) 
13.24.120 - Violation-Withholding of service. 
    The city shall have the right to withhold service to any property owner who is a person coming within the purview of this chapter who has not complied with this chapter. 
(Ord. 307 § 13, 1963) 
13.24.130 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than two hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city jail for not less than five days nor more than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 307 § 15, 1963) 
Chapter 13.28 - REFRIGERATION COOLING WATER 
Sections: 

13.28.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
A.  "Clear water drains" means publicly owned pipes which carry only refrigeration cooling water. 
B.  "Public sewer" and "public sewer system" mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
C.  "Refrigeration cooling mechanisms" include machines used to cool rooms or buildings which use a compressor in the operation of the machine, and also include machines, which use evaporation of water alone as the cooling principle, commonly known as evaporative coolers. 
D.  "Refrigeration cooling water" means unpolluted water which is passed through refrigeration cooling mechanisms. 
(Ord. 263 § 2, 1959) 
13.28.020 - Discharge into city sewers. 
A.  On and after the first day of July, 1961, no person, firm or corporation, without exception, connected to or using the public sewer system, shall dispose of, or suffer or permit the disposal of, water which has passed through or been used in refrigeration cooling mechanisms into the public sewers of the city, or any main, or pipe connected to the public sewers, whether or not such disposition is now being made or has been made into the public sewers prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  On or after the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is in effect, no person, firm or corporation shall dispose of, or suffer or permit the disposal of, water which has passed through or been used in refrigeration cooling mechanisms into the public sewers of the city, or any main or pipe connected to the public sewers, except those persons, firms or corporations connected to or using the public sewer system before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and those persons, firms, or corporations, excepted by this section may continue such disposition of refrigeration cooling water into the public sewers only up to, but not after, the first day of July, 1961. 
(Ord. 263 §§ 3, 4, 1959) 
13.28.030 - Discharge into clear water drains. 
    Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, on and after the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is in effect, no person, firm, or corporation shall dispose of water which has passed through refrigeration cooling mechanisms into the clear water drains of the city, or into pipes connected thereto, except those persons, firms or corporations who were connected to said clear water drains prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and except the connections to the said clear water drains, and usages of the said clear water drains existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. This section shall not apply to persons, firms or corporations who were connected to said clear water drains prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and this section shall not apply to connections to the said clear water drains and usages of the said clear water drains existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided, however, said excepted persons, firms or corporations, and said excepted connections and usages existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, may not be increased in volume of water flowing into the clear water drains after the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is in effect; provided, further, however, those persons, firms, or corporations who were connected to said clear water drains prior to the time and date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter may apply to the city council for permission to move a water-cooled refrigeration unit, connected and used prior to the time and date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter to a different place for a new and different connection to the clear water drains, where at said different place no clear water drain connection already exists. 
(Ord. 297 § 1, 1962: Ord. 263 § 5, 1959) 
13.28.040 - Permit required for installation. 
    On and after the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is in effect, no person, firm or corporation shall install within the city any refrigeration cooling mechanism, except evaporative coolers, without having first obtained a permit to do so from the building inspector. This section shall not apply to evaporative coolers. This section shall also apply to and include refrigeration cooling mechanisms which are of the air-cooled type. 
(Ord. 409 § 1, 1971: Ord. 263 § 6, 1959) 
13.28.050 - Permit required for certain repairs. 
    On and after the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is in effect, no person, firm or corporation shall perform any repair work upon any refrigeration cooling mechanism, except evaporative coolers, at a total material and labor repair charge in excess of one hundred dollars without having first obtained a permit to do so from the building inspector. There shall be no charge for this permit. This section shall not apply to evaporative coolers. 
(Ord. 263 § 7, 1959) 
13.28.060 - Depositing on streets prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to dispose of unpolluted water passing through refrigeration cooling mechanisms by depositing such water upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public place in the city. 
(Ord. 263 § 8, 1959) 
13.28.070 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, whether acting for himself or as the agent or servant of any person, firm or corporation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment of not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that any act continues in violation of any provisions of this chapter, and each day that anything forbidden by the terms of this chapter continues to exist, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 263 § 9, 1959) 
Title 14 - MOBILE HOMES 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.02 - UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 637. 

15.02.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, published and copyrighted in 1997 by the International Conference of Building Officials, including its indices, appendices and standards, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter, as if fully set out in this chapter; and each and all of the provisions, conditions and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter; except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 721 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 687 § 2 (part), 1992: Ord. 662 § 2 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
15.02.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 879, § 1, adopted November 8, 2016, repealed § 15.02.030, which pertained to administrative provisions and derived from Ord. No. 662, 1990; Ord. No. 687, 1992; Ord. No. 721, 1995; Ord. No. 759, 1999; Ord. No. 780, 2002 and Ord. No. 825, 2008. 
15.02.040 - Owner's permit. 
    Any permit required under the codes adopted in Title 15 of the Blythe Municipal Code may be issued to an owner to do any work regulated by Title 15 in a single-family dwelling or duplex, or commercial building, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings, in the event that any such person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings. However, any electrical or plumbing work done in structure that is not the bona fide residence of the owner shall be done by a licensed contractor. Said owner shall comply with the requirements of workman's compensation and insurance when hiring individuals. Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt owners from complying with all other standards of the codes herein adopted. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 662 § 2 (part), 1990) 
15.02.050 - Building permits. 
    Section 301.2.1 of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code is amended: 
 A building permit shall not be required for the following: 
 Any wood or chain link fence not over 4' (four feet) in height in the front yard setback or 6' (six feet) in height in the rear yard setback, when measured from grade to top of fence. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 459 § 3, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Chapter 15.04 - CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 518, 565 and 637. 

15.04.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Building Code, Title 24, Part 2, 2016 Edition, Volumes I and II, including appendices C, F, I and J, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Building Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 3 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 4 (part), 1999: Ord. 721 § 4, 1995: Ord. 687 § 3, 1992: Ord. 662 § 3 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.04.011 - Swimming pool barriers. 
    Section 3119B.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read: 
 1. The enclosure shall have a minimum effective perpendicular height of 6 feet as measured from the outside. 
    Sections 3119B.2 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read: 
 1. ... Hand activated door or gate opening hardware shall be located at least 54 inches from the bottom of the gate. 
    Section 3109.3 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read: 
 1. Public swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than 6 feet in height or a screen enclosure. 
    Section 3109.4.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read: 
 1. The top of the barrier shall not be less than 6 feet above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 3 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 4 (part), 1999: Ord. 721 § 5, 1995) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.04.012 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 846, § 1, adopted December 14, 2010, repealed § 15.04.012, which pertained to adopted by reference and derived from Ord. No. 825, 2008. 
15.04.013 - Building permits. 
    Section 105.2 of the 2016 California Building Code, Volume 1, is amended: 
 A building permit shall not be required for the following: 
 2. Any wood or chain link fence not over 4' (four feet) in height in the front yard setback or 6' (six feet) in height in the rear yard setback, when measured from grade to top of fence. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.04.014 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 863, § 1, adopted November 12, 2013, repealed § 15.04.014, which pertained to swimming pool permits and derived from Ord. No. 825, 2008 and Ord. No. 846, adopted December 14, 2010. 
15.04.015 - Findings. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply: "Outdoor swimming pool" means any pool over twenty-four inches in depth, used or intended to be used for swimming or recreational bathing. 
    The city council finds that there are a number of outdoor swimming pools within the city and that the operation or maintenance of the same without adequate protective measures constitutes a severe hazard to the safety of the citizens of the city, and particularly to small children. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.04.016 - Fence-Required. 
    Every person in possession of land within the city, as either owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated an outdoor swimming pool, shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such outdoor swimming pool is located and completely surrounding such pool, or completely surrounding the lot or premises upon which such pool is located, a fence or other solid structure not less than six feet in height, and having no opening therein, other than doors or gates as provided for in Section 15.04.017, larger than four inches in any dimension, except that a picket fence may be erected and maintained having no horizontal dimension between any of the pickets in excess of four inches. Such fence or other solid structure shall be constructed so as to prevent any person, including small children, from crawling or passing through, under or over the same, except at doors or gates therein. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008) 
15.04.017 - Fence-Self-closing, self-latching devices required on gates and doors. 
    All doors or gates opening through the fence or other solid structure required by Section 15.04.016, shall, at all times, be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed at all times when such door or gate is not in actual use. Any door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the solid enclosure referred to in the preceding section need not be equipped with the self-closing and self-latching device required by this section if the door is equipped with an audible warning system. 
    The self-closing and self-latching device referred to in this section shall be placed at least 54 inches above the ground, or shall be so designed and installed as to be inaccessible to small children. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.04.018 - Owner's permit. 
    Any permit required under the codes adopted in Title 15 of the Blythe Municipal Code may be issued to an owner to do any work regulated by Title 15 in a single-family dwelling or duplex, or commercial building, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings, in the event that any such person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings. 
    However, any electrical or plumbing work done in structure that is not the bona fide residence of the owner shall be done by a licensed contractor. Said owner shall comply with the requirements of workman's compensation and insurance when hiring individuals. Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt owners from complying with all other standards of the codes herein adopted. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008) 
15.04.020 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Building Code, adopted by reference in Section 15.04.010, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 3 (part), 2002: Ord. 662 § 3 (part), 1990) 
15.04.030 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Building Code, adopted by reference in Section 15.04.010, require permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed by the ordinance codified in this chapter, permits issued under the repealed ordinances shall continue in full force and effect as if issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 3 (part), 2002: Ord. 662 § 3 (part), 1990) 
Chapter 15.06 - CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 

15.06.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Administrative Code, Title 24, Part 1, 2016 Edition, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Administrative Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.06.020 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Administrative Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.06.030 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Administrative Code require permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed or permits issued, such permits shall nevertheless continue in full force and effect as if issued under provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 15.08 - CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE 

15.08.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Residential Code, Title 24, Part 2.5, 2016 Edition, including appendices B, C, G, N, O, R and S, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Residential Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.08.020 - Building permits. 
    Section R105.2 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended: 
 2. Any wood or chain link fence not over 4' (four feet) in height in the front yard setback or 6' (six feet) in height in the rear yard setback, when measured from grade to top of fence. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.08.030 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Residential Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.08.040 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Residential Code require permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed or permits issued, such permits shall nevertheless continue in full force and effect as if issued under provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 15.10 - CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE 

15.10.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3, 2016 Edition, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter; and each and all of the provisions, conditions and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 803 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 780 § 4 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 721 § 6 (part), 1995: Ord. 637 § 5 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.10.020 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Electrical Code, as adopted by Section 15.10.010, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations of such provisions and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 803 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 780 § 4 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 721 § 6 (part), 1995: Ord. 637 § 5 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.10.030 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Electrical Code, adopted by Section 15.10.010, requires permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed by the ordinance codified in this chapter, or prior California Electrical Codes, permits issued shall continue in full force and effect as if issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 803 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 780 § 4 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 721 § 6 (part), 1995: Ord. 637 § 5 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
Chapter 15.12 - CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 516, 587 and 637. 

15.12.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4, 2016 Edition, including Chapter 1, Division II, and appendices F, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 5 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 6, 1999: Ord. 721 § 7, 1995: Ord. 662 § 4 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.12.020 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Mechanical Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 5 (part), 2002: Ord. 662 § 4 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.12.030 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Mechanical Code require permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed or permits issued, such permits shall nevertheless continue in full force and effect as if issued under provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 5 (part), 2002: Ord. 662 § 4 (part), 1990) 
Chapter 15.16 - CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 568 and 637. 

15.16.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5, 2016 Edition, including Chapter 1, Division II, and appendices G, and J, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter; and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter, except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 7 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 7, 1999: Ord. 721 § 8, 1995: Ord. 662 § 4 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
Chapter 15.18 - CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 

15.18.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11, 2016 Edition, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.18.020 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Green Building Standards Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.18.030 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Green Building Standards Code require permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed or permits issued, such permits shall nevertheless continue in full force and effect as if issued under provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 15.20 - UNIFORM HOUSING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 517, 570 and 637. 

15.20.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, published and copyrighted in 1997 by the International Conference of Building Officials, including its indices and appendices, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 9 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 9, 1999: Ord. 721 § 10, 1995: Ord. 662 § 4 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 15.24 - CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 443, 567, 582 and 637. 

15.24.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9, 2016 Edition, including Appendix Chapter 4, and appendices B, BB, C, CC, D, F, and I, as adopted by the state of California one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Fire Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, condition, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 12 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 12 (part), 1999: Ord. 721 § 12 (part), 1995: Ord. 662 § 6 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.24.020 - Definitions and appointments. 
A.  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the California Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city of Blythe. 
B.  Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the California Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city of Blythe. 
C.  All references in the California Fire Code to the word chief of the fire department shall be construed under this chapter to refer to the fire marshal. 
D.  All references in the California Fire Code relating to the fire prevention bureau shall be construed to mean the department of development services. 
E.  The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 12 (part), 2002: Ord. 662 § 6 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.24.030 - Fire sprinklers. 
    Section 903.2.8 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read: 
 An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area, including mobile homes, modular homes and manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.24.040 - District limits-Storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks. 
A.  The limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, is established as follows: Prohibited in R-E, R-L-1, R-L-1-72, R-L-2, R-M-L, R-M, R-H, P-D, S-P-R, R-R, P-Q-P and R/M-H zones as defined in Title 17, and as may be subsequently amended. Aboveground tanks as referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code may be allowed in A, C-N, C-C, C-G, I-S and I-G zones with a conditional use permit. 
B.  Aboveground tanks for waste oil and hydrocarbon contamination removal, meeting City standards may be allowed with a conditional use permit in A, C-N, C-C, C-G, I-S and I-G zones, provided they do not exceed three hundred gallons in size and are adequately protected and screened. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 12 (part), 2002: Ord. 759 § 12 (part), 1999: Ord. 721 § 12 (part), 1995: Ord. 687 § 2 (part), 1992: Ord. 662 § 6 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.24.070 - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire marshal denies an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire marshal to the city council within thirty days of the decision. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 12 (part), 2002: Ord. 662 § 6 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.24.080 - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
    The director of development services and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. ICC, National Recognized Testing Labs and the state of California approvals where applicable shall be guidelines for approval. The fire marshal shall post in his office, and distribute to interested parties copies of approved new materials, processes or occupancies. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 12 (part), 2002: Ord. 662 § 6 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
15.24.090 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 863, § 1, adopted November 12, 2013, repealed § 15.24.090, which pertained to penalty for violation and derived from Ord. No. 662, 1990; Ord. No. 780, 2002 and Ord. No. 825, 2008. 
15.24.110 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 863, § 1, adopted November 12, 2013, repealed § 15.24.110, which pertained to issuance of citations by designated officers and derived from Ord. No. 749, 1998; Ord. No. 780, 2002; Ord. No. 825, 2008 and Ord. No. 846, adopted December 14, 2010. 
Chapter 15.26 - CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE 

15.26.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Referenced Standards Code, Title 24, Part, 12, 2016 Edition, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.26.020 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Referenced Standards Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations of such provisions and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.26.030 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Referenced Standards Code require permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed or permits issued, such permits shall nevertheless continue in full force and effect as if issued under provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 15.28 - CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE 

15.28.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Historical Building Code, Title 24, Part 8, 2016 Edition, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Historical Building Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.28.020 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Historical Building Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations of such provisions and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.28.030 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Historical Building Code require permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed or permits issued, such permits shall nevertheless continue in full force and effect as if issued under provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 15.30 - CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

15.30.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Existing Building Code, Title 24, Part 10, 2016 Edition, including Appendix A-Chapter A1 and Appendix A-Chapter A3, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Existing Building Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
15.30.020 - Provisions construed as restatements. 
    The provisions of the California Existing Building Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations of such provisions and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.30.030 - Effect on permits issued under repealed ordinances. 
    Where the provisions of the California Existing Building Code require permits similar to permits required under ordinances repealed or permits issued, such permits shall nevertheless continue in full force and effect as if issued under provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 15.32 - UNIFORM CODE FOR ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 103. 
Editor's Note: The title of Ch. 15.32 was amended by Ord. 825. 

15.32.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, published and copyrighted in 1997 by the International Conference of Building Officials, including its indices and appendices, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all of the provisions, conditions, and terms therein contained are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 14, 2002: Ord. 759 § 13, 1999: Ord. 721 § 13, 1995: Ord. 687 § 11, 1992: Ord. 662 § 7, 1990: Ord. 637 § 7, 1988) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Chapter 15.40 - ARCADE, MARQUEES AND CANOPIES 

15.40.010 - Minimum height. 
    No arcade, marquee or canopy shall be erected within the city unless, at its lowest altitude, or that of any fixture suspended therefrom, it is of a minimum height of eight and one-half feet above the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 15 (part), 2002: Ord. 145 § 1, 1941) 
15.40.020 - Support columns. 
    Any arcade, marquee or canopy which extends from the building line to the outer edge of the sidewalk shall be supported by columns of incombustible material, imbedded at the outer edge of the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 15 (part), 2002: Ord. 145 § 2, 1941) 
15.40.030 - Down spouts required. 
    The roof of any arcade, canopy or marquee shall be sloped to down spouts, which down spouts shall be installed so as to conduct any drainage under the sidewalk and parkway to the street. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 780 § 15 (part), 2002: Ord. 145 § 3, 1941) 
15.40.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 863, § 1, adopted November 12, 2013, repealed § 15.40.040, which pertained to penalty for violation and derived from Ord. No. 145, 1941; Ord. No. 780, 2002 and Ord. No. 825, 2008. 
Chapter 15.58 - CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE 

15.58.010 - Adopted by reference. 
    The California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6, 2016 Edition, including Appendix 1-A, as adopted by the state of California, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "California Energy Code, 2016 Edition," is made a public record of the city and is adopted and made a part of this chapter except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008: Ord. 803 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 879, § 1, 11-8-16) 
Chapter 15.60 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 

15.60.010 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation, whether acting for themselves, or as the agent or servant of any person, firm or corporation, that violates any of the provisions of this title, or the codes adopted by this title, or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made under such code, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under such code, or any certificate or permit issued under such code and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail of Riverside County for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or allow it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that a violation of Title 15 is continued or permitted to exist without compliance, shall constitute a separate offense punishable upon conviction in the manner prescribed in this section. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. 825 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2008; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
(Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
15.60.020 - Issuance of citations by designated officers. 
    Officers of the city who have discretionary duty to enforce a statute or ordinance are authorized to, pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5 and subject to the provisions of this section, arrest a person without a warrant whenever any such officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of the Blythe Municipal Code or applicable state codes in the officer's presence, which he or she has the discretionary duty to enforce and to issue a notice to appear and to release such person on the person's written promise to appear in court. Officers of the city shall not be allowed by their superiors to exercise the arrest and citation authority herein conferred, unless such officer is within a classification of city officer designated by resolution of the city council to exercise such arrest and citation authority. 
(Ord. No. 863, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Chapter 15.62 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS 

15.62.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city of Blythe and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city of Blythe to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 1, 8-25-15) 
15.62.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
B.  "Building department" means the building department for the city of Blythe. 
C.  "Building official" means the building official for the city of Blythe. 
D.  "City" means the city of Blythe. 
E.  "Common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  A community apartment project; 
2.  A condominium project; 
3.  A planned development; 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
F.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Email; 
2.  The Internet; 
3.  Facsimile. 
G.  "Expedited permitting," and "expedited review," means the process outlined in Section 15.62.070. 
H.  A "feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit. 
I.  "Planning commission" means the planning commission for the city of Blythe. 
J.  "Reasonable restrictions" on a solar system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specific performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
K.  "Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
1.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. 
L.  "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is not larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city of Blythe and all state of California health and safety standards. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city of Blythe. 
M.  "Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. 
N.  "Specific adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 1, 8-25-15) 
15.62.030 - Applicability. 
    This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city of Blythe. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 1, 8-25-15) 
15.62.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the city and the state of California. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Codes. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 1, 8-25-15) 
15.62.060 - Duties of building department and building official. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the city of Blythe's publicly accessible website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via email or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
D.  The building department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
E.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
F.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 1, 8-25-15) 
15.62.070 - Expedited permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The city of Blythe building department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications within thirty days of adoption of this chapter. For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, the building department shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit the same day for over-the-counter applications or within three business days for electronically filed applications. A building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed pursuant to the procedures outlined in Sections 2.64.170, 2.64.180 and 2.64.190 of this code. 
B.  Review of the application shall be limited to the building department's official review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. 
C.  If a use permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed pursuant to procedures outlined in Sections 2.64.170, 2.64.180 and 2.64.190 of this code. 
D.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A)-(B). 
E.  The city shall not condition the approval of an application on the approval of an association as defined in Civil Code Section 4080. 
F.  If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
G.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
H.  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request and will provide the applicant with a two-hour inspection window. 
I.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 1, 8-25-15) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Purpose-Authority. 
    This title is for the purpose of adopting subdivision regulations, under the authority of and in accordance with the provisions of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state, and any future amendments thereto, referred to in this title as the Subdivision Map Act, and is in addition to any other regulations provided by law. The Subdivision Map Act is located in Government Code Sections 66410 to 66499.37, inclusive, Statutes 1974, Chapter 1536. 
(Ord. 475 § 2, 1976) 
16.04.020 - Provisions supplementary to state provisions. 
    The provisions of this title shall be in addition to and shall be considered as supplementing the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state. 
(Ord. 475 § 4, 1976) 
16.04.030 - Compliance required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, as a principal, agent, or otherwise to: 
A.  Divide real property in any manner that constitutes a subdivision, unless and until all the requirements of this title have been complied with; or 
B.  Sell, lease or divide for purposes of financing, or contract or offer to sell, lease or divide for purposes of financing, any division of land that constitutes a subdivision unless and until all the requirements of this title have been complied with. 
(Ord. 475 § 3, 1976) 
Chapter 16.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

16.08.010 - Generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all terms used in this title which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act are used in this title as so defined, unless from the context it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended. 
(Ord. 475 § 5 (part), 1976) 
16.08.020 - Final map. 
    "Final map" means a subdivision map other than a parcel map, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, which is designed to be placed on record in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(g), 1976) 
16.08.030 - Lot. 
    "Lot" means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a final or parcel map, or by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease, financing or separate use. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(e) , 1976) 
16.08.040 - Owner. 
    "Owner" means any person having sufficient proprietary interest in the real property sought to be divided to commence and maintain proceedings to divide the same under this title; and, while used in this title in the masculine gender and singular number, it shall be deemed to mean the feminine and neuter gender and plural number wherever required. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(b), 1976) 
16.08.050 - Parcel map. 
    "Parcel map" means a subdivision map, other than a final map, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, which is designed to be placed on record in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(h), 1976) 
16.08.060 - Person. 
    "Person" means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndicate, trust or other legal entity. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(i), 1976) 
16.08.070 - Shall-May. 
    "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(a), 1976) 
16.08.080 - Subdivider. 
    "Subdivider" means a subdivider as defined in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(c), 1976) 
16.08.090 - Subdivision. 
    "Subdivision" means a subdivision as defined in the Subdivision Map Act, as it exists at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or may thereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(d), 1976) 
16.08.100 - Tentative map. 
    "Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around such subdivision. Such map need not be based upon an accurate or detailed field survey of the property but shall be of the form and contain the information required by this title. 
(Ord. 475 § 5(f) , 1976) 
Chapter 16.12 - GENERAL REGULATIONS AND DESIGN 
Sections: 

16.12.010 - Streets. 
A.  Street design shall conform in principle to the streets shown on the circulation element of the general plan and in width and alignment to the streets shown on any precise plan adopted by the city council relating to streets, and shall conform to the requirements of this title. Streets not shown on a general or precise plan shall conform to the requirements of the city council. 
B.  The subdivider shall be required to dedicate all land necessary for street purposes as shown on the general plan or any precise plan or to conform to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 475 § 6, 1976) 
16.12.020 - Design conditions-Generally. 
    The general conditions of design set forth in Sections 16.12.030 through 16.12.100 shall apply. 
(Ord. 475 § 7 (part), 1976) 
16.12.030 - Design conditions-Streets and highways. 
A.  Relationship to Existing Streets. The street system in the proposed subdivision shall relate functionally to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision. 
B.  Centerlines. The centerlines of all streets, wherever practicable, shall be continuations of the centerlines of existing streets. 
C.  Intersections. Each street intersection or interception shall be as near to a right angle as is practicable. 
D.  Cul-de-sac or Dead-end Streets. No cul-de-sac or dead-end street shall be more than four hundred seventy-five feet in length unless the city council in its discretion allows a greater length. Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future subdivision of adjoining land, the streets shall extend to the boundary of the property and the resulting dead-end streets may be approved without a turnaround. In all other cases, a turnaround having a minimum radius of forty-five feet measured to the property line or a comparable area in another form shall be required separated to the depth of one lot from the exterior boundary line or other topographical feature of the subdivision. 
E.  Curve Radius. The centerline curve radius on all streets and highways shall conform to accepted engineering standards of design and shall be subject to approval of the city engineer. 
F.  Intersection Corner Rounding. At street intersections the block corners shall be rounded at the property line with a curve having a radius of not less than twenty feet. A greater curve radius may be required if streets intersect other than at right angles. 
G.  Street Names. All names shall be approved by the city council. Duplications of existing names will not be allowed unless the streets are obviously in alignment with existing streets and not so far removed as to be confusing. 
H.  Part-width Streets. In case of a part-width street, a minimum of forty feet along and adjacent to a boundary of the subdivision shall be required except in cases in which proper deed or instrument of dedication to the city, duly executed by the owner or owners of the adjacent lands, is filed with the map of the subdivision granting sufficient land to make a street of the required full width. Part-width streets shall be permitted only on the periphery of a subdivision and only when the street design approved by the city council required the street to be so located that a full dedication would require Highways Code of the state. The approval of the council shall be based on the following factors: 
1.  The extension of the street is along property lines which form a boundary of the subdivision. 
2.  Adherence to the forty-foot part-width standards creates an offset in the center of the street. 
3.  The public interest in having a street without an offset in the centerline thereof outweighs the general public policy set forth in this subsection of having all part-width streets a minimum of forty feet in width. 
    In all cases in which a part-width street of less than forty feet is permitted, on-street parking may be prohibited until such time as a minimum of forty feet of the street is improved. 
I.  Width of Streets. Street right-of-way widths shall be not less than those set forth in this subsection. Increased widths may be required when determined necessary by the council in the public interest. Approval or determination of street classification shall be made by the council. 
Street Class Minimum Width Freeway As determined by state highway Expressway As determined by precise plan Major streets 60 feet Collector streets 60 feet Industrial streets 60 feet Residential streets 60 feet Frontage road 60 feet Cul-de-sac 90 feet.  
(Ord. 555 § 1, 1979; Ord. 544 § 1, 1978; Ord. 492 §§ 1, 2, 1977; Ord. 475 § 7(a), 1976) 
16.12.040 - Design conditions-Blocks. 
A.  Acre or Large Lot Subdivisions. Where a parcel is first subdivided into small farms or acre tracts, the blocks shall be of such size and shape and be so divided as to provide for the opening of major and collector streets and for the ultimate extension and opening of minor streets and alleys at such intervals as will permit a subsequent division of any parcel into lots of normal size. 
B.  Block Lengths. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet. For those blocks of an "el" shape, "tee" shape, or superblock configuration, the width shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet in each of any other direction perpendicular or nearly perpendicular to the length. For the purposes of measurement, the distance between extreme property lines measured generally along rear property lines will be utilized. The limitations set forth in this subsection shall not apply to blocks which will abut irrigation canals, railroads, freeways, limited-access expressways, existing subdivisions with a block over one thousand three hundred twenty feet in length, or other existing barriers over one thousand three hundred twenty feet in length. 
C.  Block Widths. Blocks shall be of a sufficient width to permit the plotting of two tiers of lots, except where blocks are adjacent to major streets, freeways, or expressways and lots are created which back up to such street and front onto a residential or collector street, and access rights to such major street, freeway, or expressway are waived by the subdivider. The city council may grant an exception to these provisions to permit through lots which are to be developed with uses facing both streets when it is determined that such exception is warranted by the circumstances of a particular subdivision and is in compliance with an existing zoning classification. 
(Ord. 475 § 7(b), 1976) 
16.12.050 - Design conditions-Lots. 
A.  Side Lines. The side lines of all lots wherever practical shall be at right angles to the centerline of the street. 
B.  Division of Lots. No lot shall be divided by a county, city, school or any other taxing district boundary line. 
C.  Lot Widths and Depths. The size and shape of each lot shall be in conformance to the zoning regulations effective in the area of the proposed subdivision. 
D.  Building Lines. Building setback lines shall be indicated by dashed lines on the subdivision map, as required by the city council. 
E.  Suitability of Lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they are intended to be sold. No land subject to flooding or deemed by the city council to be uninhabitable shall be plotted for residential occupancy. 
(Ord. 475 § 7(c), 1976) 
16.12.060 - Design conditions-Easements. 
A.  For Utilities. The subdivider shall grant easements for public utility use along lot lines where necessary for the extension of any such utility and for the relocation of existing public utility facilities. 
B.  Dedication. Dedication of easements shall be for the purpose of installing and maintaining utilities and for other public purposes as may be ordered or directed by the city council. 
C.  Protection of Easements. No person other than a public utility shall erect, construct or place any building or structure except fences or walls on any public utility easement. No person shall permit or allow vines or other climbing plant materials to become attached to public utility poles. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of real property to maintain any public utility easement area located thereon in such a manner that its condition will not interfere with the proper operation and maintenance of public utility facilities located thereon. Any public utility using such easements, and its representatives, agents or employees, shall have the right to trim or top such trees or shrubs growing within or overhanging the easement as may endanger or interfere with public utility facilities constructed therein and may have free access to said public utility facilities and every part thereof at all times for the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining such public utility facilities. 
D.  Design of Easements. Easements shall be located and designed in subdivision to provide for reasonable, practical and useful placement, replacement, enlargement, repair and maintenance of utility facilities. 
(Ord. 475 § 7(d), 1976) 
16.12.070 - Design conditions-Underground utilities. 
    All utility distribution facilities and lines, including but not limited to gas, water, sewer, electrical, communications, street lighting and cable television, shall be installed underground, except that overhead utility lines may be permitted when it is determined by the city council that such facilities are designed to serve areas larger than that being subdivided and that it is impractical to locate such facilities underground. 
    When overhead lines are approved by the city council, they shall extend along alleys, side lot, rear yard, or privately owned easements, whichever is possible, except where such overhead lines cross streets, or must be located outside of easements for good and sufficient reasons, as determined by the city council. 
    Overhead service to lots abutting existing overhead lines is permitted where no extension of overhead lines is required. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to ensure that utilities are installed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. He shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies or other agencies for such installation, according to the specifications of the governing agency. 
    For the purpose of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed aboveground. 
(Ord. 475 § 7(e), 1976) 
16.12.080 - Design conditions-Subdivisions along major streets. 
    When a subdivision is developed adjacent to a freeway, expressway or major street as shown on the general plan, the city council may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a frontage road to provide ingress and egress to adjacent lots or to create backup lots which front upon an interior residential street and back up to such freeway, expressway or major street. When backup lots are created, the subdivider shall waive direct access rights from the lots to the freeway, expressway or major street, and shall construct a masonry wall, fence or other suitable barrier, as required by the city council, between the subdivision and the adjacent freeway, expressway or major street. 
(Ord. 475 § 7(f), 1976) 
16.12.090 - Design conditions-Watercourses. 
    The subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights, dedicate a right-of-way for storm drainage purposes, conforming substantially with the lines of any natural watercourse, channel, stream or creek that traverses the subdivision, or, at the option of the subdivider, provided by dedication, further and sufficient easements or construction, or both, to dispose of such surface and storm water. 
(Ord. 475 § 7(g), 1976) 
16.12.100 - Design conditions-Sewage disposal. 
    Provision shall be made for adequate sewerage to be installed in accordance with the provisions of the applicable laws of the city. 
(Ord. 475 § 7(h), 1976) 
16.12.110 - Conditions of approval. 
    In approving tentative maps, the city council may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary or desirable to protect the public health, safety or welfare, in accordance with the purpose and intent of this title. 
(Ord. 475 § 8, 1976) 
16.12.120 - General plan. 
    In all respects the subdivision will be considered in relation to the general plan of the city, or any part thereof, or preliminary plans made in anticipation thereof. 
(Ord. 475 § 9, 1976) 
Chapter 16.16 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 

16.16.010 - Filing. 
    Fifteen copies of a tentative map and statement of the proposed subdivision of any land shall be filed with the city clerk at least twenty-one days prior to the meeting of the city council at which consideration is desired. 
(Ord. 475 § 10(a), 1976) 
16.16.020 - Acceptance. 
    The city council shall examine any map filed pursuant to Section 16.16.010 upon presentation and shall not accept such map unless the same is in full compliance with the law and of this title as to form and the data, information and other matters required to be shown thereon or furnished therewith. The tentative map shall not be considered filed until stamped, signed and dated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 475 § 10(b), 1976) 
16.16.030 - Distribution of copies. 
    The city clerk shall transmit copies of the tentative map filed pursuant to Section 16.16.010 to the city engineer; the manager of the Palo Verde irrigation district; the district manager of the Southern California Edison Company; the district manager of the Southern California Gas Company; the district manager of the Continental Telephone System; and such other department heads or agencies as it deems advisable; and, if a state highway is concerned, to the district engineer of the State Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. 475 § 10(c), 1976) 
16.16.040 - Departmental action. 
    The department or agency receiving a copy of the map shall notify, within ten days of the receipt thereof, the city council of particulars which do not conform to requirements coming within its authorized scope. If a relay is not received prior to the meeting at which consideration of the map is made, it will be assumed that the map does conform to the requirements of the department concerned. 
(Ord. 475 § 10(d), 1976) 
16.16.050 - Preliminary sketches. 
    Subdividers are encouraged to consult with the staff of the department of public works for technical advice and procedure prior to the filing of a tentative map. Preliminary sketches of the area involved may be submitted and discussed, however, such a preliminary sketch is not to be construed as a tentative map. Where only a portion of a larger area is to be subdivided at the present time and the balance planned for future subdivisions, the department of public works may require a map showing the proposed street layout within the entire area. Such a map is not a tentative map but is to be used as a guide for the tentative map under consideration and future maps of that area. 
(Ord. 475 § 11(a), 1976) 
16.16.060 - Size and scale. 
    Tentative maps shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches in size. Maps shall be to have scale of one inch equals one hundred feet for large areas, and to a scale of one inch equals fifty feet for small areas, unless otherwise approved by the department of public works. 
(Ord. 475 § 11(b), 1976) 
16.16.070 - Contents. 
    Every tentative map shall be clearly and legibly reproduced and shall contain the following information: 
A.  A key or location map on which shall be shown the general area, including adjacent property, subdivisions and roads; 
B.  The tract name or number, date, north point, scale and sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract; 
C.  The name and address of the recorded owner or owners; 
D.  The name and address of the subdivider; 
E.  The name and business address of the person who prepared the map; 
F.  Acreage of proposed tract to the nearest tenth of an acre; 
G.  Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope of the land and the high and low points thereof; 
H.  The locations, names, widths and grades of all roads, streets, highways and ways in the proposed subdivision or to be offered for dedication; 
I.  The locations, names and existing width of all adjoining and contiguous highways, streets and ways; 
J.  The locations and size of all pipelines and structures used in connection therewith; 
K.  The location and character of all existing and proposed public utilities; 
L.  The widths, location and purposes of all existing and proposed easements; 
M.  The lot layout, dimensions of each lot and lot numbers; 
N.  City limit lines occurring within the general vicinity of the subdivision; 
O.  The bearings and distances to quartersection bounds within the general vicinity of the subdivision; 
P.  The boundaries of any units within the subdivision, if the subdivision is to be recorded in stages; 
Q.  The names of the owners of land immediately adjacent to the subdivision; 
R.  The outline of any existing buildings to remain in place and their locations in relation to existing or proposed street and lot lines; 
S.  The location of all trees proposed to remain in place, standing within the boundaries of proposed public right-of-way; 
T.  The location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow, and the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses. 
(Ord. 475 § 11(c), 1976) 
16.16.080 - Accompanying statement. 
A.  A statement shall be presented by the subdivider in written form accompanying the map and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Improvements and public utilities proposed to be made or installed and the time at which such improvements are proposed to be completed; 
2.  The proposed plan for drainage; 
3.  Provision for sewerage and sewage disposal; 
4.  Provision for proposed water supply; 
5.  Public areas proposed; 
6.  The type and location of street lighting proposed; 
7.  The proposed building setback lines and width of side yards; 
8.  Justification and reasons for any exceptions to provisions of this title, or for any amendments to the zoning law, which may be requested in conjunction with the subdivision proposed. 
B.  A copy of any restrictive covenants proposed shall be attached to the owner's statement. 
(Ord. 475 § 12, 1976) 
16.16.090 - Review by council-Generally. 
    The city council shall review the tentative map to determine whether it is in conformity with the provisions of law and of this title and, upon that basis, within fifty days after the filing of the tentative map, shall adopt a resolution approving, conditionally approving or disapproving the tentative map. The city council is authorized to report its action directly to the subdivider, and shall also transmit to the city engineer a copy of the tentative map and a copy of the resolution setting forth the action of the council. 
(Ord. 475 § 13(a), 1976) 
16.16.100 - Review by council-Consistency with general plan. 
    A tentative map shall not be approved or conditionally approved by the city council unless the council finds that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans of the city. 
(Ord. 475 § 13(b), 1976) 
16.16.110 - Review by council-Discharge of waste. 
    In connection with their review of a tentative map the city council shall determine whether the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into the existing sewer system would result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code of the state. In the event the city council finds that the proposed waste discharge would result in or add to violation of requirements of such board, it may disapprove the tentative subdivision map. 
(Ord. 475 § 13(c), 1976) 
16.16.120 - Review by council-Limitations on approval. 
    A tentative map shall not be approved or conditionally approved by the city council if it makes any of the following findings: 
A.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
B.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
C.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
D.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
E.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
F.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
G.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 475 § 13 (d), 1976) 
16.16.130 - Review by council-Reports and recommendations. 
    Any reports or recommendations on the map or maps of any subdivision submitted to the city council shall be submitted in writing to the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on the map or maps by the council. Such required submission in writing shall be deemed complied with when such reports or recommendations are placed in the mail bearing proper postage, and directed to the subdivider at his address shown on the map. 
(Ord. 475 § 13 (e), 1976) 
16.16.140 - Information to be furnished to city engineer. 
    When the approval or conditioned approval of the tentative map of any subdivision has become final, the subdivider shall furnish the following information to the city engineer, and shall receive his authorization prior to construction of any of the improvements or preparation of the final map: 
A.  Typical cross-sections and proposed final finished grades of all roads, streets and highways in the proposed new subdivision, together with a profile showing the relation between finished grade and existing ground elevations; 
B.  Proposed lengths, size and type of any pipes, culverts or structures necessary for drainage, erosion control or the public safety with plans and specifications therefor; 
C.  Any information required by the conditional approval of the city council; 
D.  Elevations shall be references to the Blythe city datum. 
(Ord. 475 § 13(f), 1976) 
Chapter 16.20 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 

16.20.010 - Generally. 
    Land may be divided by parcel map, when such division is authorized by provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, by first obtaining city council approval of a tentative parcel map and by subsequently recording the parcel map in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 475 § 14, 1976) 
16.20.020 - Tentative-Filing and departmental approval. 
    The legal owner of record, or his authorized representative, desiring the reparcelling of any lot or lots or parcels of land under the provisions of this chapter shall file fifteen copies of a tentative parcel map with the city council at least twenty-one days prior to the meeting of the council at which consideration is desired. Acceptance, distribution and departmental action on such maps shall be in accordance with the provisions of this title relating to tentative subdivision maps. 
(Ord. 475 § 15(a), 1976) 
16.20.030 - Tentative-Form. 
A.  Tentative parcel maps shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches in size. Maps shall be to a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet for large areas, or to a scale of one inch equals fifty feet for small areas where practical. 
B.  Every tentative parcel map shall be clearly and legibly reproduced and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Date, north point, scale and sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed reparcelling; 
2.  The name and address of the record owner or owners; 
3.  The name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner; 
4.  The name and business address of the person who prepared the map, if other than owner; 
5.  Locations, names and existing width of all adjoining and contiguous highways, streets and ways; 
6.  The locations and size of all pipelines and structures used in connection therewith; 
7.  The location and character of all existing public utilities; 
8.  The location and character of all existing and proposed street improvements; 
9.  The widths, locations and purpose of all existing and proposed easements; 
10.  The method of serving individual parcels to be created with utilities; 
11.  The lot layout, dimensions of each lot, and lot designations; 
12.  The outline of any existing buildings to remain in place and their locations in relation to existing or proposed street and lot lines. 
(Ord. 475 § 15(b), 1976) 
16.20.040 - Tentative-Consistency with general plan. 
    A tentative parcel map shall not be approved or conditionally approved by the city council unless the council finds that the proposed parcel map, together with the provisions for its design and improvements is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans of the city. 
(Ord. 475 § 15(c), 1976) 
16.20.050 - Tentative-Requirements for approval. 
    If the tentative parcel map complies with all of the requirements of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, the city council may approve the division, subject to the dedication of necessary right-of-way for streets and easements, the installation of all improvements along the frontages of the property so divided, as required by the council, and the installation of all necessary utilities and connections to each lot. All lot sizes shall conform to the provisions of the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 475 § 15(d), 1978) 
16.20.060 - Tentative-Limitations on approval. 
    A tentative parcel map shall not be approved or conditionally approved by the city council if it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
2.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
3.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
4.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
5.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
6.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
7.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 475 § 15(e), 1976) 
16.20.070 - Improvement security. 
    If the city council approves the tentative parcel map, it may grant the subdivider a period of time after the recording of the parcel map in which to complete the installation of the public improvements required by the council to be installed as a condition of approval of the map. If such a time period is granted, the council shall require improvement security to be posted in one of the forms set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 475 § 15(f), 1976) 
16.20.080 - Requirement for trees. 
    As a condition of approval for parcel maps it is the policy of the city to require two trees to be planted and maintained along the frontages of the affected properties. In order to ensure that such trees conform to the city tree plan, and that they are properly planted and maintained, whenever trees are required as a condition of approval of a parcel map, the applicant shall pay to the city a sum for each tree required. Such sum shall be established by the resolution of the council adopted from time to time. Such sum shall be paid at the time of filing the parcel map. Upon payment of such sum, the city shall be responsible for planting such trees. 
(Ord. 475 § 15(g), 1976) 
16.20.090 - Drainage facilities. 
    Whenever the city, by ordinance, has adopted a drainage plan for a particular drainage area, pursuant to Section 66483 of the Government Code of the state, each subdivider filing a parcel map for the division of land, any part of which is located within the boundaries of such a drainage area, and the tentative map of which is filed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, shall pay to the city, at the time of filing of the parcel map, as a condition of approval thereof, such fees as may be required by said ordinance. The council may, by resolutions or agreements adopted or entered into from time to time, establish conditions under which such fees may be spread over a period of time. 
(Ord. 475 § 15(h), 1976) 
16.20.100 - Filing. 
    The subdivider or his agent may file a parcel map with the city engineer for his examination and certification within twelve months after the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the city council may extend the time for filing a parcel map for a period or periods not exceeding two years, if it determines that conditions affecting the parcel map have not substantially changed. In any case where a parcel map has not been recorded within twelve months or such extended period of time as may be granted by the council, approval of a new tentative parcel map shall be required. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(a) (part), 1976) 
16.20.110 - Preparation. 
    A parcel map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall substantially conform to the tentative parcel map and conditions thereto as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(a) (part), 1976) 
16.20.120 - Recorder's fee. 
    A tracing of the parcel map shall be filed with the city engineer. In addition, the subdivider shall deposit with the city the recorder's fee for recording the parcel map. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(b), 1976) 
16.20.130 - Form. 
    The parcel map shall conform to the provisions for final maps where applicable. 
    The map shall show the definite location of the parcel or parcels, and particularly their relation to surrounding surveys. The location of any remainder of the original parcel shall be shown, but need not be shown as a matter of survey, but only by reference to the existing record boundaries if such remainder has a gross area of five acres or more. 
    The parcel map may be compiled from record data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps to locate and retrace the exterior boundary lines of the parcel map and when the location of at least one of these boundary lines can be established from an existing monument line. In any case, the parcel map may be based upon a field survey made in conformance with the Land Surveyor's Act. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(c), 1976) 
16.20.140 - Consent of owner. 
    The parcel map shall contain a certificate, which shall be signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the parcel map. Such signatures shall be in accordance with the provisions of this title pertaining to final maps. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(d), 1976) 
16.20.150 - Dedications-Requirements. 
    If dedications of streets, alleys, walkways, easements, public utility easements, or other public ways, or access rights are required by the city council as conditions of approval of a parcel map, such dedications shall either be shown on and offered by a certificate on the parcel map or made by separate instrument as determined by the city engineer. Such certificate or instrument shall be signed by those parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided in accordance with the provisions of this title pertaining to final maps. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(e), 1976) 
16.20.160 - Certification by city engineer. 
    Upon receipt of the parcel map, together with the recording fees, and any required improvement security, the city engineer shall examine the same to determine whether said map is technically correct and substantially conforms with the tentative parcel map and with all changes and requirements imposed as conditions of approval by the city council. The city engineer shall also refer the parcel map to the city clerk for examination and determination of whether all of the lots and parcels created by said map conform with the requirements and the zoning regulations of the city. If the city engineer determines that the parcel map fully conforms with all the requirements set forth in this section, he shall so certify on said map. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(f), 1976) 
16.20.170 - Dedications-Acceptance. 
    Offers of dedication shall be reviewed by the city engineer for compliance with the conditions of approval imposed by the city council. If all offers of dedication are in accordance with the requirements of the council, the city engineer shall recommend the acceptance of such dedications by the authorized official of the city. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(g), 1976) 
16.20.180 - Recordation. 
    Upon certification by the city engineer, the parcel map shall be transmitted to the city clerk, who shall cause said map to be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 475 § 16(h), 1976) 
16.20.190 - Issuance of building permits. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building, structure or other work on any parcel proposed to be created until a parcel map has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, and recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 475 § 17, 1976) 
16.20.200 - Division of existing buildings. 
A.  Prior to the recordation of a parcel map which will result in the division of any existing building or buildings into separate units or parts, the applicant shall secure certification by the building inspector that any building or buildings to be divided will, after division, meet current code standards for new construction. 
B.  As used in this section, "current code standards" refers to all standards in the current adopted editions of the building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code and fire code of the city. 
(Ord. 475 § 18, 1976) 
Chapter 16.24 - FINAL MAP 
Sections: 

16.24.010 - Filing. 
    The subdivider or his agent may file a final map within twelve months after the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the city council may extend the time for filing a final map for a period or periods not exceeding two years if it determines that conditions affecting the subdivision have not substantially changed. In any case where a final map has not been filed within twelve months of such extended period of time as may be granted by the council, approval of a new tentative map shall be required. 
(Ord. 475 § 19(a), 1976) 
16.24.020 - Fees. 
    A tracing of the final map shall be filed with the city engineer. The subdivider shall deposit with the city the county recorder's fee for recording the final map and shall pay to the city the fees for checking the map and for preparing prints thereof, the amount of such fees to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. The subdivider shall also pay at the time all other fees required by law to be paid in connection with the approval of a subdivision. 
(Ord. 475 § 19(b), 1976) 
16.24.030 - Traverse sheets. 
    At the time of the filing of the final map with the city engineer, the subdivider shall also file therewith traverse sheets, showing traverse closures and the computation of all distances, angles and course shown on the final map. The traverse of the boundaries of the tract and of lots and blocks shall close within a limit of error of one in ten thousand. 
(Ord. 475 § 19(c), 1976) 
16.24.040 - Report and guarantee of clear title. 
    The final map shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a duly authorized title company, naming the persons whose consent is necessary to the preparation and recordation of said map and to the dedication of the streets, alleys and other public places shown on the map, and certifying that, as of the date of the preparation of the report, the persons therein named are all the persons necessary to give clear title to the subdivision. At the time of recording the approved map, there shall be filed with the county recorder a guarantee, executed by a duly authorized title company for the benefit and protection of the city, showing that persons (naming them) consenting to the preparation and recordation of said map and offering for dedication the streets, alleys and other public places shown thereon are all the persons necessary to pass clear title to the subdivision and to the dedication shown thereon. 
(Ord. 475 § 19(d), 1976) 
16.24.050 - Form-Legibility and size. 
A.  The final map shall be clearly and legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film, except that affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with black opaque ink. The map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when filed that good legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom. The size of each sheet shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. 
B.  When the final map consists of more than two sheets, a key map showing the relation of the sheets shall be placed on sheet one. Every sheet comprising the map shall bear the scale, north point, legend, sheet number and number of sheets comprising the map. 
(Ord. 475 § 20(a), 1976) 
16.24.060 - Form-Title. 
    The final map shall contain a title, consisting of the name of the tract and a subtitle or general description of all the property being subdivided, with reference to maps which have been previously recorded. In no case shall the title be the same, or so nearly the same as to cause confusion, as a name of any existing city, town, tract or subdivision of land of which a map has been previously recorded. 
(Ord. 475 § 20(b), 1976) 
16.24.070 - Form-Distances and bearings. 
    Sufficient data must be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of every lot line, block line and boundary line. Dimensions of lots shall be given as total dimensions, corner to corner, and shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot. Lots containing one acre or more shall show total acreage to the nearest hundredth. Bearing and lengths of straight lines, and radii and arc length for all curves as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and tangent points shall be shown. 
(Ord. 475 § 20(c), 1976) 
16.24.080 - Form-Boundary references and monuments. 
A.  The final map shall show clearly any stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract. The corners of adjoining subdivisions or portions thereof shall be identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision name and properties shown. 
B.  Whenever the city engineer has established the centerline of a street or alley, adjacent to or in the proposed subdivision, the data shall be shown in the final map, indicating all monuments found and making reference to a field book or map. If the points were reset by ties, the course and detail of relocation data used shall be stated. 
C.  The map shall show the location and description of all monuments and bench marks found or placed in making the survey of the subdivision, with proper reference sufficient for relocation. 
(Ord. 475 § 20(d), 1976) 
16.24.090 - Form-Additional information. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in Sections 16.24.050 through 16.24.080, the final map shall be prepared in full compliance with the following requirements: 
A.  High-water Line. The line of high water shall be shown in any case where the subdivision is adjacent to a stream, channel or any body of water. 
B.  Flood Areas. The boundaries of any areas within the proposed subdivision which are subject to inundation by water shall be shown. 
C.  Boundary of Subdivision. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a blue border, one-eighth inch in width, applied to the reverse side of the tracings. Such border shall not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data. 
D.  Right-of-way Dimensions. The centerlines and sidelines of all streets, the total width of all streets, the widths each side of the centerline, the widths of any portion of a street being dedicated, the widths of existing dedications, and the widths of all railroad, irrigation district or other rights-of-way shall be shown. 
E.  Building Lines. Building setback lines shall be indicated by dashed lines of the same width as the lines denoting street boundaries and shall be property designated. 
F.  Easements. The map shall show the sidelines of all easements to which the lots are subject. Such easements must be clearly labeled and identified and if already of record, the record references given. If any easement is not definitely located of record, a statement of such easement must appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drain, sewers and other purposes shall be denoted by fine broken lines. The width of the easement and the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificate of dedication. 
G.  Acreage. The total acreage of the subdivision to the nearest one hundredth of an acre shall be shown on the face of the final map. 
H.  Block Numbers. Block numbers shall be assigned by the department of public works. The numbers shall be solid and of sufficient size and thickness to stand out, and shall be so placed as not to obliterate any figure and shall not be enclosed in any design. Each block in its entirety shall be shown on one sheet. Where adjoining blocks appear on separate sheets, the street adjoining both blocks shall be shown on both streets complete with centerline and property line data. 
I.  Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number "1" in each block and shall be consecutive with no omissions or duplications. If deemed necessary by the department of public works, omissions may be made when only a portion of the block is to be recorded and the remainder of the block is to be completed as part of a subsequent subdivision. 
J.  Other Data. The map shall also show all other data that is or may be required by law. 
K.  Disposition of Lots. The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all lots intended for sale or reserved for private purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, public or private, with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. 
L.  Reversion to Acreage. Maps filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage shall be conspicuously so designated under the title "The Purpose of This Map is a Reversion to Acreage." 
(Ord. 475 § 20(e), 1976) 
16.24.100 - Certificates and acknowledgements. 
    The following certificates and acknowledgments, and other required by law, shall appear on the final map; such certificates may be combined where appropriate: 
A.  Certificate by Parties Holding Title. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of said map, provided, however, that the signatures of parties owning the following types of interests may be omitted if their names and the nature of their interests are set forth on the map: 
1.  Rights-of-way, easements or other interest which cannot ripen into a fee, except those owned by a public entity or public utility, unless it is determined by the city council that division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the final map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; provided that such signatures may be required by the council. If such signatures are not required by the council, the subdivider shall send, by certified mail, a sketch of the proposed final map, together with a copy of this section, to any public entity or public utility which has previously acquired a right-of-way or easement. If the public entity or public utility objects to recording the final map without the signature of each public entity or public utility, it shall so notify the subdivider within thirty days after receipt thereof, otherwise the signature may be omitted. Failure of the public entity or public utility to object to recording the final map without its signature shall in no way affect its rights under a right-of-way or easement, 
2.  Rights-of-way, easements or reversions, which by reason of changed conditions, long disuse or laches appear to be no longer of practical use or value, and which signature it is impossible or impractical to obtain. In this case, a reasonable statement of circumstances preventing the procurement of the signature shall be set forth on the map, 
3.  Any subdivision map, including land originally patented by the United States or this state, under patent reserving interest to either or both of these entities, may be recorded under the provision of this chapter without the consent of the United States or of this state thereto, or to dedication made thereon, 
4.  Interest in or rights to minerals including, but not limited to, oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances, if: 
a.  The ownership of such interests or rights does not include a right of entry on the surface of the land, or 
b.  The use of the land, or the surface thereof, in connection with the ownership of such interests or rights, is prohibited by zoning or other local ordinances or regulations, provided that such signatures may be required by the council; 
B.  Dedication Certificate. A certificate signed and acknowledged as provided in subsection A of this section offering for dedication all parcels of land shown on the final map and intended for any public use, except those parcels other than streets which are intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the subdivision, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants; 
C.  Engineer's Certificate. A certificate by the civil engineer or licensed surveyor responsible for the survey and final map. The signature of such civil engineer or surveyor, unless accompanied by his seal, must be attested; 
D.  Other Certificates. Certificates for execution by each of the following: 
1.  City engineer, 
2.  City council, 
3.  City clerk; 
E.  Certificates Regarding Tax Liens. 
1.  Prior to the filing of the final map with the governing body, the subdivider shall file with the clerk of the board of supervisors of Riverside County a certificate from the official, computing redemptions in the county or any municipal corporation in which any part of the subdivision is located, showing that, according to the records of his office, there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid state, county, municipal or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable, 
2.  As to taxes or special assessments collected as taxes not yet payable, the subdivider shall file with the clerk of the board of supervisors a certificate by each proper officer, giving his estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which are a lien but which are not yet payable, 
3.  Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider executes and files with the board of supervisors a good and sufficient bond to be approved by the board and by its terms made to inure to the benefit of the county, and conditioned upon the payment of all state, county, municipal and local taxes, and all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property, but which are not yet payable. In lieu of a bond, a deposit may be made of money or negotiable bonds in the same amount, and of the kind approved for security deposits of public money. 
(Ord. 475 § 21, 1976) 
16.24.110 - Action-Certification by clerk. 
    The city clerk, upon receiving the final map from the subdivider or his agent, shall examine the same to determine whether the map conforms with the tentative map and with all changes and requirements imposed as a condition to the acceptance of said tentative map by the city council. If it is determined that the final map does not conform, the subdivider shall be advised of the changes or additions that must be made before the final map can be certified by the city clerk. If the subdivider is not satisfied with the determination made by the city clerk, he may appeal, in writing, within fifteen days to the council. If it is determined that the map is in conformity, the city clerk shall certify approval thereon. 
(Ord. 475 § 22 (a), 1976) 
16.24.120 - Action-Approval by city engineer. 
    Upon approval by the city clerk, the final map and other data shall be submitted to the city engineer, who shall examine and determine that the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the tentative map, and any improved alterations thereof, that all provisions of the law and of this title applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map have been complied with, and that he is satisfied that the map is technically correct. If the city engineer determines that full conformity therewith has been made, he shall so certify on said map. In the event a subdivision is partly in the city and partly outside the city, the county surveyor and the city engineer shall enter into an agreement by and with the consent of their respective governing bodies, providing that the county surveyor may perform the duties of the city engineer or vice versa, or providing for an apportionment between them of said duties. The county surveyor or the city engineer, when by such agreement all such duties devolve upon either one, may after his performance thereof make the aforesaid certification upon said map; and when by such agreement said duties are apportioned between the county surveyor and city engineer, it shall be sufficient, if each, after the performance thereof, makes a certification on said map, touching the duties performed by each. When all certificates required on the final map have been signed, except the approval certificate of the council, the city engineer shall transmit said map to the city clerk. 
(Ord. 475 § 22(b), 1976) 
16.24.130 - Action-Approval by council. 
A.  At its first regular meeting following the transmittal of the final map to the city clerk, the city council shall consider said map, the plan of subdivision and the offers of dedication. The council may reject any or all offers of dedication. In the event that all improvements required or conditions imposed upon approval under the terms of this title or by law are not completed before the filing of the final map, the council may enter into an agreement with the subdivider for posting improvement security. In such case, when the agreement has been approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city engineer as to sufficiency, and when the improvement security has been approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city manager as to sufficiency, the council may consider the final map. 
B.  The city council shall approve said map if it is determined to be in conformity with the provisions of law and of this title. The council shall disapprove said map if it is determined to be not in conformity with the provisions of law and of this title, and shall advise the subdivider of its disapproval and the reason or reasons therefor. 
(Ord. 475 § 22(c) , 1976) 
16.24.140 - Action-Transmittal to county recorder. 
    The city clerk, upon receipt of the necessary fees, and after the signatures and seals have been affixed, and upon the approval of the final map by the city council, shall transmit the map to the county recorder who shall file the same. No map shall have any force or effect until the same has been approved by the council, and no title to any property described in any offer of dedication shall pass until recordation of the final map. 
(Ord. 475 § 22(d), 1976) 
16.24.150 - Improvements-Agreement. 
A.  Prior to the approval of the city council of the final map, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the city specifying the period within which he shall complete all improvement work to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and providing that, if he fails to complete such work within such period, the city may complete the same and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. The agreement shall also provide for inspection of all improvements by the city engineer, and reimbursement of the city by the subdivider for the cost of such inspection. 
B.  Such agreement may also provide for: 
1.  Construction of the improvements in units; 
2.  Extension of time under conditions therein specified; 
3.  Partial release of the improvement securities upon acceptance by the city council of the work as it progresses; 
4.  Financing and construction of any of all of such improvements under an appropriate special assessment act proceeding; the subdivider shall agree, in writing, to initiate and, so far as may be in his power, to consummate such proceedings, within such time as may be prescribed by the council. 
(Ord. 475 § 23(a), 1976) 
16.24.160 - Improvements-Security. 
A.  The subdivider shall also file with the agreement provided for in Section 16.24.150 two improvement securities, each to be in an amount based upon the total estimated cost of the improvement as determined by the city engineer. 
1.  One improvement security shall secure faithful performance of said agreement and shall be in an amount based upon the total agreement and shall be in an amount equal to fifty percent of the estimate cost of the improvements. 
2.  The second improvement security shall secure the obligations set forth in subsection (b) of Section 66499.3 of the Government Code for payment of the contractor, his subcontractors and persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them for said improvements, and shall be in an amount equal to fifty percent of the total estimated cost of the improvements. 
B.  Such improvement securities may be in one of the following types, subject to the approval of the council as to the type and the city attorney as to form: 
1.  All bonds which shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact a surety business in California; 
2.  In lieu of the faithful performance and payment bonds, the subdivider may submit cash deposits under the conditions described in this subsection. 
    Disbursements from cash deposits shall be made in accordance with separate agreement between the subdivider and the city. A bookkeeping fee of one percent of the total amount deposited with the city for each cash deposit bond shall be submitted with each bond. Disbursements from a cash deposit filed with an approved escrow agency shall be made in accordance with separate agreement between the subdivider and the city. Disbursements from a cash deposit in any instance shall not be permitted unless and until authorized in writing by both the subdivider and the city engineer; 
3.  In lieu of the faithful performance and payment bonds, or cash deposits, the subdivider may submit instruments of credit under the conditions described in this subsection. Such instruments of credit shall be issued by a financial institution subject to regulation by state or federal government in a form and content as approved by the city attorney, and shall pledge that the funds necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and agree that the funds designated by the instrument shall become trust funds for the purposes set forth in the instrument; 
4.  Any other form of improvement security authorized by the California Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 649 § 1, 1988: Ord. 475 § 23(b), 1976) 
16.24.170 - Improvements-Forfeiture of security. 
    In the event the subdivider fails to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this title and the city has to complete same, or if the subdivider fails to reimburse the city for the cost of inspection, engineering, fees and incidental expenses, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement, or shall appropriate from any cash deposits, savings and loan certificates and shares, or instruments of credit, funds for reimbursement. In any case, if the amount of the surety bond, savings and loan certificate and share, instrument of credit, or cash deposit exceeds all costs and expense incurred by the city, it shall release the remainder of such bond, savings and loan certificate and share, or cash deposit. If the amount of the surety bond, savings and loan certificate and share, instrument of credit, or cash deposit is less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to the city for such difference. 
(Ord. 475 § 23(c), 1976) 
16.24.180 - Improvements-Release of security. 
    Improvement securities may be released or reduced, in whole or in part, only in the time and manner prescribed in Section 66499.7 of the Government Code, as it exists at the time of, or is amended after, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, and only after certification by the city engineer that the work covered thereby has been satisfactorily completed and upon approval of the council. 
(Ord. 475 § 23(d), 1976) 
16.24.190 - Improvements-Guarantee and warranty security. 
A.  In addition to the improvement securities specified in Section 16.24.160, the subdivider shall file with the subdivision agreement an amount as specified in said agreement to guarantee and warrant subdivision improvements for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, materials furnished. 
B.  The director of public works is authorized to release said security upon expiration of the guarantee and warranty period if it is determined that subdivision improvement so guaranteed and warrants are satisfactory. 
(Ord. 475 § 23(e), 1976) 
16.24.200 - Improvements-Limitations on liability. 
    Any liability upon the security given for the faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be limited to: 
A.  The performance of the work covered by the agreement between the subdivider and the city council or the performance of the required act; 
B.  The performance of any changes or alterations in such work; provided that all such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement; 
C.  The guarantee and warranty of the work, for a period of one year following completion and acceptance thereof, against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished, in the performance of the agreement with the city council or the performance of the act; 
D.  Costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. § 475 § 23(f), 1976) 
16.24.210 - Improvements-Causes of action to recover. 
    Where the security is conditioned upon the payment to the contractor, his subcontractors and persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of an act, and takes the form of a deposit of money or negotiable bonds, a suit to recover the amount due the claimant may be maintained against the holder of such deposit. Where the security takes the form of a surety bond or surety bonds, the right of recovery shall be in a suit against the surety. Where the security takes the form of an instrument of credit, the cause of action shall be against the financial institution obligating itself on such instrument of credit. 
(Ord. 475 § 23(g), 1976) 
16.24.220 - Preliminary soil report. 
    Prior to the submission of the final map, the subdivider shall file with the director of public works a preliminary soil report, prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state, based upon adequate test borings or excavations of every subdivision for which a final map is required. The preliminary soil report may be waived if the director of public works determines that, due to the knowledge of the building department as to the soil qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. 
(Ord. 475 § 24, 1976) 
16.24.230 - Soil investigation-Report. 
    If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critical expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state. The soil investigation shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The report shall be filed with the director of public works. 
(Ord. 475 § 25, 1976) 
16.24.240 - Soil investigation-Approval. 
    The director of public works shall approve the soil investigation if he determines that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed on each lot in the subdivision. Appeal from such determination shall be to the city council. The building permit shall be conditioned upon the incorporation of the approved recommended corrective action in the construction of each dwelling. 
(Ord. 475 § 26, 1976) 
16.24.250 - Division of existing buildings. 
A.  Prior to the recordation of a final map which will result in the division of any existing building or buildings into separate units or parts, the subdivider shall secure certification by the director of public works that any building or buildings to be divided will, after division, meet current code standards for new construction. 
B.  As used in this section, "current code standards" refers to all standards in the current adopted editions of the building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code and fire code of the city. 
(Ord. 475 § 27, 1976) 
Chapter 16.28 - OTHER MAPS 
Sections: 

16.28.010 - Reversion to acreage-Generally. 
    Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions of Sections 16.28.020 through 16.28.060. 
(Ord. 475 § 28 (part), 1976) 
16.28.020 - Reversion to acreage-Initiation of proceedings by owners. 
A.  Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the property. 
B.  The petition shall contain the following information, and such other information as required by the city clerk: 
1.  Evidence of title to the real property; and 
2.  Evidence of the consent of all the owners of an interest in the property; or 
3.  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or 
4.  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record; 
5.  A tentative map in the form prescribed by this title; or 
6.  A final map in the form prescribed by this title which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. 
(Ord. 475 § 28(a), 1976) 
16.28.030 - Reversion to acreage-Initiation of proceedings by city council. 
    The city council, at the request of any person or on its own motion, may by resolution initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The council shall direct the city clerk to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct proceedings. 
(Ord. 475 § 28(b), 1976) 
16.28.040 - Reversion to acreage-Fees. 
    Petitions to revert property to acreage shall be accompanied by a fee to cover the cost of processing and public hearing in an amount to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. If the proceedings are initiated pursuant to Section 16.28.030, the person or persons who requested the council to initiate the proceedings shall pay the fee established by resolution of the council. Fees are not refundable. 
(Ord. 475 § 28(c), 1976) 
16.28.050 - Reversion to acreage-Proceedings. 
A.  A public hearing shall be held before the city council on all petitions for, and council initiations for, reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearings shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Government Code. The council may give such other notice that it deems necessary or advisable. 
B.  Prior to city council consideration of the reversion to acreage and the holding of a public hearing, the city clerk may refer the proposed reversion to acreage to the council for a report and recommendation. 
C.  The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records in writing that: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later, or 
c.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. 
D.  The city council may require, as conditions of reversions: 
1.  That the owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets or easements; 
2.  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits, or improvements securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 475 § 28(d), 1976) 
16.28.060 - Reversion to acreage-Return of fees and deposits and release of securities. 
    Except as provided in Section 16.28.050, upon filing of the final map for reversion to acreage with the county recorder, all fees and deposits shall be returned to the subdivider and all improvement securities shall be released by the city council. 
(Ord. 475 § 28 (e), 1976) 
16.28.070 - Reversion to acreage-Recording of final map. 
    After the hearing before the council and approval of the reversion, the final map shall be delivered to the County Recorder. The reversion to acreage shall be effective upon the final map being filed for recording by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedication and offers of dedication not shown on the final map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. 
(Ord. 475 § 28(f), 1976) 
16.28.080 - Resubdivision of an existing subdivision. 
    In the event an existing subdivision is resubdivided such that the street alignment, lot design or drainage are changed, then the area constitutes a new subdivision and the procedures for filing a tentative and final map, as outlined in this title, shall apply. 
(Ord. 475 § 29, 1976) 
Chapter 16.32 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 

16.32.010 - Standards-Designated. 
    All improvements shall conform to the requirements contained in the standard specifications of the city, prepared by the city engineer and adopted by the city council, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. Copies of said standard specifications shall be maintained on file in the offices of city clerk and city engineer. 
(Ord. 475 § 30, 1976) 
16.32.020 - Standards-Compliance required. 
    The subdivider shall install improvements in accordance with the standards specified in this title and in the standard specifications referred to in Section 16.32.010. 
(Ord. 475 § 31 (part), 1976) 
16.32.030 - Streets and alleys. 
    All streets and alleys shall be improved in accordance with the requirements of the standard specifications referred to in Section 16.32.010. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(a), 1976) 
16.32.040 - Drainage facilities. 
    Drainage facilities shall be installed as deemed necessary by the city engineer to provide for the removal of surface water. Such drainage facilities shall be of a character and design approved by the city engineer and in accordance with the requirements of the standard specifications referred to in Section 16.32.010, in order to ensure proper grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(b), 1976) 
16.32.050 - Curbs and gutters. 
    Curbs and gutters shall be installed to grades, cross-section, layout and location approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(c), 1976) 
16.32.060 - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks shall be installed along all streets and may be required in other locations where sidewalks are deemed necessary by the city council. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(d), 1976) 
16.32.070 - Sewage disposal. 
    Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city system shall be installed to serve each lot when connection to such system is available. Sewers shall be installed to grades, location, design and sizes approved by the city engineer, in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws of the city. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(e), 1976) 
16.32.080 - Water. 
    Water mains connecting with the existing city or public utility system shall be installed to serve each lot when connection to such system is available. In the latter case, when it is proposed that water will be supplied by a private water company, the subdivider shall submit a letter from the governing body of such water system showing the ability of the system to serve the proposed subdivision and evidence that a satisfactory agreement has been entered into for connection to that system. Water mains shall than be installed to grades, location, design and sizes approved by the city engineer and the engineer of the governing body of the water system. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(f), 1976) 
16.32.090 - Street lights. 
A.  Lighting standards, underground cables or conduit and conductors and all materials and appurtenances necessary shall be installed of a design and location approved by the city engineer. 
B.  There shall be at least one electrolier at each intersection, and intermediate electroliers not more than two hundred forty feet apart in blocks exceeding three hundred thirty feet in length. Electroliers shall be spaced not more than two hundred forty feet apart on one side of major streets. 
C.  Where a cul-de-sac is longer than one hundred fifty feet, measured from the center of the turnaround at the end of the cul-de-sac to the centerline of the intersecting street, an electrolier shall be provided at the turnaround in a location approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(g), 1976) 
16.32.100 - Railroad crossings. 
    Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to provide access to or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the California State Public Utilities Commission for the establishment and improvement of such crossing. The cost of such railroad crossing improvement shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(h), 1976) 
16.32.110 - Street-name signs. 
    Each subdivider shall pay to the city at the time of approval of the final map, as conditions of such approval, an amount established by resolution of the city council for each street-name sign required in the subdivision; provided that, when only a part of an intersection requiring a street-name sign is within or contiguous to the subdivision, the charge for street-name signs for such intersection shall be proportional to the number of corners of the intersection within or contiguous to the subdivision. 
(Ord. 475 § 31(i), 1976) 
16.32.120 - Drainage plan. 
    Whenever the city, by ordinance, has adopted a drainage plan for a particular drainage area pursuant to Section 66483 of the Government Code of the state, each subdivider of a subdivision, any part of which is located within the boundaries of such a drainage area and the tentative map of which is filed after the effective date of this section, shall pay to the city at the time of approval of the final map, as a condition of such approval, such fees as may be required by said ordinance. 
(Ord. 475 § 32, 1976) 
16.32.130 - Trees. 
    Each subdivider of a subdivision, the tentative map of which is approved by the city council after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, shall pay to the city at the time of approval of the final map, as a condition of such approval, such sum as may be established by resolution of the city council. The purpose of such requirement is to provide funds for the cost of furnishing, locating, planting and fertilizing trees and providing and installing supports for trees in such subdivision in such cases where the subdivider has not in advance located, planted and installed trees and supports for trees. 
(Ord. 475 § 33, 1976) 
16.32.140 - Monuments. 
A.  At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code, so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. 
B.  Permanent monuments, as required by the standards specifications of the city, shall be set at each corner and angle point in the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, except where such monuments already exist in their proper positions. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be adequately monumented or referenced before the final map is recorded. 
C.  Interior monuments shall be set as required by the standard specifications of the city. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded, if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the subdivider furnished to the city a cash deposit in an amount for each monument to be set as established by resolution of the city council adopted from time to time. 
D.  Within five days after the final setting of all monuments has been completed by the engineer or surveyor, he shall give written notice to the subdivider, and to the city engineer, that the final monuments have been set. 
E.  Upon payment to the engineer or surveyor for setting the final monuments, the subdivider shall present to the city engineer evidence of such payment and receipt thereof by the engineer or surveyor. Upon receipt of such evidence, the city engineer is authorized to release the cash deposit. The city engineer is authorized to cause payment to be made to the engineer or surveyor for the setting of the final monuments from said cash deposit, if so requested by the depositor. 
F.  If the subdivider does not present evidence to the city engineer that he has paid the engineer or surveyor for the setting of the final monuments, and if the engineer or surveyor notifies the city engineer that he has not been paid by the subdivider for the setting of the final monuments, the city engineer may, within three months from the date of said notification, authorize payment to the engineer or surveyor from the cash deposit the amount due. 
(Ord. 475 § 34, 1976) 
Chapter 16.36 - EXCEPTIONS 
Sections: 

16.36.010 - Granted under certain circumstances. 
    The city council may vary the regulations relative to the subdivision of land by granting an exception, provided it is shown by the subdivider that: 
A.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property, such as to topography, fixed rights-of-way, unique location of easements, etc.; or 
B.  Because of the unique nature of a particular subdivision concept, design innovations are proposed to meet the functional standards of the zoning and subdivision regulations without strict adherence to the requirements of this title; or 
C.  In the case of a parcel map, the applicant is being denied the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity or zone in which the property is located; 
D.  The granting of the exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity or zone in which the property is located and will not nullify the intent and purpose of the general plan or these regulations. 
(Ord. 475 § 35(a), 1976) 
16.36.020 - Plan adopted in conjunction with planned development zone. 
    Where it is determined by the city council that the design of a proposed subdivision is in compliance with a development plan which has been adopted by the council in conjunction with a planned development zone, the council may approve such subdivision without formally granting exceptions for design factors which are not in strict compliance with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 475 § 35(b), 1976) 
16.36.030 - Imposition of conditions. 
    In granting an exception, the city council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so excepted. 
(Ord. 475 § 35(c), 1976) 
Chapter 16.40 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

16.40.010 - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting or suffering. 
    Whenever in this title any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 475 § 37, 1976) 
16.40.020 - Imposition of penalty. 
    The provisions of this title which declare certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the court authorized to pass sentence to determine and impose the punishment described. 
(Ord. 475 § 38, 1976) 
16.40.030 - Fees and charges made a civil debt. 
    The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this title shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto, as prescribed by ordinance. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be accumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this title or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. 475 § 39, 1976) 
16.40.040 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this title. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except that, where state law makes such violation an infraction, it shall be an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
C.  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this title shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24. Any person convicted of any infraction shall be punished as provided by state law, as such law now exists and may hereafter be amended. 
D.  In addition to the penalties provided by this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city council, summarily abated; and each day such condition continues, shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. 507 § 1, 1978: Ord. 475 § 36, 1976) 
Title 17 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The current zoning map is available in the city clerk's office. 

DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapter 17.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

17.02.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Blythe." 
(Ord. 595 § 1.00, 1982) 
17.02.020 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this title may be cited as the "Blythe Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. 595 § 1.01, 1982) 
17.02.030 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this title is to classify, designate and regulate the use of buildings, structures and land; to regulate and limit the bulk and dimensions of buildings and other structures designed, erected or altered after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title; to regulate and determine building setbacks and open spaces; to regulate the density of population; for the purposes to divide the city into zones of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations, provide for their enforcement; and to provide zoning designations consistent with the Blythe general plan. Regulations are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate access to light and air and to prevent and control fires; to prevent undue concentration of population; to minimize congestion of public rights-of-way; to facilitate adequate provision of community utilities such as transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; and to implement the city's general plan. 
(Ord. 638 § 1, 1988: Ord. 595 § 1.02, 1982) 
17.02.040 - Severability. 
    If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The council declares that it would have passed and does pass the ordinance codified in this title and each of its sections, sentences, clauses and phrases, irrespective of the fact that any one of them be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 595 § 1.03, 1982) 
Chapter 17.04 - DEFINITIONS 

17.04.010 - Access. 
    "Access" means a place or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.020 - Accessory building. 
    "Accessory building" means a building, part of building or structure which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building, structure or use of the same lot. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.030 - Accessory use. 
    "Accessory use" means a use customarily incidental to a principal use established on the same lot or parcel of land, which accessory use does not alter the principal use nor serve property other than the lot or parcel of land on which the principal use is located. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.040 - Alley. 
    "Alley" means a public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of vehicular access to abutting property. Frontage on the alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this title related to frontage on a dedicated street. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.050 - Apartment. 
    "Apartment" means a room or suite of two or more rooms in a multiple-dwelling structure, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one family. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.060 - Apartment, bachelor. 
    "Bachelor apartment" means a dwelling unit in an apartment house that combines sleeping, living, cooking and dining facilities into one habitable room. "Light housekeeping room" means the same as "bachelor apartment." 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.070 - Apartment, efficiency. 
    "Efficiency apartment" means a dwelling unit in an apartment house that combines sleeping, living, cooking and dining facilities into two habitable rooms, one of which shall be a kitchen. "Single apartment" and "efficiency living unit" mean the same as "efficiency apartment." 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.080 - Apartment house. 
    "Apartment house" means a building designed and used for occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other. "Apartment house" means the same as "multiple-family dwelling." 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.090 - Apartment, one-bedroom. 
    "One-bedroom apartment" means a dwelling unit in an apartment house that contains more than three habitable rooms. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.100 - Apartment, two-or-more-bedroom. 
    "Two-or-more-bedroom apartment" means a dwelling unit, in an apartment house, that contains more than three habitable rooms. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.110 - Architectural feature. 
    "Architectural feature" means a part, portion or projection that contributes to the beauty or elegance of a building or structure and is not intended for occupancy, which may extend beyond the face of the exterior wall, but shall not include signs. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.120 - Area, net. 
    "Net area" means that area of a lot or parcel of land exclusive of: 
A.  Public alleys, highways streets or rights-of-way; or 
B.  Proposed public facilities such as alleys, highways, streets or other necessary public sites when included within a proposed development project; or 
C.  Other public or private easements where the owner of the servient tenement does not have the right to use for permanent structures the entire surface of the land. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.130 - Assessor. 
    "Assessor" means the county assessor. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.00(A), 1982) 
17.04.140 - Attach. 
    "Attach" means to connect, fasten or structurally affix permanently to a building or structure. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.150 - Automobile impound yard. 
    "Automobile impound yard" means an area designated or maintained for the temporary storage of vehicles legally removed or impounded from public or private property as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.160 - Automobile service station. 
    "Automobile service station" means an area which provides for the servicing of motor vehicles, including tube and tire repairs, minor tune-ups, battery charging, storage of merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of gasoline and lubricants, automobile washing and grease racks, but excluding automobile repairs such as body and fender work, engine overhauling or other similar activities. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.170 - Basement. 
    "Basement" means a space wholly or partly underground, and having more than one-half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below the average adjoining grade. If the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six feet above grade at any point, such basement shall be considered a story. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.180 - Breezeway. 
    "Breezeway" means a roofed passageway, open on two sides, where the roof is in keeping with the design and construction of the main building. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.190 - Buildable area. 
    "Buildable area" means any portion of a lot or building site not contained within required setbacks. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.200 - Building. 
    "Building" means any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.210 - Building area. 
    "Building area" means the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all buildings and structures on a lot. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.220 - Building height. 
    "Building height" means the vertical distance from the finished grade at the exterior wall to the highest point of the roof structure. In case of sloping lots the vertical distance from the finished grade on the exterior wall at a point located midway between the front and rear of the building, or side and side property lines to the highest point of the roof structure. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.230 - Building, main. 
    "Main building" means a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot, as provided by this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.240 - Building setback line. 
    "Building setback line" means the minimum distance as prescribed by this title or a city ordinance, between the property line of a lot or parcel of land, or rights-of-way of alleys, streets or highways, and any point on a building or structure related thereto, exclusive of those architectural features permitted to extend beyond the setback line. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.250 - Building site. 
    "Building site" means the ground area of a building together with all the open space required by this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.260 - Camper. 
    "Camper" means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and to provide facilities for human habitation for camping purposes. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.270 - Carport. 
    "Carport" means a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.280 - Centerline. 
    "Centerline" means the same as "street centerline." 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.290 - Compact car. 
    "Compact car" means a vehicle capable of movement under its own power having a wheelbase of one hundred inches or less. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.300 - Compatible use. 
    "Compatible use" means a use that, by its manner of operation, is suitable in the zone in which it may be nonconforming. Said use of land and/or buildings shall be in harmony with the type of use and manner of operation on abutting properties in the same zone. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.310 - Condominium. 
    "Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property such as an apartment, office or store. A "condominium" may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. Such estate may, with respect to the duration of an enjoinment, be either: 
A.  An estate of inheritance of perpetual estate; 
B.  An estate for life; 
C.  An estate for years; or 
D.  With a separate interest in a legal lot or air space. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.320 - County. 
    "County" means the county of Riverside. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.00(G), 1982) 
17.04.330 - County recorder. 
    "County recorder" means the county recorder of the county. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.00(H), 1982) 
17.04.340 - Court. 
    "Court" means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and bounded on two or more sides by such building. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.350 - Coverage. 
    "Coverage" means that portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, regardless of whether the building or structure is intended for human occupancy. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.360 - Curbline. 
    "Curbline" means a straight line along the top outer edge of a curb. The curbline for streets without curbs shall be considered to be located ten feet, measured at right angles, from the property line. Exception: In the case of streets with established highway setback lines, the future curbline shall be determined by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.365 - Design review committee. 
    "Design review committee" means that committee appointed under this title for the purpose of reviewing plans for the downtown redevelopment area. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988) 
17.04.370 - Double frontage lot. 
    "Double frontage lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets, and having the right of access to both streets. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.380 - Drive-in business. 
    "Drive-in business" means any establishment or business which, whether by design or operation, provides services or products directly to occupants of motor vehicles, or directly to pedestrian traffic from exterior openings or counters or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.390 - Driveway. 
    "Driveway" means a paved access to a required off-street parking facility. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.400 - Dwelling. 
    "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy, with the exception of permitted home occupations, but not including hotels, motels, motor hotels, boarding homes or lodginghouses. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.410 - Dwelling unit. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for, or occupied by, one family for living or sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.420 - Easement. 
    "Easement" means an area on a lot or parcel of land, and so indicated on a subdivision map or in a deed, reserved for and/or used for public utilities, public uses and/or private uses. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.425 - Emergency shelter. 
    "Emergency shelter" means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 1, 10-8-13) 
17.04.430 - Enclosed building. 
    "Enclosed building" means a building enclosed by a permanent roof and on all sides by solid exterior walls, except for window and door openings. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.440 - Enclosed space. 
    "Enclosed space" means an area enclosed on all sides by a solid physical barrier, such as a solid wood fence or masonry wall. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.450 - Family. 
    "Family" means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five persons, excluding servants, who need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.455 - Farmworker housing. 
    "Farmworker housing" means any housing for agricultural employees consisting of no more than thirty-six beds in a group quarters or twelve units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household on land zoned for agricultural uses. Such employee housing shall be considered to be an activity that in no way differs from an agricultural use. The permitted occupancy in employee housing in a zone allowing agricultural uses shall include agricultural employees who do not work on the property where the employee housing is located. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 1, 10-8-13) 
17.04.460 - Federal. 
    "Federal" means the Government of the United States of America. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.00(I), 1982) 
17.04.470 - Fence. 
    "Fence" means any structural device forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that not less than fifty percent of the vertical surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through the surface in a horizontal plane. This shall include wire mesh, steel mesh, chain link, louvered, stake and other similar materials. Planting shall be regulated to maintain the required open areas in the fence structure. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.480 - Floor area. 
    "Floor area" means the total horizontal area of all the floors of a building measured from the exterior surface of the outside walls including all floors below ground level but exclusive of vent shafts, courts and basements (residential). 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.490 - Front wall. 
    "Front wall" means the wall of a building or structure nearest the street on which the building fronts, but excluding certain architectural features as cornices, canopies, eaves or embellishments. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.500 - Frontage. 
    "Frontage" means all property fronting on one side of a street between a street and right-of-way, or between intersecting or intercepting streets, the end of a dead-end street, or city boundary measured along a street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street that it intercepts. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.510 - Garage. 
    "Garage" means a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling, used for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling, including carports. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.520 - Grade. 
    "Grade" means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all the exterior walls of a building. In cases where the front wall is parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the grade shall be measured at the sidewalk at the centerline of the front of the lot. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.530 - Guest. 
    "Guest" means any transient person who occupies a room for sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.540 - Hedge. 
    "Hedge" means a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material so arranged as to from a physical barrier or enclosure. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.550 - Home occupation. 
    "Home occupation" means any use customarily conducted entirely within only one room in a dwelling or accessory structure and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the structure for dwelling purposes and which does not change the character thereof or does not adversely affect the uses permitted in the zone of which it is a part. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.560 - Household pet. 
    "Household pet" means any domesticated animal commonly maintained in residence with man. (See Chapter 17.54 for provisions on keeping of dogs and cats.) 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.565 - Intensification of use. 
    "Intensification of use" means a change in use that creates of itself or as a result of itself increased traffic or need for parking as defined in this title. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988) 
17.04.570 - Kennel. 
    "Kennel" means any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or cats or combination thereof are kept, boarded or trained, whether or not for compensation. "Kennel" is included in the use "animal boarding." 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.580 - Kitchen. 
    "Kitchen" means any room designed to be used or maintained for the cooking and/or preparation of food. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.590 - Landscaping. 
    "Landscaping" means the planting and maintenance of a combination of trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers, lawns or desert plants. In addition, the combination of design may include natural features such as rock and stone; and structural features, including but not limited to fountains, reflecting pools, art works, screens, walls, fences and benches. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.600 - Legal lot or parcel of land. 
    "Legal lot or parcel of land" means: 
A.  A parcel of real property which is shown as a single lot in a lawfully recorded subdivision, approved pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or 
B.  A parcel of real property, the dimensions and boundaries of which are defined as a single lot by a lawfully recorded record of survey map; or 
C.  A parcel of real property shown on a parcel map as a single lot, lawfully recorded pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or 
D.  Any parcel of real property otherwise lawfully created and dimensioned either prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title or in conformance with it; or 
E.  Two or more lots not meeting the regulations of this title which are combined, by an appropriate recorded written instrument, or two or more such lots which are combined by a common usage, shall be deemed, for all purposes, a single lot. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.610 - Loading space. 
    "Loading space" means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading. It shall abut a street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress or egress. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.620 - Lot area. 
    "Lot area" means the total horizontal area within the property lines of a lot. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.630 - Lot, corner. 
    "Corner lot" means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.640 - Lot coverage. 
    "Lot coverage" means that portion of a lot covered by a building, buildings or structures, exclusive of the normal roof overhang. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.650 - Lot depth. 
    "Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. For irregular lots, see Section 17.04.700, "Lot line, rear." 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.660 - Lot, interior. 
    "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.670 - Lot, key. 
    "Key lot" means a lot where a side property line abuts the rear property line of one or more other lots, and not separated by an alley. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.680 - Lot line. 
    "Lot line" means any line bounding a lot as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.690 - Lot line, front. 
    "Front lot line" means all property fronting on one side of a street between a street right-of-way, or between intersecting or intercepting streets, the end of a dead-end street, or city boundary measured along a street line. In case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line as the front lot line. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.700 - Lot line, rear. 
    "Rear lot line" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten feet. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.710 - Lot line, side. 
    "Side lot line" means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.720 - Lot of record. 
    "Lot of record" means a parcel of land as shown on the records of the assessor at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.730 - Lot, reversed corner. 
    "Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the lots to its rear, whether across an alley or not. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.740 - Lot slope. 
    "Lot slope" means the greatest slope expressed in percent obtained by the difference in elevation between the highest and lowest points within the lot to the horizontal distance between the points. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.750 - Lot, through. 
    "Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel dedicated streets. The lot frontage in instances such as this shall be determined by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.760 - Lot width. 
    "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established building setback line. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.770 - Manufactured housing. 
    "Manufactured housing" means any dwelling unit or units, to which is affixed a U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Seal, which are fabricated either in whole or in large sections at a factory, are designed and constructed on a chassis for transportation to the site, do not require substantial assembly on site other than connection to utilities, and are installed with or without a permanent foundation for residential occupancy exclusively. For purposes of this title, this category shall include mobile homes and factory-built buildings which are constructed on a chassis for transportation to a building site, and designed to be installed with or without a permanent foundation for residential occupancy. A mobile home means a factory assembled portable structure containing more than four hundred square feet, and which exceeds eight feet in width and/or forty feet in length, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, made to be readily movable on its own chassis and running gear. This category shall not include modular housing or any dwelling unit or units which require substantial assembly on site, nor shall this category include recreational vehicles as defined by this title. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.774 - Mobile home. 
    See Section 17.04.770, Manufactured housing. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988) 
17.04.778 - Modular housing. 
    "Modular housing" means any dwelling unit or units which are fabricated either in whole or in sections at a factory wherein such sections, or modules, are not constructed on a chassis. For purposes of this title this category shall not include manufactured housing as defined herein, but shall be considered equivalent to any dwelling or dwellings which require substantial assembly on site. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988) 
17.04.780 - Off-street parking facility. 
    "Off-street parking facility" means an approved space or spaces located within a building or structure, or surface parking areas, public or private, for the parking of vehicles, including driveways. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.790 - Open space. 
    "Open space" means that portion of a lot which is not covered by a building, buildings or structure and is open from the ground up, except for normal roof overhang, in residential zones. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.800 - Parking space, automobile. 
    "Automobile parking space" means a readily accessible space, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, loading areas, office or work areas within a building or open parking area for the parking of one automobile. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.810 - Person. 
    "Person" means an individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the federal or state government, city, county, district or any other group or combination acting as an entity. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.815 - Plot plan. 
    "Plot plan" means a plan drawn to scale showing existing and proposed structures, improvements, etc., as to standards established by planning director. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988) 
17.04.820 - Rabbits, poultry and domestic fowl. 
    "Rabbits, poultry and domestic fowl" means any member of the hare family, chinchillas, hamsters, nutria, guinea pigs and other rodents, pigeons, chickens, chicks, capons, ducks, geese, turkeys, doves, squab and all other domestic or domesticated fowls and birds. "Rabbits, poultry and domestic fowl" is included under the use "animal keeping (light)." 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.830 - Recreational vehicle. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a camper, motor home, travel trailer or tent trailer, with or without motor power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy, with a living area less than three hundred twenty square feet. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.840 - Recreation space. 
    "Recreation space" means any area, whether enclosed, covered or open, at ground level or in or on a structure, used exclusively for active or passive recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
[17.04.842 - Service station.] 
    "Service station": See Section 17.04.160, "Automobile service station." 
17.04.850 - Sign. 
    "Sign" means any method of display or part thereof, for visual communication, that includes any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia, which is used to advertise or promote the interests of any person, business group or enterprise. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.860 - Sign structure. 
    "Sign structure" means any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign as defined in this chapter. A sign structure may be a single pole or it may not be an integral part of the building. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.865 - Single-room occupancy (SRO). 
    "SRO" means a multi-unit housing project for single persons typically consisting of single rooms and shared bathrooms, and may include a shared common kitchen and activity area. SROs may be restricted to seniors or be available to persons of all ages. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 1, 10-8-13) 
17.04.870 - Story. 
    "Story" means a space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or, if there is no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.880 - Street. 
    "Street" means a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare, except as excluded in this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.890 - Street centerline. 
    "Street centerline" means the centerline of a street or right-of-way as established by official surveys. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.900 - Street line. 
    "Street line" means the boundary line between the street and abutting property. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.910 - Street, side. 
    "Side street" means that street bounding a corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.920 - Structure. 
    "Structure" means anything constructed or built, an edifice or building or any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.930 - Structural alterations. 
    "Structural alterations" means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles or retaining walls or similar components. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.935 - Supportive housing. 
    "Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to onsite and offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Target population, as used herein, means adults with low-income having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Development Disabilities Services Act and may, among other populations, include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals existing from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people. 
17.04.940 - Swimming pool. 
    A "swimming pool" shall be considered as a structure, except that it shall not be considered as covered space in computing lot coverage. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.950 - Transient. 
    "Transient" means a person who requests accommodations for a price, with or without meals, for a period of not more than one hundred eighty days. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.955 - Transitional housing. 
    "Transitional housing" means rental housing operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. 
17.04.960 - Use. 
    "Use" means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.970 - Used for. 
    "Used for" includes the words "arranged for, designed for, occupied or intended to be occupied for." 
(Ord. 595 § 2.00(K), 1982) 
17.04.975 - Viewshed. 
    "Viewshed" means that area from which an existing or proposed sign may be viewed with nonenhanced eyesight. 
(Ord. 638 § 2 (part), 1988) 
17.04.980 - Visual obstruction. 
    "Visual obstruction" means any combination of fencing, hedges, trees, shrubs and walls which limits the visibility of persons at intersecting or intercepting streets and alleys between three feet and ten feet above the ground, measured in a vertical plane of the sidewalk area. 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
17.04.990 - Wall. 
    "Wall" means any structure or device forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that fifty percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through the surface in a horizontal plane. This includes concrete, concrete block, wood or other materials that are solids and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier. (See Section 17.04.470, "Fence.") 
(Ord. 595 § 2.01 (part), 1982) 
DIVISION II. - ZONES 
Chapter 17.06 - ZONES AND MAP 

17.06.010 - Zones designated. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this title, the city is divided into twenty zones designated as follows: 
Symbol Zone Name A Agriculture SPR Specific plan resort RR Rural residential R/MH Mobile home residential R-E Residential estates R-L-1 Low-density residential (7,800 sq. ft. lots) R-L-1-72 Low-density residential (7,200 sq. ft. lots) R-L-2 Low-density residential (6,000 sq. ft. lots) R-M-L Medium- to low-density residential R-M Medium-density residential R-H High-density residential P-D Planned development P/Q-P Public/quasi-public C-N Neighborhood commercial C-C Community commercial C-G General commercial C-M-O Commercial manufacturing overlay I-S Service industrial I-G General industrial D-O Redevelopment overlay  
A.  Agriculture Zone. This zone allows for the continued cultivation of land and for associated uses commonly tied to agriculture including farmworker housing and the grazing of animals. Residential units are allowed at a density of one per twenty acres. Agriculture associated commercial uses, feed lots (more than forty head), and recreational activities are allowed with a conditional use permit. 
B.  Specific Plan Resort. This zone allows all the uses set out in the agriculture zone and the rural residential zone. Residential development, recreational development, resort oriented development and open space uses are allowed with the adoption of a specific plan. 
C.  Rural Residential. This zone allows the cultivation of agriculture land. Residential units are allowed at a density of one per 2.5 acres without central water or central sewer, one per acre with central water and septic systems, or one per twenty thousand square feet with central water and sewer. Agriculture related or small commercial activities that do not require on signage may be allowed with a conditional use permit. Golf courses and other recreational activities including but not limited to riding stables, rodeo or roping areas may be allowed with a conditional use permit. 
1.  The noncommercial keeping of horses shall be allowed on lots not less than twenty thousand square feet in area and one hundred feet in width; provided they are kept not less than one hundred feet from any street and twenty feet from any property line. A maximum of two horses per twenty thousand square feet, and in any event not more than six horses (excluding foals less than fourteen months of age) shall be kept on any lot in this zone. 
2.  If the lot is one acre or more in area, poultry and rabbits may be kept for the use of the occupants of the premises only. The poultry and rabbits shall be kept in an enclosed area located not less than fifty feet from any residence and shall be maintained on the rear portion of the lot in conjunction with a residential use. If a lot is two acres or more in area, two sheep, two goats or one adult bovine and one bovine less than fourteen months old, or combination thereof may be kept in addition to the allowed horses; provided they are kept not less than one hundred feet from any street, twenty feet from any property line and fifty feet from any residence. 
    Exception to parcel size requirement: Parcels annexed to the city of Blythe under the rural residential (RR) zoning designation not meeting the size and service requirements of this subsection when annexed, are allowed one single-family residential dwelling unit per parcel subject to the site's ability to accommodate one potable water well and a private waste disposal system meeting all Riverside County Department of Environmental Health standards for installation/construction of a potable water well and private waste disposal system with one hundred percent expansion capability. All other development standards as set forth in Title 17 of the Blythe Municipal Code shall apply to such parcels. 
D.  Mobile Home Residential. This zone allows the location of manufactured housing parks, cooperatively owned manufactured housing parks and recreational vehicle parks. Associated commercial operations and recreational facilities including golf courses may be allowed with a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 796 § 1, 2005; Ord. 693 § 1, 1993: Ord. 636 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 3.00, 1982) 
(Ord. No. 862, §§ 2, 3, 10-8-13) 
17.06.020 - Official zoning map adopted. 
    The boundaries of the zones listed in Section 17.06.010 are shown on a map attached to and made a part of the ordinance codified in this title, designated as the "Official Zoning Map." This map and all the notations, references and other information shown on it shall be considered as a part of this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.01, 1982) 
17.06.030 - Uncertainty as to boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone as shown on the zoning map, the following shall apply: 
A.  Street, Alley or Lot Lines. 
1.  Where indicated, zone boundaries are approximately street, alley or lot lines, the lines are determined to be the boundaries of the zone. Otherwise, the boundaries shall be determined by the dimensions shown on the official zoning map. In the absence of a dimension, the boundary shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the map. 
2.  A street, alley, railroad or railway right-of-way, watercourse, channel or body of water included on the zoning map shall, unless otherwise indicated, be included within the zone of adjoining property on either side thereof; and where such street, alley, right-of-way, watercourse, channel or body of water serves as a boundary between two or more different zones, a line midway in such street, alley, right-of-way, etc., extending in the general direction of the long dimensions thereof, shall be considered the boundary between zones. 
B.  Vacations. In the event that a vacated street, right-of-way or easement was the boundary between two zones, the new zone boundaries shall be at the new property line. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.02, 1982) 
17.06.040 - Filing of map. 
    The original of the official zoning map shall be kept on file with the city clerk and shall constitute the original record. A copy of the map shall also be maintained by the planning director. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 3.03, 1982) 
17.06.050 - Amendments and changes to map. 
    All amendments and changes in the official zoning map shall be recorded at the end of each fiscal year on a revised official zoning map. Individual amendments shall be filed with the official zoning map by the city clerk and copies sent to the planning director within forty-eight hours after the amendment becomes effective. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 3.04, 1982) 
17.06.060 - Redevelopment overlay zone. 
    The provisions for the redevelopment overlay zone are set out in Sections 17.06.061 through 17.06.064. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.06.061 - Purpose. 
    The D-O zone is intended to set out those areas that have been designated by the city and the redevelopment agency of the city as review areas for compliance with adopted redevelopment plans and standards. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.06.062 - Manner of development. 
    All new uses and structures shall be established, all uses shall be changed, and changes or modifications to exterior of structures shall be made subject to approval of the design review committee as established in Section 17.64.060 of this code, the primary purpose of which is to provide adherence to the adopted Design Standards and Architectural Guidelines of the downtown design implementation program. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.06.063 - Conditional use permit. 
    Nothing in the preceding sections shall preclude the necessity of complying with conditional use permit requirements that may be required for the primary zone designation. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.06.064 - Zoning map designation. 
    The basic underlying use in the D-O zoned areas shall be the primary zoning designation. Where the D-O zone symbol is designated on the zoning map it shall be followed by a primary zone symbol. Uses shall be permitted by the primary zone and shall be subject to the provisions of the zone and all other provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
Chapter 17.08 - PERMITTED USES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
For provisions further defining the uses provided for in this chapter, see Ch. 17.04 of this code. 

17.08.010 - Uses permitted in each zone. 
    Use types permitted in each zone shall be as shown in the following table. Note: A slash mark (/) means the use is permitted only with a conditional use permit; a cross mark (X) indicates the use is permitted by right. Explanations of use types listed in the table are provided in this chapter. 
ZONES USE TYPES ZONES _____SPR RR A R-E R-L R-M-L R-M R-H P-D P/Q-P C-N C-C C-G C-M-O I-S I-G R/MH Agricultural: X / X X / Animal Keeping 
(Light) X X / / Livestock/Animal Keeping (Heavy) / / X X X X X X X X / Plant Cultivation (Light) X X X X Farm/Plant 
Cultivation (Heavy) X X X Farmworker Housing Residential: X X X X X X X / Single-Family Dwelling / []* /* X X / Two-Family Dwelling X X X / Multiple-Family Dwelling / / / / / Group Dwelling X X X X X / Guest House / / / / / / Mobile Home Park X Recreational 
Vehicle Park X X Residential Unit, 
One per 20 acres Single-Room 
Occupancy X X X X X [4] X X X Transitional Housing and Supportive Housing X Emergency Shelter X X Public/Quasi-Public: / / / / / / / / Public Administrative Services X / / / / / / Cemeteries / / Cultural Exhibits/Museums X / / / / / / / / / / / Educational Institutions/ Schools X / / / / Hospitals X / / / / Library Services X / / / / / Open Space Uses Postal Services X / / Public Maintenance Services X / / / X X Public Transportation Services X / / X X / / / / / / / / / Recreation Services/Facilities X / / / / / / / / / Religious Assembly X / / / / Resort Facilities Transitional Shelter / / / / / / / / / / Utility Operations Facilities X / / / / X X Jails X Commercial: / Administrative/Professional Services / X X X / X / / Adult Business / / / / Agriculture / / / Animal Boarding X / / / / Animal Grooming X X X / / / / Animal Health Care X / / Automobile Painting / / / Automobile Parking X X X X / X X / Automobile Repair / / X X / Automobile Sales/Rentals / X / X / Automobile Servicing / / X / X X / Automobile Storage / / X Business Support Services X X X / X / Communications Services / / / / X / Construction Sales and Services / / X X / Convenience Sales and Services X X X / / Crematory / / / / Eating/Drinking Establishments X X X / X X / Entertainment Facilities / / / / / Feed Lots / Financial Institutions X X X / / Food and Beverage Sales X X X / / Fraternal Organization/Lodge Hall/ Club X X X / / Funeral Services X X X / / Instructional Services X X X X / X X / Laundry Services (Heavy) / / X X / Laundry Services (Light) X X / X / Medical Services / X X X / / / / / Recreational/Fitness Facilities / X / / / Repair Services X X X / / / / Retail Sales (Indoor) X X X / / / / Retail Sales (Outdoor) / / / / / / Transient Habitation / X / Industrial: Building Material Yards / X X Custom Manufacturing / / X X Farm Equipment Sales/Rentals / X X Farm Equipment Repair X X Farm Supplies X X Farm Products Processing / X General Manufacturing / X Heavy Manufacturing / Laundry Services (Heavy) / / X X Livestock Feeding/Sales / Research/Testing Services / / X X Refuse Processing Dumps / Salvage Operations / Warehousing/Wholesaling / / X X Special Uses: / / / Day/Child Care Services / / / / / / / Home Occupations (See Sec. 6.00) / X / Rest Homes / / / / / / / / / / Temporary Uses (See Sec. 7.04) / / / / / / / / / / Airport/Heliport Facilities / / / / / / Mini Warehousing / / X X  
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 781 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 693 § 2, 1993; Ord. 690 § 1, 1992; Ord. 665 § 1, 1990; Ord. 638 § 3 (part), 1988; Ord. 621 § 1, 1985: Ord. 601 § 3 (part), 1984; Ord. 595 § 3.05, 1982) 
(Ord. No. 862, §§ 3, 4, 10-8-13) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* For provisions regarding residences in nonresidential zones, see Section 17.68.025. 

--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Permitted in the R-L-1, R-L-1-72 and R-L-2 zones. 

17.08.020 - Administrative/professional services. 
    "Administrative/professional services" means offices of private firms or organizations primarily used for the provision of professional, executive, management or administrative offices, legal offices, architectural firms, physician's offices, insurance agencies, real estate firms and other similar activities where a service is rendered, as distinguished from the handling of commodities. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.030 - Adult businesses. 
    "Adult businesses" means any massage parlor, model studio or arcade, bookstore or theater which is not customarily open to the general public because minors are excluded by virtue of their age as a prevailing business practice. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.040 - Airport. 
    "Airport" means any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or are intended to be used for airport buildings or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways and tie-down areas. 
(Ord. 621 § 2, 1985; Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.050 - Animal boarding. 
    "Animal boarding" means boarding services for dogs, cats and similar small animals, as well as horses. Typical uses include kennels, pet motels, dog training centers and stables. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.060 - Animal grooming. 
    "Animal grooming" means grooming of dogs, cats and similar small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons or pet grooming shops, but excludes animal boarding. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.070 - Animal health care. 
    "Animal health care" means veterinary services for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals or animal hospitals. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.080 - Animal keeping (light). 
    "Animal keeping (light)" means premises where animals are fed or kept for personal use, for 4-H or other agricultural organization projects by the owner or occupant of the premises, as limited by Chapter 17.54. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.090 - Automobile dismantling yard. 
    "Automobile dismantling yard" means any premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles required to be registered under the California Vehicle Code, including the buying, selling or dealing in such vehicles or integral parts or component materials thereof and the storage, sale or salvage of dismantled, partially dismantled, or wrecked, inoperative or disabled vehicles generated incidentally with the legal operation of an automobile repair garage or body and fender shop. "Automobile dismantling yard" means the same as "salvage operations." 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.095 - Automobile painting. 
    "Automobile painting" means the painting of autos, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes and other motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 638 § 3 (part), 1988) 
17.08.100 - Automobile parking. 
    "Automobile parking" means the parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within an off-street parking area with or without a fee. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.110 - Automobile repair. 
    "Automobile repair" means the repair of motor vehicles, as well as the sale, installation and servicing of automotive equipment and parts, together with body repairs, steam cleaning, welding and automated car washes. 
(Ord. 638 § 3 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.120 - Automobile sales/rentals. 
    "Automobile sales/rentals" means the sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental of autos, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, mobile homes, travel trailers, aircraft, construction equipment, farm equipment, and boats. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.130 - Automotive servicing. 
    "Automotive servicing" means fueling, washing and polishing, installation and servicing of automotive equipment and parts, including motor-cycle service and repair, but excluding automated car washes using blowers, dryers and other automatic equipment, and auto glass shops. A typical use is automobile service station. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.140 - Automotive storage. 
    "Automotive storage" means the storage of operating motor vehicles for extended periods of time. Typical uses include recreational vehicle storage, fleet storage and automobile, van and pickup truck impound yards. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.150 - Building material yards. 
    "Building material yards" means places of business engaged in the sales and storage of lumber, masonry and metal products, including plumbing, electrical and air-conditioning equipment and supplies used in the construction of buildings. Typical uses include lumberyards and brickyards. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.160 - Business support services. 
    "Business support services" means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services of a clerical, employment, protective, maintenance, janitorial or minor processing nature to firms rather than individuals. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.170 - Cemeteries. 
    "Cemeteries" means areas reserved for interment of human dead. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.180 - Communication services. 
    "Communication services" means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information-relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms, but excluding television studios, telecommunication service centers or telegraph service offices. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.190 - Construction sales and services. 
    "Construction sales and services" means places of business primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites, as well as the retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or structures other than retail sale of paint, fixtures and hardware. Typical uses include building materials stores, tool and equipment rentals or sales, or building contractors. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.200 - Convenience sales and services. 
    "Convenience sales and services" means places of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed small personal items or services for residents within a reasonable walking distance. These include various general retail sales and personal services of an appropriate size and scale to meet the criteria of this section. Typical uses include neighborhood grocery and convenience stores and laundromats. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.205 - Crematory. 
    "Crematory" means a building or structure containing one or more furnaces for the reduction of bodies of deceased persons to cremated remains. 
(Ord. 781 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.08.210 - Cultural exhibits-museums, nonprofit. 
    "Nonprofit cultural exhibits-museums" means nonprofit, museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects of permanent interest in one or more of the arts and sciences. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.220 - Custom manufacturing. 
    "Custom manufacturing" means establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment, and the direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on the site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candlemaking shops and custom jewelry manufacturers. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.230 - Day/child care services. 
    "Day/child care services" means establishments providing for the part-time care of seven or more children. Child-care homes providing care services to not more than six children and which are licensed pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code and Administrative Code shall be included within the definition of "family" and classified as such for purposes of this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.240 - Eating/drinking establishments. 
    "Eating/drinking establishments" means places of business primarily engaged in the sale of prepared food and beverages for on-premises consumption. Typical uses include restaurants, short-order eating places or bars. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.250 - Educational institutions/schools. 
    "Educational institutions/schools" means public or private institutions offering instruction at the primary, intermediate, high school, college or university level with incidental administration, recreational and storage facilities. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.255 - Emergency shelter. 
    "Emergency shelter" means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 5, 10-8-13) 
17.08.260 - Entertainment facilities. 
    "Entertainment facilities" means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic and other events to spectators. Typical uses include small theaters and meeting halls. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.270 - Farm equipment repair. 
    "Farm equipment repair" means the repair of farm tractors, implements, machinery and irrigation systems, as well as the sale, installation and servicing of farm equipment and parts. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.280 - Farm equipment sales/rentals. 
    "Farm equipment sales/rentals" means sales, retail or wholesale, and/or rental and servicing of tractors, trailers, trucks and farm implements or machinery, including irrigation systems. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.290 - Farm/plant cultivation (heavy). 
    "Farm/plant cultivation (heavy)" means premises primarily devoted to the growing of plants as a business. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.300 - Farm products processing. 
    "Farm products processing" means industrial plants engaged in processing, packing, storage and shipping of fruit, vegetables and cotton as a business. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.310 - Farm supplies. 
    "Farm supplies" means sale, retail or wholesale, of fertilizers, feed, seed, herbicides and insecticides, including open and bulk storage. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.315 - Farmworker housing. 
    "Farmworker housing" means any housing for agricultural employees consisting of no more than thirty-six beds in a group quarters or twelve units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household on land zoned for agricultural uses. Such employee housing shall be considered to be an activity that in no way differs from an agricultural use. The permitted occupancy in employee housing in a zone allowing agricultural uses shall include agricultural employees who do not work on the property where the employee housing is located. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 5, 10-8-13) 
17.08.320 - Financial institutions. 
    "Financial institutions" means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial services, including banks and savings and loan institutions. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.330 - Food and beverage sales. 
    "Food and beverage sales" means places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food and beverages for home consumption. Typical uses include grocery stores, liquor stores and delicatessens. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.340 - Fraternal organization/lodge hall/club. 
    "Fraternal organization/lodge hall/club" means meeting hall and rooms used primarily for the activities of a fraternal organization, lodge or club. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.350 - Funeral services. 
    "Funeral services" means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation or disposition of human dead, other than cemeteries. Typical uses include funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.360 - General manufacturing. 
    "General manufacturing" means industrial plants primarily engaged in manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products. Typical uses include fruit packing, woodworking, metal working and machine shops. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.370 - Group dwelling. 
    "Group dwelling" means a building designed for occupancy by more than five persons who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption, on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses include dormitories, sorority or fraternity houses, retirement homes, boardinghouses and roominghouses and farm workers' housing. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.380 - Guest house. 
    "Guest house" means living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.390 - Heavy manufacturing. 
    "Heavy manufacturing" means industrial operations involving the compounding of radioactive materials, petroleum refining, manufacturing of explosives, or any other operation of a dangerous nature or creating high levels of air, water or noise pollution. It includes the manufacture of any acid, chlorine or other noxious gases, fireworks, glue and potash. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.400 - Hospitals. 
    "Hospitals" means establishments providing for on-site residence or confinement and medical treatment of persons afflicted with bodily or mental disease. Typical uses include homes for the aged, sanitariums, institutions for the care of chronic drug addicts and mental patients, rest homes and convalescent homes. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.410 - Instructional services. 
    "Instructional services" means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include driving schools and reducing salons. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.420 - Jails. 
    "Jails" means prisons, detention homes or similar buildings where human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.430 - Junk and salvage yard. 
    "Junk and salvage yard" means any premises used for the storage or keeping of old, used or secondhand scrap ferrous and nonferrous metals, paper and paper products, roofing and tar paper, cloth and clothing, wood and wood products, paints, clay and porcelain products, trash and similar materials, including dismantling of machinery, equipment and parts and the baling of cardboard boxes, paper and paper products, but does not include any business defined as an automobile dismantling yard. "Junk and salvage yard" means the same as "salvage operations." 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.440 - Laundry services (heavy). 
    "Laundry services (heavy)" means establishments primarily engaged in the process of laundering, dry-cleaning or dyeing clothing or other materials. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.450 - Laundry services (light). 
    "Laundry services (light)" means establishments primarily engaged in providing laundering, dry-cleaning or dyeing services directly to the consumer. Typical uses include laundromats and dry-cleaning stores. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.460 - Library services. 
    "Library services" means public uses involving the collection of books, manuscripts, audio-visual materials, etc., for study and reading. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.470 - Livestock/animal keeping (heavy). 
    "Livestock/animal keeping (heavy)" means premises where animals are kept and fed as a business. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.480 - Livestock feeding/sales. 
    "Livestock feeding/sales" means heavy agricultural operations of cattle and hog feed yards, dairies for production and sale of slaughter animals or milk products and incidental processing and sale of manure. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.490 - Medical services. 
    "Medical services" means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services ranging from prevention, diagnosis and treatment or rehabilitation to medical testing and analysis services, but not providing in-patient services or overnight accommodations. Typical uses include medical offices, dental laboratories and health maintenance organizations. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.500 - Mobile home park. 
    "Mobile home park" means a designated area or parcel of land where spaces are rented or leased for mobile homes. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.510 - Multiple-family dwelling. 
    "Multiple-family dwelling" means a building containing three or more dwelling units, each unit designed for occupancy by one family. "Multiple-family dwelling" means the same as "apartment house." 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.520 - Plant cultivation (light). 
    "Plant cultivation (light)" means premises where plants are raised and nurtured for personal use, either for aesthetic value or consumption. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.530 - Postal services. 
    "Postal services" means mailing services, excluding major processing, owned or operated by governmental agencies as traditionally provided by the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.540 - Public administrative services. 
    "Public administrative services" means premises occupied by public agencies engaged in consulting, recordkeeping, clerical or public-contact services that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary equipment and vehicles. It includes civic centers. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.550 - Public maintenance services. 
    "Public maintenance services" means yards or other space, whether enclosed or unenclosed, devoted to the storage of equipment needed by public agencies to maintain public facilities such as any incidental structures housing administrative operations of such programs. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.560 - Public transportation facilities. 
    "Public transportation facilities" means facilities, such as bus terminals and train tracks, devoted to one or more of the various means of public transit. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.570 - Recreation services/facilities. 
    "Recreation services/facilities" means recreational, social or multipurpose uses of open areas, as well as within buildings. Typical uses include parks, community meeting centers and public swimming pools. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.580 - Recreational/fitness facilities. 
    "Recreational/fitness facilities" means establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of sports and recreation by and for participants. Any spectators would be incidental and on a nonrecurring basis. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, driving ranges, spas, physical conditioning centers and cardrooms (subject to Chapter 5.24). 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.590 - Refuse processing/dumps. 
    "Refuse processing/dumps" means processing and sale of plant or animal byproducts, including fish or any refuse or garbage or the disposal of such products in a landfill dump. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.600 - Religious assembly. 
    "Religious assembly" means religious services involving public assembly such as customarily occurs in churches, synagogues and temples. "Church" is further defined as a building, the principal purpose of which is religious worship and including uses in the principal structure or separate buildings, including Sunday school rooms, assembly rooms, kitchen, library, one-family dwelling unit and day nurseries operated by and located on the same lot or site as the church, but excluding facilities for residences of or training of religious orders. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.610 - Repair services. 
    "Repair services" means establishments primarily engaged in the repair of appliances, apparel and musical instruments for individuals and households. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.620 - Research/testing services. 
    "Research/testing services" means establishments primarily engaged in research of an agricultural or scientific nature provided as a service or conducted by and for a private firm, excluding medical testing and analysis and product testing. Typical uses include soils analysis, plant and animal pest monitoring and control programs. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.630 - Rest home. 
    "Rest home" means a convalescent home, guest home or any other facility operating similar to a boardinghouse for the temporary housing of and caring for ambulatory, aged, infirm or invalid persons, and in which nursing, dietary and incidental convalescent and medical care is furnished to residents. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.640 - Retail sales (indoor). 
    "Retail sales (indoor)" means places of business primarily engaged in the sale or rental to the ultimate consumer of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use from an enclosed structure, but excluding bulk sales and storage. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, sporting goods stores and furniture stores. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.650 - Retail sales (outdoor). 
    "Retail sales (outdoor)" means the display, exchange, barter or sale to the ultimate consumer of new or commonly used household items, office equipment, furnishings or other personal goods as well as foods and beverages in an outdoor setting outside of a fully enclosed structure. Typical uses include swap meets, flea markets, farmers' markets, nurseries and crafts fairs. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.655 - RV parks/campgrounds. 
    "RV parks/campgrounds" means any parcel of land used or offered for use in whole or in part, with or without charge for parking of travel trailers, pickup campers, motor homes or similar devices used for temporary portable housing for a relatively short-term occupancy; includes camping spaces for tents or other short-term camping. 
(Ord. 638 § 3 (part), 1988) 
17.08.660 - Salvage operations. 
    "Salvage operations" means places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials not intended for reuse in their original form. Typical uses include automobile dismantling yards, junkyards and paper salvage yards. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.670 - Single-family dwelling. 
    "Single-family dwelling" means a building designed for occupancy by one family. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.675 - Single-room occupancy (SRO). 
    "SRO" means a multi-unit housing project for single persons typically consisting of single rooms and shared bathrooms, and may include a shared common kitchen and activity area. SROs may be restricted to seniors or be available to persons of all ages. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 5, 10-8-13) 
17.08.677 - Supportive housing. 
    "Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site and off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 5, 10-8-13) 
17.08.680 - Two-family dwelling. 
    "Two-family dwelling" means a building containing two dwelling units, each unit designed for occupancy by one family. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.690 - Transient habitation. 
    "Transient habitation" means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of lodging services on a less-than-weekly basis with incidental food, drink and other sales and services intended for the convenience of guests. Typical uses include hotels, motels and recreational vehicle parks. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.695 - Transitional housing. 
    "Transitional housing" means rental housing operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 862, § 6, 10-8-13) 
17.08.700 - Utility distribution facilities. 
    "Utility distribution facilities" means utilities which are necessary to support principal development and involve only minor structures such as lines and poles. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.710 - Utility operations facilities. 
    "Utility operations facilities" means facilities involved in the operation of the various public and quasi-public utilities such as telephone switchboard centers, electrical generating plants and terminals, sewage treatment plants and water pumping stations or reservoirs. 
(Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.720 - Warehousing/wholesaling. 
    "Warehousing/wholesaling" means places of business primarily engaged in warehousing, wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than live animals and plants. It includes the bulk storage of fuels, fertilizers, feed, seed and other agricultural supplies. Bulk storage of fertilizers derived from livestock/animal keeping (heavy) or feed lots is not included except in association with such use. This does not include the bulk storage of hazardous chemicals or materials. 
(Ord. 638 § 3 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 3.06 (part), 1982) 
17.08.730 - Uses similar to those listed. 
    Other use types which are similar to and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community than the use types permitted in any zone may be allowed in such zone by resolution of the city council. 
A.  Prior to city council determination of classifications of such other use types, the planning director shall submit a report to the city council of his findings and recommendations regarding such classification. 
B.  The planning director shall keep a record in his office of all use types classified in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.09, 1982) 
17.08.740 - Location of commercial cannabis businesses-Dispensaries. 
    Commercial cannabis dispensaries shall be permitted only as follows: 
A.  In the C-C, commercial community business, C-G general commercial, and in I-G, general industry zone. 
B.  The dispensary must not be located on a parcel located within a six hundred feet radius of a school (whether public, private, or charter, including pre-school, transitional kindergarten, and K-12). If any part of a parcel falls within the six hundred feet, then the entire parcel shall meet the requirements of this paragraph. 
C.  No closer than six hundred feet from any portion of any parcel in the City limits containing any of the following: 
1.  A youth facility; 
2.  A daycare facility serving nine or more children and is licensed by the county or city; 
3.  Parks and places of worship at the discretion of the city council; 
4.  An adult day care facility serving nine or more adults and licenses by the state, county or city. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 15, 10-10-17) 
DIVISION III. - DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
Chapter 17.10 - LOT AND BUILDING DIMENSIONS 
Sections: 

17.10.010 - Lot area, width and depth. 
    The minimum lot areas and dimensions in the various land use zones shall be as shown in the following table: 
Dimensional controls
Zone Minimum Lot Area (S.F.) Minimum Lot Width (ft.) Minimum Lot Depth (ft.) Ag 5 acres - - R-R See Section 17.06.010(C) - - R-E 9,600 75 100 R-L-1 7,800 65 100 R-L-1-72 7,200 65 100 R-L-2 6,000 50 100 R-M-L 7,800 65 100 R-M 10,000 75 100 R-H 15,000 100 100 P-D 1 acre (See General Plan) C-N 5,000 50 100 C-C 5,000 50 100 C-G 5,000 50 100 C-M-O - - - D-O - - - I-S 10,000 75 100 I-G 15,000 100 100  
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 636 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 4.00 (part), 1982) 
17.10.015 - Residential lot coverage. 
    The ground floor area of all roofed structures, both main and accessory, on residential lots shall be limited to forty percent of the total lot area. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.10.020 - Lot size exemptions. 
    Where a lot is recognized as a legal lot as defined in this title, and the area and dimensions of the lot are less than required for its zone, the following shall apply: 
A.  Such lot in the residential, commercial and industrial service zones may be occupied by the uses permitted in the zone. 
B.  Such lot in residential zones may be occupied by the number of dwelling units permitted under the density provision (minimum square footage of lot area required per dwelling unit) of the zone in which it is located. If the lot area is less than the minimum required dwelling unit, one dwelling unit may occupy the lot provided the development standards are met or acceptably modified in accordance with procedures of this title. 
C.  Development regulations for a nonconforming legal lot in residential zones may be varied in accordance with the requirements and procedures of Section 17.70.070, Minor variances-Granting, if strict application of these regulations would deprive such property of privileges enjoyed for lots of the required minimum size. The planning director shall also, when granting minor variances, make the remaining findings required under Chapter 17.70. 
D.  The planning director may vary side yard setbacks for a nonconforming lot in the C-M-O zone to zero subject to the following conditions if he is also able to make the findings required by Chapter 17.70: 
1.  The lot is a legal lot having access from a street or alley both to the front and rear and the side yard is not the yard of a corner lot adjacent to a street; 
2.  The wall of the residence located on the side yard lot line has no windows or other openings and no extensions of the foundation, wall or roof protruding over the lot line; 
3.  The wall of the residence located on the side yard lot line does not extend more than twenty-five feet to the rear of the front yard setback line and is separated by twenty feet from any accessory building located on the same lot line. 
E.  Such lot in the I-G zone may be occupied by the uses permitted in the zone only if a conditional use permit is granted. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 4.00 (part), 1982) 
17.10.030 - Dwelling unit floor area. 
    The minimum gross floor area of a dwelling unit in the various land use zones shall be as shown in subsections A or B of this section. 
A.  Minimum Gross Floor Area in Square Feet. 
Two-family or Multiple-family Dwelling 
Zone Bachelor Efficiency One Bedroom Two Bedrooms Single-Family Dwelling R-E - - - - 1,250 R-L - - - - 800 R-M-L 350 400 500 600 800 R-M 350 400 500 600 800 R-H* 350 400 500 600 -  
* Single-family and two-family dwellings in separate buildings are not permitted uses in the R-H zone. 
B.  Manufactured housing units permitted under Section 17.38.060(E) shall have a minimum square footage of six hundred seventy-two square feet. Those manufactured units which have less than eight hundred square feet of floor space shall be required to construct or install sixty cubic feet of enclosed storage that shall match the exterior of the unit. 
(Ord. 679 § 2, 1992: Ord. 595 § 4.01, 1982) 
17.10.031 - Residential accessory structure size. 
    The square footage of any accessory structure shall not exceed the ground floor area of the primary dwelling unit, unless approved through the variance process. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.10.035 - Residential building width. 
    All single-family residential units shall be a minimum of twenty feet in width, except those manufactured housing units on twenty-five foot lots allowed under Section 17.38.060 of this title. Width shall be exclusive of eves, overhangs, porches or awnings. 
(Ord. 679 § 1, 1992: Ord. 659 § 1, 1989) 
17.10.040 - Building height. 
A.  The height of any single-family residential structure shall not exceed two stories from finished grade; and the height of any accessory structures shall not exceed eighteen feet from finished grade. 
B.  All other buildings shall not exceed three stories in height or a maximum of thirty-four feet in height. 
C.  The height of telecommunications facilities shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.47. 
D.  All other unmanned structures in the I-S and I-G zone shall not exceed seventy-five feet in height without the issuance of a variance by the city council as set forth in Chapter 17.70. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 721 § 3, 1995; Ord. 638 § 4, 1988; Ord. 617 § 1, 1985: Ord. 595 § 4.02, 1982) 
17.10.050 - Lot area per dwelling unit. 
A.  The minimum lot area required for each dwelling unit in the residential zones shall be as shown in the following table: 

Dimensional controls
Zone Minimum Required Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.) Multi-Family Units Per Acre R-E 9,600 - R-L-1 7,800 - R-L-1-72 7,200 - R-L-2 6,000 - R-M-L 3,900 11.16 R-M 3,100 14.05 R-H 1,500 29.04  
B.  The table set out in subsection A of this section is designed so that a development meeting the requirements of the R-E and R-L zones will be consistent with the "Low Density Residential" category defined in the Land Use Element of the Blythe General Plan; the R-M-L and R-M zones' requirements will be consistent with the "Medium Density Residential" category and the R-H zone requirements will be consistent with the "High Density Residential" category. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 638 § 5, 1988; Ord. 636 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 4.03, 1982) 
17.10.060 - Recreation space. 
A.  All developments in residential zones must provide a minimum of one square foot of recreation space for every five square feet of gross dwelling unit floor area. At least half of this shall be in the form of private recreation space, with each unit having one square foot of private recreation space for every ten square feet of its gross floor area. This requirement may be waived by the planning director if the proposed development contains exceptional design features or amenities (such as spas, a pool, tennis courts, etc.). No recreation area shall have a dimension of less than eight feet. 
B.  Private and common recreation space may be located in a required rear or side setback, but not in a required front setback. Area in a required side setback cannot be counted as common recreation space unless it has a minimum dimension of twenty feet. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 601 § 3 (part), 1984; Ord. 595 § 4.04, 1982) 
17.10.070 - Perimeter foundation. 
    All perimeter foundations must be at least eight inches above the highest adjacent curb height. 
(Ord. 601 § 2 (part), 1984) 
Chapter 17.12 - SETBACKS* 
Sections: 

17.12.010 - Measurement. 
    Setbacks along streets shall be measured from the "lot line" established for the planned right-of-way for collector, secondary, major and arterial streets specified in the Circulation Element of the Blythe General Plan. The "lot line" of either an existing or planned street is measured from a centerline established by the planning director or is the planned right-of-way line for the street as established by the planning director based upon policies and actions taken under city laws. In no event shall the "lot line" be considered closer than thirty feet on an existing or planned city street from the centerline as established by the planning director. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 4.05(A) (part), 1982) 
17.12.020 - Compliance-Factors affecting requirements. 
    Structures shall be set back from the front, side and rear property lines of the lot on which they are located in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. The setback requirements will vary depending on what bounds the property (streets, alleys or other lots), the function of the structure (main or accessory building) and the zone in which it is located (residential, commercial or industrial). 
(Ord. 595 § 4.05(A) (part), 1982) 
17.12.030 - Residential-zone setbacks. 
    Setback requirements in the residential zones shall be as follows: 
From Lot Line Bounded By A Building Must be Set Back (ft.) Front a street main or accessory R-R 25 R-E 25 R-L-1 25 R-L-1-72 20 R-L-2 20 R-M-L 15 R-M 15 R-H 15 Side other lots main 5 2, 6 Side other lots accessory 0 3, 4, 6, 8 Side an alley main or garages opening to alley 25 from opposite side of 
alley Side an alley accessory (except garages opening to alley) 0 3, 4, 8 Side a street main or accessory 5 for corner lot; 10 2, 5 for reserve corner R-R 25 R-E 25 R-L-1 7 25 R-L-1-72 7 20 R-L-2 7 20 R-M-L 15 R-M 15 R-H 2, 7 15 Rear another lot or an 
alley accessory 0 3, 4, 8 Rear an alley garages opening to an alley 25 from opposite side of 
alley  
Notes: 
1.  Fire escapes and unenclosed, uncovered stairways, unenclosed patios, porches, platforms and landing places not extending above the level of the first floor, as well as cornices, eaves, sills and similar architectural features may project up to five feet into the required setback. Balconies and fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet may project up to thirty inches into the required setback. 
2.  A main building shall be located no closer to a side property line than five feet, except for fireplaces having a maximum linear dimension of eight feet, and eaves which may project two feet into the required setback. Three-or-more-storied buildings in the R-H zone shall be located no closer than ten feet to a side property line. 
3.  The building shall be located at least three feet from the lot line if it has openings along the lot line or is of frame construction. If the eaves of the building are constructed of one-hour fire-resistant material, they may project one foot into the three-foot setback. If the entire building is constructed of one-hour fire-resistant material and all water drainage from the roof is onto the lot on which the building is located, no setback is required. 
4.  This applies only to accessory structures (except swimming pools) located at least eighty feet from the front lot line. Accessory structures located less than eighty feet from the front lot line must be set back the same distance as main buildings. Swimming pools must be set back at least five feet from a lot line. 
5.  Except garages opening onto the street, which must be set back at least twenty feet. 
6.  Lot not having access to an alley shall provide one side yard of a minimum of ten feet for vehicular access to the rear yard. 
7.  Attached unenclosed patios with no freestanding walls may extend up to ten feet into the required setback from the rear lot line only. 
8.  Two-story accessory structures shall maintain the same setback as main buildings. 
9.  Handicapped ramps are permitted in the front, side, and rear yard setbacks of any residential structure provided that they do not extend closer than three feet to any side yard property line and five feet to any rear or front yard property line. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 636 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 4.05(B), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 862, § 7, 10-8-13) 
17.12.040 - C-N, C-C, C-G, I-S, I-G, and P/Q-P setback requirements. 
    Setback requirements in the C-N, C-C, C-G, I-S, I-G, and P/Q-P zones shall be as follows: 
Lot Line Bounded By Building 
Setback Front a street 10 feet 1,2,5 Side a street 10 feet 1,2,5 Side an alley or another lot 0 feet 3,4 Rear a street 5 feet 1,2,5 Rear an alley or another lot 0 feet 3,4  
Notes: 
1.  No setback is required for buildings in the C-C, C-G, and I-S zones, except as noted in Section 17.12.050, where the lot width is sixty feet or less. 
2.  Cornices, eaves, sills, and similar architectural features may project up to five feet into the required setback. 
3.  Where a building is provided with a vehicle or pedestrian access door, the building shall be set back twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley. 
4.  Where a building abuts a residential zone, the average of the combined building setback standards for the residential and abutting zones shall apply. 
5.  When a building is surrounded by developed properties, then the setback may be determined by the planning director by taking an average of the setbacks on the existing buildings in the block. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 601 § 3 (part), 1984: Ord. 595 § 4.05(C), 1982) 
17.12.050 - Intersection visibility. 
    In all zones, no buildings, walls, fences, hedges, shrubs, ground signs or other physical obstruction higher than three feet above grade shall be located in the triangular areas defined by the intersections diagramed below (the diagrams are not to scale): 

(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 595 § 4.05(D), 1982) 
17.12.060 - Distance between buildings. 
    Facing walls of separate buildings on the same lot in the residential zones (buildings linked by a common roof are considered separate buildings) shall be set apart according to the following table: 
Type of Facing Wall Separation Required for Each Wall With openings 3 ft. Without openings As provided for in the adopted California Building Code  
Notes: 
1.  The total separation required between two facing walls is the sum of that required for each. 
2.  No part of the structure may encroach into the three feet separating. 
3.  Separation requirements are based on V-N Type Construction and R-3 Occupancy. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 595 § 4.06, 1982) 
Chapter 17.14 - FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS 
Sections: 

17.14.010 - Residential zones-Height. 
    Screening up to six feet in height shall be permitted on all rear and side property lines with the following exceptions: 
A.  No fence, wall or hedge over four feet in height will be permitted within the required front yard setback. 
B.  Fences over six feet in height, to enclose swimming pools, tennis courts or other game areas located within the rear half of the lot, may be permitted upon the finding of the planning director that such an enclosure will not constitute a nuisance to abutting property. 
C.  No fence, wall or hedge or other physical obstruction higher than three feet above grade shall be located in the triangular areas defined by the intersections diagramed in Section 17.12.050. 
D.  Where a single story, single-family residential structure is located on a parcel of land immediately adjacent to a multi-story, multi-family residential structure with windows overlooking the single-story structure and no public rights-of-way or public property will be impacted, a hedge, higher than six feet may be grown to provide screening for the single-story structure. The property owner on which the hedge is located shall be wholly responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the hedge. The hedge shall be regularly watered, trimmed and maintained in order to avoid the creation of a fire hazard and for aesthetic purposes. Failure to maintain the hedge shall be a violation of this chapter, a fire hazard and a nuisance that the city may abate as set forth in the Blythe Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 806 § 1, 2006; Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 603 § 1, 1984: Ord. 595 § 4.07(A)(1), 1982) 
17.14.020 - Residential zones-Materials. 
    All screening under this section shall be composed of one or more of the following: 
A.  Masonry walls; 
B.  Evergreen shrubs closely spaced and maintained; 
C.  Wooden fencing, if of adequate aesthetic and structural quality and durability; 
D.  Other materials approved by the planning director, after giving consideration to appearance, structural quality and durability. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 4.07(A)(2), 1982) 
17.14.030 - Commercial and industrial zones-Location. 
    Screening shall be required in all commercial and industrial zones as follows: 
A.  Along any side or rear lot line when adjacent to a residential use, or along the front yard setback line, as defined by Section 17.12.040, when adjacent to or across the street from a residential use; 
B.  Along the front yard setback line, as defined by Section 17.12.040, for any outdoor storage operation; 
C.  Around any trash enclosure or storage area; except as provided for in Sections 17.20.010(A) and (B). 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 603 § 2, 1984: Ord. 595 § 4.07(B)(1), 1982) 
17.14.040 - Commercial and industrial zones-Materials. 
    All screening in commercial and industrial zones shall be composed of one or more of the following: 
A.  Masonry walls; 
B.  Wooden fencing, if of adequate aesthetic and structural quality and durability; 
C.  Other materials approved by the planning director after giving consideration to appearance, structural quality and durability. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 4.07(B)(2), 1982) 
17.14.050 - Commercial and industrial zones-Height. 
    Screening may be permitted within the height ranges shown in the following table with the following exceptions: 
A.  No fence, wall or hedge or other physical obstruction higher than three feet above grade shall be located in the triangular areas defined by the intersections diagramed in Section 17.12.050. 
Use Abutting a: Residential Zone Street Commercial 
Zone Display of autos, boats, trailers, or nursery stock 2 to 6 feet when adjacent to the front yard setback, otherwise 6 to 8 feet 0 to 3 feet 0 to 8 feet Parking 3 to 6 feet when adjacent to the front yard setback, otherwise 6 to 8 feet 0 to 3 feet 0 to 8 feet Trash storage or commercial operation 6 to 8 feet 6 feet 6 to 8 feet Storage (except trash) or industrial operations 6 to 8 feet 6 to 8 feet 6 to 8 feet  
Note: 
    In no instance shall the materials stored exceed the height of the screening. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 603 § 3, 1984: Ord. 595 § 4.07(B)(3), 1982) 
17.14.060 - Measurement of screening height. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the height of any screening shall be measured as follows: 
A.  For street-abutting property lines, at sidewalk grade; 
B.  For interior property lines, at the highest elevation of adjacent finished grade or as determined by the planning director. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 4.07(C), 1982) 
17.14.070 - Other security-fencing requirements unaffected. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to set aside or reduce the requirements established for security fencing by local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.07(D), 1982) 
17.14.080 - Security fencing allowances. 
    Security fencing, consisting of chain link and barbed wire, may be permitted up to eight feet in height along any rear or side lot line not adjacent to residential uses or zones. Such fencing may also be permitted along the front yard setback line, as defined by Section 17.12.040, when it is not adjacent to, or across the street from any residential use or zone. 
(Ord. 603 § 4, 1984) 
17.14.090 - Maintenance and upkeep of fencing and screening. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or tenant to maintain site fencing and/or screening in a state of good repair. If a fence or screen, or any part thereof, due to deterioration and/or lack of maintenance is unable to serve its intended purpose as a fence or screen, it shall be declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 17.16 - OFF-STREET PARKING 
Sections: 

17.16.010 - Compliance required when. 
A.  The standards for providing off-street parking set out in this chapter shall apply at the time of the erection of any main building. 
B.  These standards shall also be complied with when an existing building is altered or enlarged by the addition of dwelling units or guestrooms or where the use is intensified or floor area added. 
(Ord. 601 § 3 (part), 1984; Ord. 595 § 4.08 (part), 1982) 
17.16.020 - Enlargement, extension, intensification or addition requires conformity. 
    Where automobile parking space is provided and maintained on a lot in connection with a structure and where such parking spaces at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter became effective were insufficient to meet the requirements for the use with which it is associated, or where no such parking has been provided, said structure may be altered or enlarged, or such use may be extended, only if additional automobile parking spaces are provided to meet the standards for the use in conformity with the requirements set forth in this title, for the enlargement, extension or addition proposed. Where a structure located in a commercial zone and having a commercial use at the time of the enactment of the ordinance codified in this section does not have any area on its lot for parking it is exempt from providing parking except when an intensification of use takes place. 
(Ord. 638 § 6 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 4.08 (A) (part), 1982) 
17.16.030 - Fractional number in calculations. 
    Where calculation of the number of spaces required results in a fractional number, the next higher whole number shall be used. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.08(A) (part), 1982) 
17.16.040 - Enclosure required for nonlocomotive vehicle. 
    No motor vehicle shall be parked or stored in a residential or commercial zone, other than in an entirely enclosed space, unless the vehicle is capable of movement under its own power. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.08(A) (part), 1982) 
17.16.050 - Commercial vehicles in residential zones. 
    Unless excepted pursuant to subsection A of this section, no commercial or construction vehicle, or towed or commercial equipment, or agricultural equipment, shall be parked on private property or on public right-of-way in residential zones unless the vehicle or equipment is screened from public view and adjacent properties. The term "commercial or construction vehicle, or towed, or commercial equipment, or agricultural equipment" includes, but is not limited to, utility body trucks, construction or agriculture tractors, construction vehicles and towed equipment, semitruck tractors, semitruck trailers, dump trucks, step van delivery trucks or any parts or apparatus of any of the above. 
A.  Commercial Vehicles Exempted. The following commercial vehicles are exempted from the above paragraph: 
1.  Pickup trucks, utility vans and similar utility vehicles, each of which does not exceed eight feet in height or twenty feet in combined total length; 
2.  All vehicles while being used in actual construction work on a permit-approved construction site; 
3.  All vehicles in the process of making a pickup or delivery; 
4.  All vehicles used to load or unload agriculture products or supplies, and all vehicles used in cultivation or harvesting of crops, pertaining to that specific property; 
5.  Government, utility and emergency service vehicles; and 
6.  All vehicles used in gardening or landscaping businesses, each of which does not exceed eight feet in height or twenty feet in length. 
(Ord. 695 § 1, 1993: Ord. 595 § 4.08 (A) (part), 1982) 
17.16.055 - Vehicles in front yard setbacks. 
    No motor vehicle, trailer, boat or recreational vehicle shall be parked in the front yard setback as defined by this title, except on paved driveways. 
(Ord. 695 § 2, 1993) 
17.16.060 - Number of spaces required-Residential. 
    The number of spaces required for residential uses shall be as follows: 
A.  There shall be at least two parking spaces for every dwelling unit in zones R-R, R-E, R-L and R-M-L. One and one-half parking spaces shall be provided for every dwelling unit in the R-M and R-H zones. 
B.  Tandem parking shall not be permitted to meet the requirements of subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 595 § 4.08(B)(1), 1982) 
17.16.070 - Number of spaces required-Nonresidential. 
A.  The number of spaces required for nonresidential uses shall be as follows for the various types and buildings and uses. The requirement for a use not specifically mentioned shall be the same as for a use specified which has similar traffic-generating characteristics: 
1.  For churches, theaters, auditoriums and similar places of assembly: at least one space for each five seats in the principal assembly room counting twenty inches of seating space on a bench as one seat. In cases where temporary or movable seats are provided, there shall be one space for every forty square feet of area within the assembly room. In cases of a use without a building, there shall be one space for each five persons normally attending or using the facilities; 
2.  For hospitals: one per three beds; 
3.  For clinics, medical and dental offices: one per two hundred square feet of gross floor area; 
4.  For convalescent, nursing or rest homes, sanitaria or homes for the care of children or the aged: one space for each four beds; 
5.  For hotels and motels: one per room; 
6.  For boardinghouses, clubhouses, fraternity or sorority houses: one space for each guestroom, plus one space for each two beds in a dormitory in any of the above; 
7.  For child care services: one space for each staff member, plus one space for each twenty children; 
8.  For mobile home parks: See Chapter 17.40; 
9.  For retail stores, administrative and professional offices: one space for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area; 
10.  For manufacturing, industrial, warehouse and storage buildings: one space for each five hundred square feet of gross floor area; 
11.  For storage yards, nursery sales, contractor yards and lumberyards, and public utilities services: one space for each five hundred square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each two thousand square feet of open land on the premises; 
12.  For bowling alleys: six spaces for each alley; 
13.  For restaurants, cafes, bars or other eating or drinking establishments including fast-food establishments: one space for each fifty square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of five spaces; 
14.  For retail stores: one space for every three hundred seventy-five square feet of gross floor area; 
15.  For mini-warehousing or storage: one space for every twenty cubicles or storage spaces plus two enclosed spaces for the manager's quarters. 
B.  "Gross floor area" need not include duct and elevator shafts; stairs; telephone, electrical and mechanical rooms; restrooms; janitor rooms and corridors. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.08(B)(2), 1982) 
17.16.080 - Joint use of parking areas. 
    Where an attested copy of a contract between the parties concerned and the city as a third party beneficiary is filed with the application for a building permit, which contract sets forth an agreement for joint use of parking spaces irrevocable for the life of the uses or buildings concerned, the number of spaces jointly required for a place of assembly, the use of which is principally exercised during nonbusiness hours, and a business use or uses regularly closed at such time may be reduced so that the total number equals whichever is greater of: 
A.  All spaces required for the business use or uses, plus one-half of the spaces required for the place of assembly; or 
B.  All the spaces required for the place of assembly, plus one-half of the spaces required for the business use or uses. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.08(C), 1982) 
17.16.090 - Location-Residential. 
    Required parking spaces for residential buildings and uses shall be provided as follows: 
A.  On the same lot as the main building; 
B.  Located at least twenty feet from a public street; 
C.  Not located in any required yard. For exceptions for garages or carports, see Section 17.12.030. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.08(D)(1), 1982) 
17.16.100 - Location-Nonresidential. 
    Required parking spaces for other than residential buildings and uses shall be provided in one or more of the following locations: 
A.  On the lot with the building served; 
B.  On a contiguous lot, or a lot within five hundred feet of the building or use served, if a legally acceptable covenant is executed and recorded to guarantee the maintenance of the required spaces and an attested copy is filed with the department; 
C.  By inclusion in a municipal parking district. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.08(D)(2), 1982) 
17.16.110 - Design-Residential. 
    Every required parking area and garage for residential uses shall be designed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations: 
A.  Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet in width and twenty feet in depth, and shall be independently accessible with a minimum of twenty-five feet of unobstructed space provided for the maneuvering of vehicles. 
B.  Every parking stall adjoined on one or both sides of its lengths by a curb, fence, wall, partition, column, post or similar obstruction, that is located less than four feet from an access aisle measured along the length of the stall or continues to form the end of an access aisle, shall have a minimum width of eleven feet six inches. 
C.  In the R-R, R-E and R-L zones, at least two spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided in a garage or carport, except that for a single-family dwelling having less than eight hundred seventy-five square feet of gross floor area a minimum of one covered space shall be required. 
D.  In the R-M-L, R-M and R-H zones, at least one space per dwelling unit shall be provided in a garage or carport. 
E.  Carports or unenclosed spaces shall be screened from all property lines except those abutting an alley by a combination of landscaping and a minimum five-foot-high permanent decorative barrier. 
F.  Striping and car stops or bumpers shall be as shown in Figure No. 1 in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 595 § 4.08(E)(1), 1982) 
17.16.120 - Design-Nonresidential. 
    Every required nonresidential parking area and garage shall be designed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations: 
A.  Parking stall dimensions shall be in accordance with the following table: 
Stall Type Dimension Standard Parallel Compact Width 9'0? 8'0? 7'6? Length 20'0? 24'0? 15'0?  
    Exception: Every parking stall adjoined on one or both sides of its length by a curb, fence, wall, partition, column, post or similar obstruction, that is located less than four feet from an access aisle measured along the length of the stall or continues to form the end of an access aisle, shall have a minimum width of eleven feet six inches. 
B.  Each stall shall be located so that no automobile is required to back onto a public street. 
C.  In every parking area and garage containing ten or more stalls, twenty percent of the stalls may be designed to accommodate compact cars, and shall be clearly marked as compact stalls. 
D.  Handicapped stalls shall be provided as recommended by the state code (two percent of total required spaces). 
E.  Striping and car stops or bumpers shall be as shown in Figure No. 1 in Appendix A to this chapter. 
F.  The minimum width of each parking bay shall be determined by the stall width and parking angle in accordance with Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Appendix B to this chapter. Where parking stalls of two bays interlock the bays may overlap. The minimum bay widths required may be reduced for bays or portions of bays containing compact stalls, provided that the net aisle width is not reduced. 
G.  Unless otherwise excepted in this section, all parking areas, including those for outdoor automotive display, sales and storage, shall be surfaced or paved with asphalt concrete of at least two and one-half inches thickness over a suitable base material, and shall thereafter be maintained in good condition. However, should use or soil condition necessitate, the planning director may require additional paving or lot improvement. 
H.  Where such areas adjoin residential uses they shall be separated therefrom by screening as specified in Chapter 17.14. These areas shall also be provided with adequate wheel stops: a concrete curb not less than six inches high, installed and maintained as a safeguard to abutting property. The barrier shall be at least three feet from any property line, but in no case shall it be less than necessary to meet the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 601 § 3 (part), 1984; Ord. 595 § 4.08(E)(2), 1982) 
17.16.130 - Driveway requirements. 
    There shall be paved vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property requiring the off-street parking as follows: 
A.  Single-family residences: Each driveway shall be at least ten feet wide and shall not be encumbered by a projection to a height under eight feet above grade. 
B.  Multiple-family residences: Each driveway shall be at least twelve feet wide and shall not be encumbered by any projection to a height under twelve feet above grade. If any driveway serves as access to more than ten parking spaces such driveway shall be not less than eighteen feet wide. Where there is more than one means of access, two twelve-foot-wide driveways may be provided in lieu of one eighteen-foot-wide driveway. 
C.  Commercial or industrial uses: One-way driveways shall be twelve feet wide; two-way, twenty feet wide; and shall not be encumbered by any projection to a height under fourteen feet above grade. Where there is more than one means of access, two twelve-foot-wide driveways may be provided in lieu of one twenty-foot-wide driveway. Exception: Where access is provided for drive-through service offered by a banking institution, fast-food restaurant or similar use, and access is a one-way driveway, the driveway may be ten feet wide. 
D.  Child care services: A circular driveway at least twenty feet in width shall be provided for the safe off-street loading and unloading of children. 
E.  All zones: Where two driveways are provided each shall be clearly marked as to the direction of ingress and egress. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.08(F), 1982) 
17.16.140 - Fee in lieu of required parking. 
    Where parking requirements cannot be met on the same site or adjacent site to the development requiring parking, parking requirements may be satisfied at the option of the city by payment to the city of an amount of money for each square foot of parking space required under this title. A parking space shall consist of two hundred fifty square feet for the calculation required. The amount of money per square foot shall be set by resolution of the city council in the same manner as required for permits and fees under council in the same manner as required for permits and fees under this title. Alternately parking requirements may be met by participating in the construction and/or purchase of a cooperative parking facility within one hundred fifty feet of the development requiring parking. 
(Ord. 638 § 6 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 4.08(G), 1982) 



Chapter 17.18 - LOADING 
Sections: 

17.18.010 - Adequate loading space required. 
    All commercial and industrial buildings, hotels, hospitals and institutions erected, constructed, converted, established or enlarged to increase their floor space after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be provided with adequate loading spaces of at least twenty-five by fourteen feet with a fourteen-foot overhead clearance. The number of spaces needed will be determined by the planning director; however, in no case shall there be less than one space. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 601 § 3 (part), 1984: Ord. 595 § 4.09 (part), 1982) 
17.18.020 - Ingress and egress for trucks. 
    Any loading space provided shall afford adequate ingress and egress for trucks from a public street or alley. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.09 (part), 1982) 
17.18.030 - Use of public street or alley. 
    In no case shall any part of a public street or alley be used for loading. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.09 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.20 - TRASH, STORAGE AND UTILITY AREAS 
Sections: 

17.20.010 - Trash and garbage collection areas. 
    All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be constructed as approved by the planning director as set forth in the following guidelines: 
A.  Residential, commercial and industrial areas that are served by alleys shall locate collection areas in or on the alley. Where collection is on the alley with an insert onto private property, a concrete pad shall be required. Where collection is in the alley, commercial, multifamily residential and industrial users shall provide a concrete pad. The area shall be screened from the owner's property. 
B.  Commercial and industrial users not served by alleys shall locate collection areas as close as possible to public right-of-way. The area shall be paved and shall be enclosed on three sides, with one side providing screening from the public right-of-way. Location shall be approved by the planning director and the public works director. 
C.  Commercial, industrial and residential property tenants shall be responsible for keeping garbage collection and storage areas clean and picked up. Those failing to do so shall be subject to penalties of this title. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 664 § 1, 1990: Ord. 638 § 7, 1988: Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 4.10(A)(2), 1982) 
17.20.015 - Recyclable materials storage and collection areas. 
    Commercial, industrial and residential property tenants shall be responsible for keeping recyclable materials storage and collection areas clean and picked up. Those failing to do so shall be subject to penalties of this title. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.20.020 - Trash containers. 
    All trash containers shall be as provided or specified by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.10(A)(2), 1982) 
17.20.030 - Storage areas. 
    At least sixty cubic feet of enclosed accessory storage space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. The space may be located in a garage or carport provided that it does not interfere with the parking of a vehicle. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.10(B), 1982) 
Chapter 17.22 - LANDSCAPING* 
Sections: 

17.22.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the planting and care of landscaping and irrigation in residential, commercial, industrial and public/quasi-public zones. The goals of this section are to: 
A.  Enhance the community's environmental and visual character for its citizens' use and enjoyment; 
B.  Establish a more healthy environment by using plants to mitigate pollution's ill effects; 
C.  Safeguard property values; 
D.  Protect public and private investments; and 
E.  To promote high-quality development. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.22.020 - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all existing and proposed landscaped areas in residential, commercial, industrial and public/quasi-public use. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.22.030 - Where required. 
    Landscaping is required in the following locations for all residential, commercial, industrial, and public/quasi-public uses: 
A.  Throughout required front yard setbacks and other areas visible from a public street where not used for parking, access or loading; 
B.  Five percent of the parking lot area which is visible from a public street; and 
C.  Refer to Section 17.34.055 of this title for nonconforming areas. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.22.040 - Approval of elements. 
1.  Required landscaping shall consist of an effective combination of trees, lawn and/or ground cover, shrubs and desert vegetation, as approved by the planning director. 
2.  All unplanted landscape areas in commercial, industrial and public/quasi-public shall be mulched with a minimum of two inches of material as approved by the planning director to promote weed control and water conservation. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.22.050 - Trees in front yard of dwellings. 
    A minimum of two deciduous or evergreen shade trees conforming to the measurements specified in this section shall be planted in the front yard of any lot on which a dwelling unit or units are to be built or placed. 
A.  Minimum branching height for all shade trees shall be six feet; 
B.  Minimum size for shade trees shall be two and one-half to three inches in diameter measured six inches above grade, and twelve to fourteen feet in height. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.22.060 - Commercial, industrial or public/quasi-public. 
    For every two hundred square feet of landscaping, a minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree conforming to the measurements specified in this section shall be planted in a tree, well-sized to properly accommodate the intended tree. Suitable protection shall be provided to trees and public works from traffic. 
A.  Minimum branching height for all shade trees shall be six feet. 
B.  Minimum size for shade trees shall be three and one-half to four inches in diameter measured six inches above grade, and twelve to fourteen feet in height. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.22.070 - Irrigation systems. 
    All landscaped areas in commercial and industrial uses, and multi-family residences in R-M, R-M-L and R-H zones shall have a properly maintained permanent, automated, underground, full-coverage irrigation system meeting the approval of the planning director. In residential R-R, R-E and R-L zones irrigation systems in the front yard setbacks of residences are encouraged. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.22.080 - Maintenance. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or tenant to: 
A.  Maintain all landscaping and landscape areas in a neat, clean and healthful condition; 
B.  Replace dead trees and/or plants within sixty days; 
C.  Mow grass on a regular basis (maximum grass height shall be eight inches); 
D.  Maintain tree canopies at a minimum of six feet in height; 
E.  Maintain irrigation systems in proper working order. 
    Those failing to do so shall be subject to penalties of this chapter. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 17.23 - STREET NAMING SYSTEM 
Sections: 

17.23.010 - System established. 
    A uniform system is necessary to provide control and coordination for the selection of street names to prevent situations that may affect emergency response by emergency services providers, as well as to minimize confusion to postal workers and the public at large. It is determined that a system be adopted that will eliminate future street naming duplication, spelling or pronunciation similarities, difficult pronunciations, inappropriate usages (both English and Spanish), and which encourages pleasant sounding and geographically relevant street names. 
(Ord. 766 § 1 (part), 2000) 
17.23.020 - Street naming committee. 
    A committee formed of one member each from the development services department, fire department, and police department shall sit as a body to review proposed names for new streets in order to eliminate duplications of street names, spelling or pronunciation similarities, difficult pronunciations, and inappropriate usages (both English and Spanish). The development services department committee member shall be designated as "street naming coordinator." 
(Ord. 766 § 1 (part), 2000) 
17.23.030 - Street naming coordinator-Duties. 
    The duties of the street naming coordinator shall be to facilitate and advise applicants on the selection of new street names through the use of: 
A.  Three lists of street names which will be kept current: 
1.  Existing Street Name List. A list of street names currently in use, thus not available for use as new street names; 
2.  Available Street Name List. A list of approved street names which are not in use and may be used for streets in new developments; 
3.  Tentative Street Name List. A list of street names which have been assigned to new streets but have not yet been recorded or constructed. 
B.  The street naming coordinator shall supply a copy of the "available street name list" to applicants, and shall verify that all street names selected by an applicant are in conformance with the "procedure for street naming" before recordation of a final tract map or final approval of site plans. 
(Ord. 766 § 1 (part), 2000) 
17.23.040 - Procedure for street naming. 
    A written "Procedure for Street Naming" shall be made available to applicants in order to fulfill the necessary requirements of new street naming. The procedure for street naming shall be an extension of this code. 
(Ord. 766 § 1 (part), 2000) 
17.23.050 - Usage of surnames. 
    A street may be named for a living or deceased citizen who has made a significant contribution to the community with the approval of the city council as recommended by the street naming coordinator at the request of an applicant, general public or a city official. 
(Ord. 766 § 1 (part), 2000) 
17.23.060 - Official street names. 
    All names presently assigned to streets prior to January 1, 2000, are accepted as the official names of such streets. 
(Ord. 766 § 1 (part), 2000) 
17.23.070 - Change of street names. 
    In the event that street names are changed in the future, such name changes shall be undertaken upon the recommendation of the planning commission to the city council. Public hearings shall be held by the planning commission and city council in considering the proposed name changes. Written notice shall be given to all parties to be affected by such name change, i.e., the residents of the subject street, or, in the event that a large number of residents are affected, by posting of notices along the street and by subject publication of such notice at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. 766 § 1 (part), 2000) 
17.23.080 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, or clause of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, and clauses shall not be affected. 
(Ord. 766 § 1 (part), 2000) 
Chapter 17.24 - STREET IMPROVEMENTS-MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT-ACCESS* 
Sections: 

17.24.010 - Street improvements. 
    The installation of curbs, gutters and sidewalks, or the repair of such existing street improvements to city standards, is required along the street frontage of any building site as a condition precedent to issuing any building permit. Refer to Section 17.34.055 of this title concerning nonconforming areas. 
(Ord. 638 § 9 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 4.12, 1982) 
17.24.020 - Mechanical equipment. 
    Mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, hearing and air-conditioning devices shall be located within the building or, if mounted elsewhere, shall be screened from public view. Residences up to and including four units on a single lot may screen the equipment by placing it below the ridge line of a gabled roof on the side away from the street at the front of the house. Flat-roof residences shall screen equipment from public view from the street at the front of the residence. 
(Ord. 638 § 9 (part), 1988: Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 4.13, 1982) 
17.24.030 - Access across prohibited zone. 
    Access to a use shall not be taken across property subject to a zone in which such use is prohibited. 
(Ord. 595 § 4.15, 1982) 
Chapter 17.26 - SIGNS 
Sections: 

17.26.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the installation and/or placement of signs. The goals of this section are to: 
A.  Provide minimum standards to safeguard and enhance property values and protect public and private investment in buildings and open space; 
B.  Preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place to live, work and visit; 
C.  Encourage sound signing practices to aid business and provide directional information to the public; 
D.  Ensure that signs effectively identify business and other establishments; 
E.  Prevent excessive and confusing signing displays; and 
F.  Reduce traffic hazards and promote the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing visual competition among signs. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.020 - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all signs existing and proposed to be located within the corporate limits of the city of Blythe California as defined by Section 17.26.030 (Definitions), including permanent, semipermanent and temporary signs within residential and nonresidential districts. This section shall also apply to signage within public rights-of-way excepts as prohibited by state and federal law. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply. These definitions shall be adapted to the context for appropriate grammatical tenses, number, case and gender. 
    "Abandoned sign" means a sign which is located on property which becomes vacant or unoccupied or which pertains to any occupant or business unrelated to the premises' present occupant or business, or a sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies. 
    "Accessory sign" means a sign whose copy refers to the products, facilities or services available on the premises. 
    "Advertising statuary" means an imitation or representation of a person or thing which is sculptured, molded, modeled or cast in any solid or plastic substance, material or fabric and used to identify or advertise a product or service. 
    "Advertising vehicles" means any vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way or public property or on private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way which has attached thereto, or located thereon, any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property or any other premises. This provision is not to be construed as prohibiting the identification of a firm or its principal products on a vehicle operating during normal course of business. Public buses or taxis are exempt from this prohibition. 
    "Aggregate sign area" means the total area of all signs combined. 
    "Animated sign" means any sign which includes action or motion or the optical illusion of action or motion, or color changes of all or any part of the sign facing, requiring electrical energy, or set in motion by movement of the atmosphere. Excluded from the definition are public service message center signs and flags. 
    "Attraction board" means a sign capable of supporting copy which is readily changeable without the use of tools, such as a theater marquee, and which refers to products, services or coming events on the premises. 
    "Banner" or "banner sign" means a sign hung either with or without frames, possessing written communication applied to nonrigid paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. 
    "Billboard" means an off-premises sign with changing advertising copy or other changing copy. 
    "Bulletin board" means a board, kiosk or wall area on which are affixed personal notices, lost-and-found notices, business cards, and similar small informal notices referring to products, services, activities, or other items not offered on the same premises. The term "bulletin board" shall not include business identification signs or attraction boards. 
    "Building-mounted sign" means a sign affixed to a building, painted directly on a wall or erected against the wall of a building. Building-mounted signs include awning signs, fascia signs, mansard roof signs, wall signs, window signs, projecting signs and under-canopy signs. 
    "Business" means a commercial, office, institutional or industrial establishment. 
    "Canopy" means a fixed structure of any material and any length, projecting from and connected to a building and/or columns and posts from the ground, or supported by a frame extending from the building and/or posts from the ground. 
    "Construction sign" or "future facility construction sign" means a sign containing information pertaining to a future development on the site where the sign is located, including the name of the project, the developer, contractor, financing source, future occupant(s), and other information directly related to the development. 
    "Copy" or "sign copy" means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic representations incorporated onto the face of a sign. 
    "Corporate limits" means all properties currently existing within the city limits, as well as all properties annexed into the city limits at any point in the future. 
    "Current" means at the time building permit application is made. 
    "Development" means, on land or in or under water: the placement or erection of any solid material or structure; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any gaseous, liquid, solid or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining or extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including but not limited to subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public or municipal utility; and the removal or harvesting of major vegetation other than for agricultural purposes. 
    "Directional sign" means any sign which is designed and erected solely for the purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction and which is placed on the property to which or on which the public is directed. Such a sign contains no advertising copy. (Examples are: "one-way," "entrance," "exit," "parking in rear," "fifteen miles per hour," "no left turn.") 
    "Director" or "planning director" means the director of the city of Blythe Development Services Department or the director's authorized agent or representative. 
    "Downtown" means that area on Hobsonway extending from the east side of Ash Avenue to the west side of Third Street; and, the area between the alley west of Main Street to the alley east of First Street extending north from Hobsonway to Murphy Street and south from Hobsonway to Rice Street. 
    "Electronic message board sign" means a sign with a fixed or changing display composed of a series of lights, but does not include time and temperature displays. 
    "Exempt sign" means a sign which is designated in this code as not subject to certain regulations. 
    "Face of building wall" means the outer surface of any main exterior wall or foundation of a building, including windows and store fronts. 
    "Fascia" means a parapet-type wall used as part of the fascia of a flat-roofed building and projecting not more than six feet from the building face immediately adjacent thereto. Such a wall shall enclose at least three sides of the projecting flat roof and return to a parapet wall or the building. 
    "Flag" means a visual display device without copy, made of flexible material, usually cloth, paper or plastic. 
    "Flashing sign" means any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source. Excluded from the definition are public service message center signs. 
    "Freestanding sign" means a sign supported upon the ground and not attached to any building. This definition includes monument signs and ground signs. 
    Height. See "sign height." 
    "Garage sale sign" (i.e., yard sales, moving sales, patio sales) means a sign used to announce sale of a used item or items. 
    "Identification sign" or "ID sign" means a sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building, business, office, establishment, person or activity. 
    "Illumination" means the method by which a sign is lighted so as to be readable at night. The following types of illumination are provided for in this chapter: 
1.  "Direct illumination" means the lighting of the sign face from behind so that the light shines through translucent sign copy or lighting via neon or other gases within translucent tubing incorporated onto or into the sign face. 
2.  "Indirect illumination" means the lighting of an opaque sign face from a light source mounted in front of the face, or the lighting of opaque sign copy (on an opaque sign face) via lights mounted into the copy and shining rearward onto the face to form a lighted "halo" around the copy (e.g., "reverse channel" letters). 
    "Improvement plan(s)" means on- and off-site construction drawings. 
    "Landscaping" means any material used as a decorative feature, such as shrubbery or planting materials within planter boxes or concrete bases, used in conjunction with a sign which expresses the theme of the sign and related structure but does not contain advertising copy. All landscape areas shall be maintained in a healthy and viable condition for the life of the sign. 
    "Logo" means a trademark or symbol of an organization. 
    "Lot" means a parcel of real property which is shown as a single lot in a lawfully recorded subdivision, approved pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or, a parcel of real property, the dimensions and boundaries of which are defined as a single lot by a lawfully recorded record of survey map. See "site." 
    "Mansard roof sign" means any sign attached to or supported by a mansard roof. A "mansard roof" is a roof having two slopes, the lower steeper than the upper, and having a slope of sixty degrees or greater with the horizontal plane. 
    "Modification" means the addition of structures or equipment to a previously approved installation. The term does not include replacement of existing equipment or structures, provided the replacement equipment or structure is substantially similar to the pre-existing equipment or structure, and creates no new impacts not addressed in connection with the previous approval. 
    "Monument sign" means a freestanding sign mounted on a low-profile solid base or a fence, or a freestanding wall, as distinguished from support by poles. 
    "Multiple-building complex" means more than one structure on a parcel of land housing commercial uses in which there are appurtenant shared facilities (such as parking or pedestrian mall), and which is designed to provide an area in which the public can obtain varied products and services. Distinguishing characteristics of a multiple-building complex may, but need not, include common ownership of the real property upon which the center is located, common-wall construction, and multiple-tenant commercial use of a single structure or structures in multiple buildings. 
    "Multiple-tenant (commercial) building" means a commercial development in which there exists a number of separate commercial activities, in which there are appurtenant shared facilities (such as parking or pedestrian mall), and which is designed to provide a single area in which the public can obtain varied products and services. Distinguishing characteristics of a multiple-tenant commercial building may, but need not, include common ownership of the real property upon which the center is located, common-wall construction and multiple-occupant commercial use of a single structure. 
    "Neon sign" means a sign which utilizes neon or other gases within translucent tubing in or on any part of the sign structure. 
    "Off-premises sign" means a structure which bears a sign which is not appurtenant to the use of the property where the sign is located or a product sold or a service offered upon the property where the sign is located, and which does not identify the place of business where the sign is located as a purveyor of the merchandise or services advertised upon the sign. Some temporary signs are not defined as off-premises signs as used within this chapter. 
    "On-premises sign" means a sign referring to a person, establishment, merchandise, service, event or entertainment which is located, sold, produced, manufactured, provided or furnished on the premises where the sign is located. 
    "Parapet wall" means a wall extending above the roof plane of the building. 
    "Permanent sign" means any sign which is intended to be and is so constructed as to be a lasting and enduring condition, remaining unchanged in character, condition (beyond normal wear) and position and in a permanent manner affixed to the ground, wall or building, provided the sign is listed as a permanent sign in this chapter. 
    "Political campaign sign" or "political sign" means a sign indicating the name and/or picture of an individual seeking election to a public office, or relating to a forthcoming public election, referendum, initiative, or to the advocating by persons, groups or parties of political views or policies. 
    "Portable sign" or "mobile sign" means a sign made of any material, which, by its design, is readily movable and is equipped with wheels, casters or rollers or which is not permanently affixed to the ground, structure or building, or a sign upon a vehicle or trailer used as a stationary advertising display, the primary purpose of which is to serve as a base or platform for the sign. (Also includes sidewalk or sandwich board signs.) 
    "Projecting sign" means any sign with two parallel faces no more than eighteen inches apart projecting twelve inches or more from the wall or eaves of a building. No guy wires, braces or secondary supports are visible. 
    "Private property" means any property other than public property. 
    "Public property" means any real or personal property in which the city or any other governmental entity or any publicly regulated utility company possesses an ownership interest. Public property shall include, without limitation, any street, sidewalk, curb, curbstone, street lamp post, hydrant, tree, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, electric light, power, telephone or telegraph wire, pole or appurtenance thereof, any fixture of a fire alarm or police telephone or telegraph system, any lighting system, public bridge or wall, drinking fountain, life buoy, life preserver, lifesaving equipment, street, sign, traffic sign or signal, street median, public park or other publicly owned property or structure. 
    "Public service message center sign" means an electronically or electrically controlled sign or portion of a larger sign which conveys only information such as time, date, temperature, atmospheric condition or general news information where different alternating copy changes are shown on the same lamp bank matrix. 
    "Real estate sign" means a sign advertising the sale, lease or rent of the property upon which it is located and the identification of the person or firm handling such sale, lease or rent. 
    "Roof sign" means any sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building or placed above the apparent flat roof or eaves of a building. 
    "Seasonal sales sign" means a sign used to advertise a business or merchandise held seasonally for a limited interval, all or most of whose business is conducted or whose merchandise is displayed in an outdoor area. 
    "Sign" means any medium for visual communication, including but not limited to words, symbols and illustrations, together with all parts, materials, frame and background, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to, identify or advertise an establishment, product, service, activity or location, or to provide information. 
    "Sign area" means the following: 
1.  Basic Rule. Sign size or area shall be defined as the entire area of the sign face, including nonstructural perimeter trim but excluding structures or uprights on which the sign is supported. 
2.  Window Signs. Window sign area shall be considered to be the entire area of any sign placed on or inside a window and not painted directly on the glass. For signs painted directly on the glass, area measurement shall be the same as that for wall signs, following. 
3.  Individual Letters. The area of wall or window signs composed of individual letters painted on or otherwise affixed to the wall or window shall be considered to be the area within the single continuous perimeter encompassed by a straight-line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the letters or other characters. 
4.  Double-Faced Signs. If a sign is double-faced with only one face visible from any ground position at one time, its sign area shall be considered to be the area of either face taken separately. Thus, if the maximum permitted sign area is twenty square feet, a double-faced sign may have an area of twenty square feet per face. 
5.  Three-Dimensional Signs. If a sign has three or more faces, its sign area shall be considered to be the sum of the areas of each individual face. Thus, if a sign has four faces and the maximum permitted sign area is twenty square feet, the maximum allowable area for each face is only five square feet. 
6.  Separated-Panel Signs. The sign area of open or separated panel signs, i.e., those signs having empty spaces between copy panels, shall be considered to be the entire area encompassed by the sign face, including the empty spaces between panels. 
    "Sign face" means the exterior surface of a sign exclusive of structural supports, on which is placed the sign copy. 
    "Sign height," "height of sign," or "height" means the following: 
1.  For building-mounted signs, the distance from the average finish grade directly beneath the sign to the top of the sign. 
2.  For freestanding signs, the distance from top of curb of the nearest street (or the edge of pavement of such street where there is no curb) to the top of the sign or any vertical projection thereof, including supporting columns and/or design elements. However, in cases where the director determines that a freestanding sign is not oriented to any particular street or is too far from such a street to reasonably apply the foregoing standard, sign height shall be measured from the average finish grade at the base of the sign. 
    "Sign permit" means an entitlement from the city to place or erect a sign. 
    "Sign program" means the method of review and approval of signs by one of the following two procedures: 
1.  Standard Sign Application. The review and approval of standard sign applications is conducted by the planning director consistent with the regulations and standards as identified for various signs in this chapter. 
2.  Planned Sign Program. The review and approval of applications for signs under this program is conducted by the planning commission. The planning commission may exercise discretion to provide additional flexibility in the application of the regulations of this chapter. 
    "Sign structure" means the structural supports, uprights and bracing for a sign. 
    "Site" means the area of the lot to be developed. 
    "Special event sign" means a sign used to announce a circus, carnival, festivals or other similar events. 
    "Subdivision sign" means a sign containing the name, location or directions to a builder, developer, and pertinent information about a subdivision for which there is a properly approved and recorded map and in which homes remain to be constructed or initially sold. 
    "Under-canopy sign" means a sign suspended beneath a projecting canopy, walkway cover, awning, ceiling or marquee. 
    "Wall sign" means a sign attached to, erected on, painted on or otherwise affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the face of the sign is approximately parallel to the exterior wall of the building and exposed to the exterior side of the building. Signs or advertising displays in or on windows are not considered wall signs. 
    "Window sign" means any sign painted on or attached to a window or located inside within a distance equal to the greatest dimension of the window (either width or height) and designed to be viewed from the outside of the building in which the window is located. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.040 - Exempt signs. 
A.  Signs Not Requiring Sign Permits. The signs listed in Table 17-1 do not require a sign permit nor shall their area and number be included in the aggregate area or number of signs permitted for any premises or use. However, this exemption shall not be construed as relieving the sign owner of the responsibility of: 
1.  Obtaining any building or other permits required for sign erection, if any; 
2.  Proper sign maintenance; or 
3.  Compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter or of any other law or ordinance. Exempt signs shall not be illuminated nor placed within any public right-of-way unless specifically permitted in this section. 
B.  Repainting. The repainting of a sign in original colors shall not be considered an erection or alteration which requires sign approval unless a structural (including face plate changes on signs above twenty feet), text or design change is made. 
Table 17-1 
Sign Type Placement Maximum Area Illumination 1. Official notices issued by any court or public body or officer and notices posted by any public officer in the performance of a public duty or by any person giving legal notice n/a n/a n/a 2. Within residential districts, address or identification signs Building-mounted 2 sq. ft. aggregate n/a 3. Signs located in the interior of any building or enclosed outdoor area which are designed and located to be viewed exclusively from within such building or outdoor area n/a n/a Yes 4. Tables, stained glass windows or dates of erection cut into the surface of a wall or pedestal or projecting not more than two inches Building-mounted or freestanding 3 sq. ft. No 5. Directional, warning or informational signs required by or authorized by law or by a governmental authority, including signs necessary for the operation and safety of public utility uses n/a n/a Yes 6. Incidental accessory signs and placards (e.g., open/closed signs), six signs maximum per premises Window or building-mounted 3 sq. ft. aggregate Internal only 7. Temporary decorations clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday, provided such signs are not installed more than 60 days in advance of the holiday and are removed within fourteen days after the applicable holiday n/a n/a Yes 8. Sculptures, fountains, mosaics and design features which do not incorporate advertising or premise identification n/a n/a Yes 9. Property signs (e.g. "No Trespassing," "No Parking," etc.), informational/directional signs (e.g. "Restrooms," "Exit," etc.) and warning signs (e.g., "High Voltage") Building-mounted or freestanding 3 sq. ft. Yes 10. Vehicular directional signs used to identify street entrances and exits, maximum three feet if freestanding Building-mounted or freestanding 3 sq. ft. Yes 11. Directional pavement markings n/a n/a n/a 12. Newspaper stand identification n/a 3 sq. ft. No 13. Within commercial districts, chalkboards or small placards (e.g., restaurant menu boards) Building-mounted 4 sq. ft. Indirect only 14. Vending machine signs and automatic teller signs n/a n/a Yes 15. Directional and nonprofit public information signs for public, quasi-public, and nonprofit uses on public or private property adjacent to an arterial or major collector thoroughfare. Number, shape, location and height (maximum 6 feet) of signs shall be approved by the planning and public works directors Freestanding 6 sq. ft. No 16. Within residential zones, temporary decorative flags clearly incidental which may or may not be associated with any national, local or religious holiday Building-mounted 15 sq. ft. n/a 17. Within commercial zones, temporary information window signs fronting on a street, parking lot or common on-site area, not covering more than 25% of the area of the window(s) within which they are placed for a period not to exceed 14 days nor more than 6 times per calendar year. No more than 3 signs per elevation with windows may be installed at any one time. For additional area allowances see Section 17.26.080 Window-mounted No one window sign shall exceed 4' high or 8' long (32 sq. ft.) No 18. Temporary for sale, lease, open house, or rent signs located on residential property. One sign per street frontage Freestanding 8 sq. ft., 4' high. Aggregate not to exceed 16 sq. ft. No 19. Temporary for sale, lease, open house, or rent signs located on commercial or industrial parcels in one ownership. One sign per street frontage to a maximum of one sign for each five parcels. (1-5 parcels = 1 sign 6-10 parcels = 2 signs) Freestanding 32 sq. ft. aggregate area with no one side exceeding 8' No Signs in residential districts requiring a permit See Section 17.26.060 Signs in nonresidential districts requiring a permit See Section 17.26.070 Temporary and semipermanent signs See Sections 17.26.080 and 17.26.090  
    Note: In this table "n/a" means not applicable or no restriction and "building-mounted" means signs mounted flush-to-wall only. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.050 - General sign standards. 
A.  Applicability. Signs in the city of Blythe, including exempt, permanent, semipermanent and temporary signs, are subject to the general standards of this section. 
B.  Planned Sign Programs. Planned sign program review is required, per the provisions of Section 17.26.110(D), for submissions which: 
1.  Include three or more permanent signs; 
2.  Are in conjunction with review of a site development permit by the planning commission; or 
3.  Include a request for a sign adjustment to a sign previously approved under a planned sign program. 
C.  Interpretation of Provisions. Where a matter of interpretation arises regarding the provisions of this chapter, the more specific definition or more rigorous standard shall prevail. Whenever the planning director determines that the application of any provision of this chapter is uncertain, the issue shall be referred to the planning commission for determination. 
D.  Application of Standards. If the director determines that a staff-reviewed sign does not conform to one or more of the general standards set forth in this section, the applicant shall be given the option of modifying the sign or applying for a minor adjustment. 
E.  Measurement of Sign Area. Sign area shall be measured as follows: 
1.  Basic Rule. Sign size or area shall be defined as the entire area of the sign face, including nonstructural perimeter trim but excluding structures or uprights on which the sign is supported. 
2.  Window Signs. Window sign area shall be considered to be the entire area of any sign placed on or inside a window and not painted directly on the glass. For signs painted directly on the glass, area measurement shall be the same as that for wall signs, following. 
3.  Individual Letters. The area of wall or window signs composed of individual letters painted on or otherwise affixed to the wall or window shall be considered to be the area within the single continuous perimeter encompassed by a straight-line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the letters or other characters. 
4.  Double-Faced Signs. If a sign is double-faced with only one face visible from any ground position at one time, its sign area shall be considered to be the area of either face taken separately. Thus, if the maximum permitted sign area is twenty square feet, a double-faced sign may have an area of twenty square feet per face. 
5.  Three-Dimensional Signs. If a sign has three or more faces, its sign area shall be considered to be the sum of the areas of each individual face. Thus, if a sign has four faces and the maximum permitted sign area is twenty square feet, the maximum allowable area for each face is only five square feet. 
6.  Separated-Panel Signs. The sign area of open or separated panel signs, i.e., those signs having empty spaces between copy panels, shall be considered to be the entire area encompassed by the sign face, including the empty spaces between panels. 
F.  Measurement of Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured as follows: 
1.  Building-Mounted Signs. The height of building-mounted signs shall be measured from the average finish grade directly beneath the sign. 
2.  Freestanding Signs. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the top of curb of the nearest street (or the edge of pavement of such street where there is no curb) to the top of the sign or any vertical projection thereof, including supporting columns and/or design elements. However, in cases where the director determines that a freestanding sign is not oriented to any particular street or is too far from such a street to reasonably apply the foregoing standard, sign height shall be measured from the average finish grade at the base of the sign. 
G.  Sign Placement. 
1.  Setback From Street. Freestanding signs shall not be located within five feet of a street right-of-way nor within a corner cutoff area identified in Section 17.12.050. 
2.  No Off-Premises Signs. All signs shall be located on the same premises as the land use or activity identified by the sign, unless specifically permitted to be off-premises in this chapter. 
3.  Utility Lines. No sign shall be located closer to overhead utility lines than the distance prescribed by California law or by the rules duly promulgated by agencies of the state or by the applicable public utility. 
4.  Traffic Safety. No sign shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
5.  Public Right-of-Way. No sign shall be located within, over or across a public right-of-way unless specifically permitted in this chapter and an encroachment permit has been obtained. 
H.  Illumination. Illumination from or upon any sign shall not be directed upward into the night sky. In addition, illumination from or upon any sign shall be shaded, shielded, directed or reduced so as to avoid undue brightness, glare or reflection of light on private or public property in the surrounding area so as to avoid unreasonably distracting pedestrians or motorists. "Undue brightness" is illumination in excess of that which is reasonably necessary to make the sign reasonably visible to the average person on an adjacent street. Illuminated signs which face or are adjacent to residentially zoned property shall be required to minimize the illumination, glare or reflection of light which is visible from the residentially zoned property. 
I.  Maintenance. Any sign displayed within the city, together with supports, braces, guys, anchors, and electrical components, shall be maintained in good physical condition, including the replacement of defective parts. Exposed surfaces shall be kept clean, in good repair and painted where paint is required. The planning director may order the repair or removal of any sign determined to be unsafe, defective, damaged or substantially deteriorated. 
J.  Landscaping of Freestanding Signs. All freestanding signs shall include, as part of their design, landscaping and/or landscaping about their base so as to prevent vehicles from hitting the sign, to improve the overall appearance of the installation, and to screen light fixtures and other appurtenances. Minimum landscape area at the base of freestanding signs shall be a minimum of twice the aggregate area of the freestanding sign or combination of signs. The applicant shall maintain all landscape areas in a healthy and viable condition. 
K.  Inspection. All sign owners and users shall permit the periodic inspection of their signs by the city upon ten days notice. 
L.  Specific Plan Standards to Apply. Signs to be located within the boundaries of a specific plan or other special design approval area shall comply with the criteria established by such plan or area. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.060 - Permanent signs in residential districts. 
    Signs identified in Table 17-2 are permitted in residential districts subject to approval of a sign permit per Section 17.26.110. 
Table 17-2 
Sign Type and Placement Maximum Number Maximum Area (sq. ft.) Maximum Height Illumination Additional Requirements 1. Building-mounted or freestanding project/neighborhood/apartment complex ID sign 2 per entry street (1 if double faced) 24 6 ft., or top of wall if building-mounted Indirect only 1 single faced sign permitted on each side of street (1 sign only if double faced) 2. Building-mounted or freestanding directory sign for multi-tenant buildings or complex(es) 1 per entrance to complex 9 6 ft. Indirect only Signs are to be designed and oriented to direct pedestrian traffic 3. Freestanding directory sign for multi-tenant buildings or complex(es) (required) 1 at each entrance to complex 12 6 ft. Indirect only Signs are to be designed and oriented to direct vehicular and emergency response traffic 4. Building-mounted or freestanding apartment rental (permanent) 1 of either per street frontage 6 6 ft. Indirect only Permanent sign giving rental information for buildings or complexes containing 15 or more units 5. Other uses 1 freestanding 2 building-mounted 24 aggregate 6 ft. top of wall Indirect only 1 sign may be changeable copy Signs in nonresidential districts requiring a permit See Section 17.26.070 Signs exempt from sign permit approval See Section 17.26.040 Temporary and semipermanent signs See Sections 17.26.080 and 17.26.090  
    Notes: 
1.  Freestanding signs shall not be located within five feet of a street right-of-way nor within a corner cutoff area identified in Section 17.12.050. 
2.  "ID" means identification sign. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.070 - Permanent signs in nonresidential districts. 
    Signs identified in Table 17-3 are permitted in nonresidential districts subject to approval of a sign permit per Section 17.26.110. 
Table 17-3 
Sign Type and Placement Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height Illumination Additional 
Requirements 1. Freestanding center or complex ID sign for multi-tenant building or multi-building shopping center or other commercial or office complex 1 per street frontage .25 sq. ft. per linear ft. of street frontage up to a maximum of 96 sq. ft. per sign and 200 sq. ft. aggregate for all signs 28 ft. if building has less than 200' of street frontage. Direct or indirect for all signs Aggregate sign area may not be combined among street frontages. Letter height shall be a minimum 10? high 50 ft. if building has more than 200' of street frontage. 2. Building-mounted or permanent window ID signs for individual commercial or office tenants 1 flush-mounted plus 1 under canopy per tenant frontage along a street or along a common-use parking lot with no direct street frontage Flush-mounted: 1 sq. ft. per linear ft. of lease frontage up to a maximum of 50 sq. ft. aggregate 8 ft. Direct or indirect for all signs ID signs not permitted for tenants above the ground floor in buildings with only interior access above ground floor Under-canopy: 3 sq. ft. 3. Freestanding ID sign for individual commercial or office building 1 96 sq. ft. 28 ft. Direct or indirect for all signs *Allowed only if building has minimum 200 linear feet of street frontage 200 sq. ft. 50 ft.* 4. Building-mounted or freestanding directory sign for multi-tenant buildings or complex(es) 1 per entrance to building complex 18 sq. ft. Top of wall or 6 ft. if freestanding Direct or indirect Signs are to be designated and oriented to direct pedestrian traffic 5. Building-mounted ID sign for individual commercial or office building 2 (but not more than 1 per each side of building) 1 sq. ft. per linear ft. of building frontage along a street up to maximum of 50 sq. ft. aggregate Top of wall Direct or indirect for all signs 6. Building-mounted or freestanding directory sign for multi-tenant buildings or complex(es) 1 per entrance to building complex 18 sq. ft. Top of wall or 6 ft. if freestanding Direct or indirect Signs are to be designated and oriented to direct pedestrian traffic 7. Theaters, cinemas and cabarets 1 freestanding and 1 building-mounted sign of which 1 sign may be combination ID and attraction board Aggregate allowed: 20 sq. ft. plus 10 sq. ft. per screen/stage over 1, up to maximum of 40 sq. ft. Top of wall or 28 ft. if freestanding Direct or indirect for all signs 1 building-mounted coming-attraction poster per screen or stage 6 sq. ft. Top of wall Indirect only 8. Church and institutional uses 1 freestanding 2 building-mounted 24 sq. ft. 24 sq. ft. aggregate 6 ft. Top of wall Direct or indirect for all signs 1 of the allowed signs may include an attraction board 9. Gas/service stations 1 freestanding 200 sq. ft. 50' Direct or indirect for all signs See Section 17.50.080 for all other gas/service station signs Signs in residential districts requiring a permit See Section 17.26.060 Sign exempt from sign permit approval See Section 17.26.040 Temporary and semipermanent signs See Sections 17.26.080 and 17.26.090  
    Notes: 
1.  Freestanding signs shall not be located within five feet of a street right-of-way nor within a corner cutoff area identified in Section 17.12.050. 
2.  "ID" means identification sign. 
3.  Signs required by law shall be allowed at the minimum size specified by such law. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.080 - Permitted temporary signs. 
A.  Definition. "Temporary sign" means any stationary, non-illuminated sign which may require a sign permit and which is intended to be posted for a maximum of sixty days. Temporary signs include without limitation: political campaign signs, garage sale signs and seasonal sales signs. 
B.  Maximum Time Periods. No temporary sign shall be posted for more than sixty consecutive days nor shall such temporary sign or sign displaying similar messages regarding the same event, if any, which is the subject of such temporary sign be re-posted upon the same site, or any site which is visible from the original site, within ninety days of the removal of the original temporary sign. In addition, all temporary signs shall be removed within seven days after the occurrence of the event, if any, which is the subject of the temporary sign. (For example, a temporary sign advertising a garage sale on a particular date, or a temporary sign promoting a candidate in a particular election). 
C.  Maximum Sign Area. Temporary sign and/or signs placed on private residential property with a total square footage of eight square feet of total sign area or less per lot or parcel are allowed. Temporary signs placed on private commercial and industrial property may not exceed thirty-two square feet in area with no dimension exceeding eight feet. The aggregate area of all temporary signs maintained on any private property parcel of real property in one ownership may not exceed thirty-two square feet. Area shall be calculated on the basis of the entire sign area, as defined in Section 17.26.030. 
D.  Maximum Height. Freestanding temporary signs which are placed on public or private property shall not exceed six feet in height. Temporary signs which are posted, attached or affixed to private multiple-floor buildings shall not be placed higher than eight feet or the finish floor line of the second floor of such buildings, whichever is less, and temporary signs which are posted, attached or affixed to private single-floor buildings shall not be higher than the eaveline or top of wall of the building. All heights shall be measured to the highest point of the surface of the sign. 
E.  Maximum Number. In no case shall the total number of temporary signs for any permit exceed fifty, except temporary signs supporting political and/or election campaigns. 
F.  Placement Restrictions. Temporary signs shall not be posted on sidewalk surfaces, mailboxes, utility boxes, electric light or power or telephone wires, poles or appendages, hydrants, trees, shrubs, tree stakes or guards, public bridges, fences or walls, fire alarm or police telegraph systems, drinking fountains, life buoys, life preservers, lifesaving equipment, street signs or traffic signs or signals. Temporary signs shall be posted no closer than five feet from the edge of the paved area of any public road or street. Temporary signs shall be placed no less than two hundred feet apart from identical or substantially similar temporary signs and shall not be visible simultaneously with the boundaries of the city. Temporary signs shall not be posted in a manner which obstructs the visibility of traffic or street signs or signals or emergency equipment. 
G.  Sign Permit Required. Any person, business, campaign organization, or other entity who proposes to post more than five temporary signs on private property, or intends to exceed the allowed maximum square footage for any one parcel shall make application to the development services department for a sign permit. To insure sign removal upon expiration of the permitted posting time, a refundable deposit as established by city council resolution shall be paid in conjunction with the issuance of the sign permit. 
1.  Statement of Responsibility Required. Each applicant for a temporary sign permit shall submit to the development services department a statement of responsibility certifying a natural person who will be responsible for removing each temporary sign for which a permit is issued by the date removal is required, and who will reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in removing each such sign which violates the provisions of this section. 
2.  Standards for Approval. 
a.  Within ten business days of the development services department's receipt of a temporary sign permit application, the planning director shall approve or disapprove such application. If the director disapproves an application, the notice of disapproval shall specify the reasons for disapproval. The director shall approve or disapprove any permit application for temporary signs based on character, location and design, including design elements such as materials, letter style, colors, sign type or shape, and the provisions of this section. 
b.  The director's decision with respect to a permit application for a temporary sign may be appealed to the planning commission. 
H.  Maintenance and Removal of Temporary Signs. 
1.  Maintenance. All temporary signs shall be constantly maintained in a state of security, safety and good repair. 
2.  Removal from Private Property. If the city finds that a temporary sign located on private property is unsafe or insecure, is a menace to public safety or has been constructed, erected, relocated or altered in violation of this section, the city shall give written notice to the property owner, owner of the temporary sign, or the person who has claimed responsibility for the temporary sign pursuant to subsection F of this section, that the temporary sign is in violation of this section, shall specify the nature of the violation, and shall direct the owner of the temporary sign or responsible person to remove or alter such temporary sign. If the city cannot determine the owner of the sign or person responsible therefor, the city shall post such notice on or adjacent to each temporary sign which is in violation. If the owner of the temporary sign or the person responsible therefor fails to comply with the notice within five days after such notice is given, the temporary sign shall be deemed abandoned, and the city may cause such temporary sign to be removed and the cost thereof shall be payable by the owner or person responsible for the temporary sign to the city. 
I.  The placement of temporary signs for existing commercial businesses during the construction of any department of public works contract over forty-five days in length, where the ingress and egress points to a commercial establishment, have been interrupted, and further when the construction/modification of the public street involves a distance of more than three thousand feet in length, the above regulations pertaining to temporary signs and the associated processing fees, shall not be enforced for the duration of the department of public works street contract. However, the placement of temporary signs must not interfere with site visibility for vehicular movement. 
J.  A banner is allowed on each building street frontage within six months of the business opening with a sign permit. The signs shall consist of light-weight fabric or similar material attached to the building wall below the eaveline for a period not to exceed thirty days. The signs shall be non-illuminated and its size shall not exceed thirty-two square feet. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.090 - Permitted semipermanent signs. 
A.  Definition. "Semipermanent sign" means a non-illuminated sign which requires a sign, such as advertising the future construction of a facility, model home complex, commercial, or residential subdivision identification which is intended to be erected or posted for a minimum of sixty-one days and a maximum of one year. A permit for semipermanent signs advertising future facility construction shall not be approved until a development review application has been submitted. 
B.  Maximum Time Periods. No semipermanent sign shall be posted for more than one year. In addition, all semipermanent signs shall be removed within ten days after the occurrence of the event, if any, which is the subject of the semipermanent sign. (For example, a semipermanent sign advertising the future construction of a facility on the site shall be removed within ten days after the facility has received a certificate of occupancy, and a model home complex identification sign shall be removed within ten days after the model homes are completed and sold.) The date of posting and permit number shall be permanently and legibly marked on the lower right-hand corner of the face of the sign. 
C.  Maximum Sign Area. Semipermanent signs may not exceed thirty-two square feet in area with no dimension exceeding eight feet. The aggregate area of all semipermanent signs placed or maintained on any parcel of real property in one ownership shall not exceed sixty-four square feet. Area shall be calculated on the basis of the entire sign area, as defined in Section 17.26.050. 
D.  Maximum Height. Freestanding semipermanent signs shall not exceed eight feet in height. Semipermanent signs which are posted, attached or affixed to multiple-floor buildings shall not be placed higher than the finish floor line of the second floor of such buildings and such signs posted, attached or affixed to single-floor buildings shall not be higher than the eaveline or top of wall of the building. All heights shall be measured to the highest point of the surface of the sign. 
E.  Maximum Number. In no case shall the number of signs on any parcel exceed ten. 
F.  Placement Restrictions. Semipermanent signs may not be posted on public property, as defined in Section 17.26.030. Semipermanent signs may not be posted in a manner which obstructs the visibility of traffic or street signs or signals or emergency equipment. Temporary signs may not be posted on sites approved for semipermanent signs unless specifically authorized by the semipermanent sign permit. 
G.  Sign Permit Required. Any person, business, campaign organization or other entity who proposes to post or erect a semipermanent sign shall make application to the development services department for a semipermanent sign permit. 
1.  Statement of Responsibility Required. Each applicant for a semipermanent sign permit shall submit to the development services department a statement of responsibility certifying a natural person who will be responsible for removing each semipermanent sign for which a permit is issued by the date removal is required, and who will reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in removing each such sign which violates the provisions of this section. 
2.  Standards for Approval. 
a.  Within ten business days of the development services department's receipt of a semipermanent sign permit application, the director shall approve or disapprove such application. If the director disapproves an application, the notice of disapproval shall specify the reasons for disapproval. The director shall approve or disapprove any permit application for semipermanent signs based on character, location and design, including design elements such as materials, letter style, colors, sign type or shape and the provisions of this section. 
b.  In any event, no permit application shall be approved which proposes to place in excess of ten semipermanent signs on private property which will be visible simultaneously from a single location and orientation within the boundaries of the city. 
c.  The director's decision with respect to a permit application for a semipermanent sign may be appealed to the planning commission. 
H.  Time Extensions. The applicant may apply for a time extension of up to one year from the date of expiration. The planning director shall approve the application for an extension of time upon finding that the semipermanent sign is otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this section and that the time extension is necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the semipermanent sign has been posted. 
I.  Maintenance and Removal of Semipermanent Signs. 
1.  Maintenance. All semipermanent signs shall be constantly maintained in a state of security, safety and good repair. 
2.  Removal. If the city finds that any semipermanent sign is unsafe or insecure, is a menace to public safety or has been constructed, erected, relocated or altered in violation of this section, the city shall give written notice to the owner of the semipermanent sign, or the person who has claimed responsibility for the semipermanent sign pursuant to subsection F of this section, that the semipermanent sign is in violation of this section, shall specify the nature of the violation, and shall direct the owner of the semipermanent sign or responsible person to remove or alter such semipermanent sign. If the city cannot determine the owner of the sign or person responsible therefor, the city shall post such notice on or adjacent to each semipermanent sign which is in violation. If the owner of the semipermanent sign or the person responsible therefor fails to comply with the notice within five days after such notice is given the semipermanent sign shall be deemed abandoned, and the city may cause such semipermanent sign to be removed and the cost thereof shall be payable by the owner or person responsible for the semipermanent sign to the city. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.100 - Signs within the defined "downtown." 
A.  "Downtown" means that area on Hobsonway extending from the east side of Ash Avenue to the west side of Third Street, and the area between the alley west of Main Street to the alley east of First Street extending north from Hobsonway to Murphy Street and south from Hobsonway to Rice Street. 
B.  Signs within the downtown shall meet the requirements set forth in this section and shall be guided by the provisions set forth within the Downtown Design Guidelines adopted by the city of Blythe and incorporated in this section by this reference. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.110 - Sign permit review. 
A.  Sign Permit Required. Sign permit approval is required prior to obtaining a building permit for the placing, erecting, moving, reconstructing, altering or displaying any sign on private property within the city, unless the review procedure is exempt under Section 17.26.040 of this chapter or other provisions of this chapter. Signs requiring approval shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances. Signs legally existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not require approval until such time as the sign is moved, structurally altered, changed or relocated, at which time, the review and approval provisions of this chapter shall apply before a sign permit and/or building permit is issued. 
B.  Submission Materials. The following shall be submitted by the applicant to the development services department at the time of permit application unless otherwise modified by the planning director: 
1.  Completed sign application obtained from the city; 
2.  Appropriate sign plans with number of copies and exhibits as required in the application; 
3.  Appropriate fees as established by city council resolution; 
4.  Letter of consent or authorization from the property owner, or lessor, or authorized agent of the building or premises upon which the sign is to be erected; 
5.  Sign plans with the following information: 
a.  Sign elevation drawing indicating overall and letter/figure/design dimensions, colors, materials, proposed copy and illumination method, 
b.  Site plan indicating the location of all main and accessory signs existing or proposed for the site with dimensions, color, material, copy and method of illumination indicated for each, 
c.  Building elevations with signs depicted (for building-mounted signs). 
C.  Review Procedures-Standard Sign Application. 
1.  The standard sign application is used by the development services department to process the following sign applications using the standards and provisions contained in this chapter: 
a.  Two or less permanent signs, 
b.  Signs in conformance with a previously approved planned sign program pursuant to subsection D of this section. 
2.  The planning director or other authorized staff member shall review standard sign applications and shall make a determination to either approve, approve with modification or deny the application. The review shall consider the size, design, colors, character and location of the proposed signs. 
3.  A standard sign application shall only be approved after a finding that the proposed sign is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and the regulations herein. 
D.  Review Procedures-Planned Sign Programs. 
1.  Planned Sign Problems. Planned sign program review per the provisions of this subsection is required for submissions which: 
a.  Include three or more permanent signs, 
b.  Are in conjunction with review of a site development permit by the planning commission, or 
c.  Include a request for a sign adjustment to a sign previously approved under a planned sign program. 
2.  The planning commission shall make a determination to either approve, approve with modifications, or deny planned sign program applications in conjunction with its review of the associated development project. 
3.  The planning commission, upon completion of its review, may attach appropriate conditions to any sign program approval. In order to approve a planned sign program, the commission must find that: 
a.  The sign program is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter, 
b.  The sign program is in harmony with and visually related to: 
i.  All signs within the planned sign program, via the incorporation of several common design elements such as materials, letter style, colors, illumination, sign type or sign shape. 
ii.  The Buildings They Identify. This may be accomplished by utilizing materials, colors, or design motif included in the building being identified. 
iii.  Surrounding Development. Implementation of the planned sign program will not adversely affect surrounding land uses or obscure adjacent conforming signs. 
4.  Modification of signs within a previously approved sign program shall be reviewed by the planning director and approved by the planning commission under the same procedures as review of a new planned sign program. 
E.  Sign Adjustments. Adjustments to planned sign programs to permit additional sign area, additional numbers of signs, an alternative sign location, an alternative type of signage, new illumination or additional height may be granted by the planning commission. Applications for sign adjustments shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the planning director. The planning commission shall make one or more of the following findings in conjunction with approval of a sign adjustment: 
1.  Additional Area. 
a.  To overcome a disadvantage as a result of an exceptional setback between the street and the sign or orientation of the sign location, 
b.  To achieve an effect which is essentially architectural, sculptural or graphic art, 
c.  To permit more sign area in a single sign than is allowed, but less than the total sign area allowed on the site, where a more orderly and concise pattern of signing will result, 
d.  To allow a sign to be in proper scale with its building or use, 
e.  To allow a sign compatible with other conforming signs in the vicinity, 
f.  To establish the allowable amount and location of signing when no street frontage exists or when, due to an unusual lot shape (e.g., flag lot), the street frontage is excessively narrow in proportion to the average width of the lot. 
2.  Additional Number. To compensate for inadequate visibility, or to facilitate good design balance. 
3.  Alternative Locations. 
a.  To transfer area from one wall to another wall or to a freestanding sign upon the finding that such alternative location is necessary to overcome a disadvantage caused by an unfavorable orientation of the front wall to the street or parking lot or an exceptional setback, 
b.  To permit the placement of a sign on an access easement to a lot not having street frontage, at a point where viewable from the adjoining public street. In addition to any other requirements, the applicant shall submit evidence of the legal right to establish and maintain a sign within the access easement, 
c.  Additionally, alternative on-site locations may be granted in order to further the intent and purposes of this chapter or where normal placement would conflict with the architectural design of a structure. 
4.  Alternative Type of Sign. To facilitate compatibility with the architecture of structure(s) on the site and improve the overall appearance on the site. 
5.  Additional Height. To permit additional height to overcome a visibility disadvantage. 
F.  Disposition of Plans. 
1.  When revisions to sign plans are required as a condition of approval, the applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the revised plans to the development services department to be stamped "Approved." The department will retain copies and a set will be returned to the applicant. 
2.  After approval is granted, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit all required applications, plans, bonds, and fees to the building department for issuance of the building permit. 
G.  Sign Permit Expiration and Time Extensions. 
1.  Approval of a standard application or planned program application shall expire one year from its effective date unless the sign has been erected or a different expiration date is stipulated at the time of approval. Prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant may apply to the director for an extension of up to one year from the date of expiration. The director may make minor modifications or may deny further extensions of the approved sign or signs at the time of extension if the director finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances. 
2.  The expiration date of the sign approval(s) shall automatically be extended to concur with the expiration date of building permits or other permits relating to the installation of the sign. 
3.  A sign approval shall expire and become void if the circumstances or facts upon which the approval was granted changes through some subsequent action by the owner or lessees such that the sign would not be permitted per this chapter under the new circumstances. 
H.  Appeals. Any decision of the planning director made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the planning commission and decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. The appeal must be made within ten calendar days of the decision date, in accordance with Section 17.26.140. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.120 - Prohibited signs. 
    The signs and displays listed in this section are prohibited. Such signs are subject to removal by the city at the owner's or user's expense. Prohibited signs include the following: 
A.  Any sign not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  Abandoned signs; 
C.  Rotating, revolving or otherwise moving signs within the defined downtown; 
D.  Trailer signs and other signs with directional arrows affixed to vehicles which are used exclusively or primarily for advertising, unless specifically permitted; 
E.  Flags (other than organizational, state or national), pennants, streamers, spinners, festoons, windsocks, valances or similar displays, unless specifically permitted in this chapter; 
F.  Animated or flashing signs within twenty-five feet of any public right-of-way; 
G.  Portable signs, unless specifically permitted in this chapter; 
H.  Off-premises signs, unless specifically permitted in this chapter; 
I.  Billboards or outdoor advertising signs; 
J.  Signs which identify or advertise activities which are illegal under federal, state or local laws in effect at the location of such signs or activities; 
K.  Building-mounted signs placed on or above the roof or above the eaveline of any structure; 
L.  Signs which purport to be, are an imitation of, or resemble an official traffic sign or signal; 
M.  Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed as a traffic-control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency vehicle, or which obstruct the visibility of any traffic or street sign or signal device; 
N.  Signs that create a potential safety hazard by obstructing clear view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
O.  Signs located upon or projecting over public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way (unless specific approval has been granted and an encroachment permit has been obtained); 
P.  Signs attached to utility poles or stop signs or other municipal sign structure; 
Q.  Balloon signs, inflatable animal or other figures, or other inflatable displays, whether tethered or not, except as otherwise permitted by a temporary use permit; 
R.  Signs located closer to overhead utility lines than the minimum distance prescribed by California law, or by the rules duly promulgated by agencies of the state or by the applicable public utility; 
S.  "For sale" signs affixed to vehicles parked on private property for display purposes, excluding those parked in a legal new or used automobile dealership sales lot, except where the vehicle is parked on the owners own private residential property; 
T.  Neon signs, except those specifically approved as an activity's major identification sign; 
U.  Signs drawn or painted onto or otherwise affixed to trees or rocks unless specifically permitted in this chapter; 
V.  Advertising statuary; 
W.  Any temporary sign or banner, unless specifically permitted in this chapter and a temporary use permit obtained; 
X.  Translucent or transparent signs on internally illuminated awnings so that they allow light to shine through the letters of the copy. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.130 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Every legal sign in existence on the effective date of this code which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter but which was in conformance with city sign regulations in effect prior to said effective date, shall be deemed a nonconforming sign and may be continued and maintained provided: 
1.  The sign is properly maintained and does not in any way endanger the public; and 
2.  The sign was covered by a valid permit or variance or complied with all applicable laws on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter; or 
3.  If the existing businesses using the pole sign closes after adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the new occupant or business will be required to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  No nonconforming sign shall be changed to another nonconforming sign, changed in any manner that increases the sign's noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, nor expanded or structurally altered so as to extend its useful life. This restriction does not preclude change of sign copy or normal maintenance. 
C.  Any nonconforming sign which is damaged or destroyed beyond fifty percent of its value shall be removed or brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The determination whether a sign is damaged or destroyed beyond such fifty percent of value shall rest with the planning director and shall be based upon the actual cost of replacing said sign. 
D.  The burden of establishing a sign as legally nonconforming under this section rests upon the person or persons, firm or corporation claiming legal status for a sign. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
17.26.140 - Enforcement, sign removal and abatement. 
A.  Enforcement Responsibility. It shall be the duty of the director or the director's authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Illegal and Abandoned Signs. 
1.  Illegal Signs. Any sign which does not have a required permit or which otherwise violates applicable provisions of this chapter shall be deemed illegal. If the director determines a sign to be illegal, the director may order the property owner and/or sign owner to remove the sign or may require other actions to ensure compliance with this chapter. Further, in order to discourage the erection of signs without a permit, the director may require that such illegally erected signs be removed prior to review. If the director determines that such removal is not feasible, such illegal signs shall be subject to a tripled sign permit application fee in conjunction with sign review. 
2.  Abandoned Signs. Any sign located on property which becomes vacant or unoccupied or which pertains to any occupant or business unrelated to the premises, present occupant or business, or which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies shall be deemed abandoned. Such signs shall be removed within ninety days after the associated enterprise or occupant has vacated the premises or within ninety days after the time, event or purpose which no longer applies has ended. Any such sign not removed within the required period shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to removal per subsection E of this section. 
C.  Unsafe Signs. Any sign deemed by the city to be a danger to the public under any applicable ordinance or other statute shall be repaired or altered to as to be deemed safe by the city or shall be removed pursuant to subsection E of this section. 
D.  Expired Temporary and Semipermanent Signs. A temporary or semipermanent sign which remains posted beyond the time limits set out therefor in Sections 17.26.080(H) and 17.26.090(I) respectively shall be removed. 
E.  Abatement and Removal of Signs. 
1.  Abatement Procedures. Any illegal or abandoned sign may be deemed to be a public nuisance that poses an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of the community by creating an obstruction to circulation, including, but not limited to, vehicular and pedestrian. The owner of the sign shall be responsible and liable for the removal and disposition of the sign. 
a.  Abatement. Upon discovering the existence of an illegal sign, the director shall have the authority to order the immediate abatement and removal thereof. The director shall notify the owner thereof, or the owner's representative, in person or by mailing an abatement notice to the owner's last known address. Such notice shall state the time limit, if any, granted for removal of the sign and the statement that the director shall remove the sign after the stated time, the procedure for retrieving a removed sign, and a statement that the owner may request a hearing to appeal the abatement and removal by submitting a written request. The amount of time stated for removal of a sign may be reduced or eliminated if the director determines that the illegal sign constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of the community or is a safety hazard. 
b.  Hearings. 
i.  Any sign removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within thirty days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable administrative fees. Such administrative fees shall be waived if, after a hearing to appeal has been requested, a determination is made at such hearing that the fees shall be waived. The administrative fees for the removal and storage of the sign shall be established or modified by resolution of the city council and shall include the actual cost of removal and storage of any sign plus the proportional share of administrative costs in connection therewith. 
ii.  Any hearing to appeal an abatement order which is requested shall be conducted within five working days of the receipt of the request by the city manager, who should be designated as the hearing officer. The failure of either the owner or his agent to request a hearing within ten days of receipt of the above referenced abatement notice shall waive the right to a hearing. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether good cause was shown for the abatement and removal of the sign. The decision of the hearing officer shall be deemed the final administrative determination. If good cause is shown for the abatement and removal of the sign, the owner or his agent shall have fifteen days from the date of the hearing to retrieve his sign upon payment of the administrative fee. If good cause is not shown for the abatement and removal of the sign, the administrative fee shall be waived and the owner of this agent shall have fifteen days to retrieve his sign. 
c.  Disposition. Any sign not retrieved by its owner within thirty days after delivering or mailing the abatement notice when such owner has not requested a hearing to appeal, or within thirty days of storage of the sign by the city in all other cases, shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned and may be disposed of by the city. 
F.  No City Liability. Neither the city nor any of its agents shall be liable for any damage to a sign which is removed under this section. 
G.  Legal Action. In response to any violation of the provisions of this chapter, the city may elect to file a criminal complaint against the violator, issue a citation to the violator for an "infraction" pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900, or institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 792 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2004) 
Chapter 17.27 - ARTS IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM 
Sections: 

17.27.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish an arts in public places program. 
(Ord. 800 § 1 (part), 2006) 
17.27.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Newly constructed and reconstructed commercial and industrial buildings and structures and additions to commercial and industrial buildings and structures shall include public arts amenities. 
B.  New single- and multi-family developments of five units or more shall include public arts amenities. 
(Ord. 800 § 1 (part), 2006) 
17.27.030 - Fee in-lieu. 
A.  Payment may be made to the city of a fee in-lieu of the inclusion of public arts amenities. 
B.  Said fee shall be one percent of commercial and industrial project costs as stated on building permits. Project costs shall not include improvements in/to the public right-of-way. 
C.  Said fee shall be one-half of one percent of project costs as stated on building permit. Said fee shall apply to single- and multi-family developments of five units or more. Project costs shall not include improvements in/to the public right-of-way. 
D.  Proceeds of such fee shall be expended by the city only for the acquisition, installation, improvement, maintenance, and insurance of public arts amenities located in the city of Blythe. 
(Ord. 800 § 1 (part), 2006) 
17.27.040 - Review of art in public places. 
    The Blythe city council shall review and at its discretion approve all art proposed for construction and/or installation in public places. 
(Ord. 800 § 1 (part), 2006) 
Chapter 17.28 - HAZARDS-NOISE-LIGHT AND GLARE-AIR POLLUTION 
Sections: 

17.28.010 - Uses with detrimental emissions. 
    No use shall be established which causes or emits any dust, gas, smoke, fumes, odors, noise or vibrations which are or may be detrimental to other properties in the neighborhood or to the occupants thereof. 
(Ord. 595 § 5.00, 1982) 
17.28.020 - Flammable and explosive materials. 
    All activities involving, and all storage of, flammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against hazards of fire and explosion by adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices standard in industry. 
(Ord. 595 § 5.01, 1982) 
17.28.030 - Lighting of private property. 
    Lighting, where provided to illuminate private property, shall be so arranged as to reflect away from adjoining property or any public way and to be arranged so as not to cause a nuisance either to highway traffic or to the living environment. 
(Ord. 595 § 5.02, 1982) 
17.28.040 - Airborne emissions. 
    No airborne emission shall be permitted which causes any damage to health, animals, vegetation or other forms of property, or which causes soiling at or beyond the property line of the property where the emission is produced. 
(Ord. 595 § 5.03, 1982) 
17.28.050 - Vacant buildings. 
    Vacant buildings are determined to be a potential hazard to the safety and welfare of the citizens. All vacant buildings shall be secured as follows: 
A.  Trash and Debris Removal. All buildings shall be cleared of trash and debris that would create a fire hazard or a place for vermin. 
B.  Security. It is the owner's responsibility to see that the building is secured at all times. 
1.  Glass windows and doors shall be kept in good repair. Any broken glass shall be replaced with glass. 
2.  If it is decided to secure the building by boarding it up, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The covering shall be one-half inch CCX plywood or equivalent; 
b.  The covering shall be inset in window and door opening so as to present a smooth surface with the exterior of the building; 
c.  The covering shall be secured with screws; 
d.  The covering shall be painted a color to match the rest of the building. 
(Ord. 695 § 4, 1993) 
Chapter 17.29 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 

17.29.010 - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods. 
A.  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Blythe does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
B.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of the city of Blythe are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
7.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
D.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 827 § 1 (part), 2008) 
17.29.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    A Zone. See "Special flood hazard area." 
    "Accessory structure" means a structure that is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars in value. 
    "Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
    "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by floodflows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flashflooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
    "Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of Special Flood Hazard. See "Special flood hazard area." 
    "Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one hundred year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
    "Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade-i.e., below ground level-on all sides. 
    Building. See "Structure." 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    "Flood, flooding or floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
    "Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
    "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Floodplain administrator" means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans. 
    "Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    "Floodplain or flood prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source-see "Flooding." 
    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93 and TB 7-93. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway." 
    "Floodway fringe" means that area of the floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory Floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
    "Fraud and victimization" as related to Section 17.29.060 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city of Blythe will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
    "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    "Governing body" means the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
    "Hardship" as related to Section 17.29.060 of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Blythe city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood openings standard in Section 17.29.050(A)(3)(c); 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 17.29.050(A)(1); 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 17.29.050(A)(2); and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 17.29.050(B). 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Market value" is defined in the city of Blythe substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 17.29.040(B)(2)(a). 
    "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    "New construction" for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    "Obstruction" means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    One Hundred Year Flood or 100 Year Flood. See "Base flood." 
    "Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
    "Public safety and nuisance" as related to Section 17.29.060 of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Sheet Flow Area. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
    "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1, A30, AE, A99 or AH. 
    "Start of construction" means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 827 § 1 (part), 2008) 
17.29.030 - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Blythe. 
B.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Riverside County, California and Incorporated Areas" dated August 28, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM's) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFM's), dated August 28, 2008, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the Blythe city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRM'S and FBFM's are on file at the city of Blythe planning department, 235 North Broadway, Blythe. 
C.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the Blythe city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Blythe city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
G.  Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 827 § 1 (part), 2008) 
17.29.040 - Administration. 
A.  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The planning director is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
B.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine: 
a.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures, 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained, 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding, 
d.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Blythe, and 
e.  All letters of map revision (LOMR's) for flood-control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood-control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition; 
2.  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
a.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "Market Value." 
b.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
3.  Review and Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17.29.030(B), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 17.29.050. 
    Note: a base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas-A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995. 
4.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
a.  Alteration or Relocation of a Watercourse. 
i.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
ii.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
iii.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
b.  Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations. 
i.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
ii.  All LOMR's for flood-control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood-control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
    Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
c.  Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
5.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
a.  Certification required by Section 17.29.050(A)(3)(a) and Section 17.29.050(D) (lowest floor elevations); 
b.  Certification required by Section 17.29.050(A)(3)(b) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
c.  Certification required by Section 17.29.050(A)(3)(c) (wet floodproofing standard); 
d.  Certification of elevation required by Section 17.29.050(C)(l)(c) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
e.  Certification required by Section 17.29.050(F)(2) (floodway encroachments); and 
f.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
6.  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 17.29.040(D). 
7.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 17.29.030(C). 
8.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
9.  Planning. Assure community's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
C.  Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17.29.030(B). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Blythe. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
1.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer and other utilities; 
c.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill and drainage facilities; 
d.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
e.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 17.29.030(B) or 17.29.040(B)(3); 
f.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
g.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 17.29.050(A)(3)(b) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
2.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 17.29.050(A)(3)(b). 
3.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 17.29.050(A)(3)(c) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
5.  All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (B)(5) of this section. 
D.  Appeals. The city council of the city of Blythe shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 827 § 1 (part), 2008) 
17.29.050 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
1.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
a.  With flood-resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation, 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage, 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and airconditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding, and 
d.  Within Zone AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; 
3.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
a.  Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
i.  In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; 
ii.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified; 
iii.  In an A zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 17.29.040(B)(3). 
    Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section or: 
i.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection (A)(3)(a), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
ii.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
iii.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections (A)(3)(b)(i) and (ii) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
c.  Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  For Non-Engineered Openings. 
(A)  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(B)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
(C)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
(D)  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or 
ii.  Be Certified by a Registered Civil Engineer or Architect. 
d.  Manufactured Homes. 
i.  See subsection D of this section. 
e.  Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures. 
i.  Attached Garages. 
(A)  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See subsection (A)(3)(c). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. See subsection (A)(2). 
(B)  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
ii.  Detached Garages and Accessory Structures. 
(A)  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 17.29.020, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
(2)  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
(3)  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
(4)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
(5)  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in subsection F of this section; and 
(6)  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with subsection (A)(3)(c) of this section. 
(B)  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in subsection A of this section. 
B.  Standards for Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
b.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
2.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
C.  Standards for Subdivisions and Other Proposed Development. 
1.  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
a.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE); 
b.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans; 
c.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator: 
i.  Lowest floor elevation, 
ii.  Pad elevation, 
iii.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
2.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
3.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
4.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
i.  Within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
2.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (D)(1) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
a.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
b.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
    Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
E.  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH and AE will either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 17.29.040(C) of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (D)(1). 
F.  Floodways. Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Blythe. 
2.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city of Blythe shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
3.  If subsections (F)(1) and (2) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 827 § 1 (part), 2008) 
17.29.060 - Variance procedure. 
A.  Nature of Variances. The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
    The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
    It is the duty of the Blythe city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
B.  Conditions for Variances. 
1.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 17.29.040 and 17.29.050 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
2.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 17.29.020 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
3.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the Blythe city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the Blythe city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
5.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Riverside recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
6.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
C.  Appeal Board. 
1.  In passing upon requests for variances, the Blythe city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system and streets and bridges. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
4.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (B)(1) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the Blythe city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 827 § 1 (part), 2008) 
DIVISION IV. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
Chapter 17.30 - HOME-BASED BUSINESSES* 
Sections: 

17.30.010 - Criteria of valid home-based businesses. 
    The following criteria shall be used to determine a valid home-based business: 
A.  No employees other than member(s) of the resident family; 
B.  No use of material or equipment not recognized as being part of the normal practices in the zone of which the use is a part; 
C.  No significant increase in pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated beyond that normal to the zone in which it is located; 
D.  No use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises that exceed the weight and/or vehicle dimension restrictions for residential zones; 
E.  No unenclosed outside storage of materials and/or supplies; 
F.  No signs other than those permitted in the zone of which it is a part, as provided for in Chapter 17.26; 
G.  Use of not more than one room in a dwelling or in an accessory structure for the home-based business; 
H.  No alteration of the appearance of the structure or the conduct of the occupation within the structure, such that the structure may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use, either by color, materials or construction, lighting, signs, sounds or voices, vibrations, etc.; 
I.  No use of utilities of community facilities beyond that normal to use of the property for residential purposes; 
J.  Conformance with the performance standards of Chapter 17.28. 
(Ord. 790 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.30.020 - Home-based business permit. 
    Prior to commencing any home-based business meeting the criteria set forth in this chapter, a business license with home-based business approval from the planning department must be obtained. The business license, with home-based business approval, shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of the operator, the nature of the operation and by way of the applicant's signature, an acknowledgment of the criteria for a home-based business. 
(Ord. 790 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.30.030 - Uses permitted as home-based businesses. 
    The following are examples of uses permitted, but not limited to, as home-based businesses: 
A.  Professional offices; 
B.  Offices for personal services, such as janitorial services, gardening services, office services, etc.; 
C.  Dressmaking, millinery and other home sewing work; 
D.  Handicrafts such as weaving, leather work and other arts and crafts; 
E.  Instructional classes, not exceeding two students at one time; 
F.  Mail order or direct sales, provided no merchandise is sold on the premises; 
G.  Single chair beauty/barber salon; 
H.  Repair of electronic equipment and small business machines; 
I.  Locksmithing. 
(Ord. 790 § 1 (part), 2004) 
17.30.040 - Uses prohibited as home-based businesses. 
    The following uses are prohibited as home-based businesses: 
A.  The repair, reconditioning, servicing or manufacturing of any internal combustion or diesel engine or of any motor vehicle, including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles or boats; 
B.  Major appliance repair; 
C.  Uses which entail the harboring, training, raising, or grooming of dogs, cats or other animals; 
D.  Uses in violation of public health and/or environmental health statutes or requirements; 
E.  Sexually oriented businesses; 
F.  Spiritual advisory services. 
(Ord. 790 § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 17.32 - CONDOMINIUMS AND COMMUNITY APARTMENTS 
Sections: 

17.32.010 - Defined. 
A.  "Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. Such estate may, with respect to the duration of an enjoinment, be either: 
1.  An estate of inheritance or perpetual estate; 
2.  An estate for life; or 
3.  An estate for years. 
B.  "Condominiums" includes "community apartments." 
(Ord. 595 § 6.01(A), 1982) 
17.32.020 - Compliance and conditional use permit required. 
    Condominiums and community apartments shall meet the requirements of this chapter and the obtaining of a conditional use permit in accordance with procedures set forth in Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.01(B), 1982) 
17.32.030 - Conditions, covenants and restrictions. 
    Copies of conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) that will apply to the proposed development shall be submitted as part of the conditional use permit application and shall include the following provisions: 
A.  Insure payment of any invoice by the city for water or sewer service charges, garbage, trash or rubbish charges in such manner that either the board of governors, the condominium owners or the management-agent guarantees payment to the city; 
B.  Guarantee access and entry to the development, all buildings and structures for any authorized fire inspector, building official or any other official charged with carrying out the laws of the city, state or federal government; 
C.  Insure that each residential unit in the development shall be used as a residence for a single family and for no other purpose; 
D.  Insure that no sign of any kind may be displayed advertising any service, business or other commercial project or venture, in any residential condominium or community apartment; 
E.  That the names of the officers and members of the board of governors shall be filed annually with the city clerk during the month of July; 
F.  A request that traffic regulations be enforced by the city on the private streets (if any) located therein. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.01(C), 1982) 
17.32.040 - Off-street parking. 
    The off-street parking requirements for residential condominiums and community apartments shall be the same as required for any residential project in accordance with the zone in which it is located. (See Chapter 17.16.) 
(Ord. 595 § 6.01(D), 1982) 
17.32.050 - Tract map-Site and floor plans. 
    A tentative tract map shall be filed as required by state law and the Blythe Subdivision Ordinance, as amended. In addition, a site and building floor plan drawn to scale shall be submitted showing: location of buildings; floor plan of each unit within the buildings; square footage of each unit; location of recreation space, pools and rooms; trash areas; any other amenities within the project; driveways and parking stalls; open space including patios and balconies; and any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the planning director. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.01(E), 1982) 
17.32.060 - Interior private streets. 
    Interior private streets may be permitted within any condominium or community apartment development, but shall have a minimum width of pavement between standard concrete curbs as follows: 
A.  Forty feet where parking is permitted on both sides; 
B.  Twenty-eight feet where parking is permitted on one side only; 
C.  Twenty feet where parking is prohibited on both sides; 
D.  Where a private drive serves only garages, and the driveway is posted to prohibit all other parking, the drive may be constructed to the standard twenty-foot alley specification. All private streets shall be irrevocably offered for dedication and may be refused or withheld by the city; 
E.  As required by Title 16 of this code for commercial or industrial condominiums when greater than specified in subsections A through D of this section. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.01(F), 1982) 
Chapter 17.34 - NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES 
Sections: 

17.34.010 - Intent. 
    Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted there exist lots, structures, including buildings or parts of buildings, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which existed before the ordinance codified in this title was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms or this title. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue insofar as they are otherwise lawful, until they are removed or otherwise set out in this chapter. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited in the same district. 
(Ord. 638 § 10 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 6.02(A), 1982) 
17.34.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Nonconforming lot" means a legal lot as defined in Chapter 17.04 which does not conform to the regulations contained in this title. 
B.  "Nonconforming structure or building" means a building or portion thereof or a structure existing at the time the ordinance codified in this title was adopted and which was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use which does not conform to uses permitted in the zone in which it is located or which does not comply with development standards applicable in the zone in which it is located, but is otherwise lawful. 
C.  "Nonconforming use" means a use of a structure, building or land existing on October 12, 1982 which does not conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is located, but which is otherwise lawful. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.02(B), 1982) 
17.34.030 - Nonconforming use of land. 
    Where lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this title, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding five thousand dollars, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
A.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on October 12, 1982. 
B.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title. 
C.  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified for the zone in which such land is located. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.02(C), 1982) 
17.34.040 - Nonconforming use of structures and premises. 
    If a lawful use involving individual structures including buildings or parts of buildings with a replacement cost of five thousand dollars or more, or of structures and premises in combination, exists that would not be allowed in the zone under the terms of this title, the use may be continued so long as it is otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No existing structure or building devoted to a use not permitted in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
B.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use on October 12, 1982, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
C.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
D.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for one year, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. 625 § 1, 1986; Ord. 601 § 1, 1984; Ord. 595 § 6.02(D), 1982) 
17.34.041 - Reconstruction of damaged buildings. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding or continued use of any nonconforming building or structure, damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other calamity or act of God, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter wherein the expense of such reconstruction does not exceed the fair market value of the structure at the time such damage occurred, provided, however said construction must be commenced (commencement of construction being defined as issuance of a building permit within two years thereafter and completed within one year after issuance of said building permit. 
(Ord. 625 § 2, 1986) 
17.34.050 - Repairs and maintenance. 
A.  On any nonconforming structure, building or portion of a structure or building containing a nonconforming use, work may be done to carry out ordinary repairs, or repair or replacement of walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to the extent that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
B.  If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official, when such order is made, a conditional use permit may subsequently be granted to permit a use to continue which would otherwise become unlawful under other provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 638 § 10 (part), 1988: Ord. 595 § 6.02(E), 9182) 
17.34.055 - Nonconforming areas-Landscaping, garbage screening and street improvements. 
    Where uses exist where the requirements for landscaping and concrete pads for trash sites in commercial and industrial zones, screening and street improvements in residential zones, parking in all zones, and other such requirements, at the time of the enactment of this section, those uses may continue without adherence to the requirements until such time as the use is intensified or when the cost of repairs or alterations equals or exceeds fifty percent of the assessed valuation of the structure (as set forth in the latest county assessment roll). Permits for partial work shall not negate this provision. All costs shall be cumulative for five years. 
(Ord. 638 § 10 (part), 1988) 
17.34.060 - Signs. 
    A nonconforming use of structure or land shall not be extended or enlarged by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.02(F), 1982) 
Chapter 17.36 - SPECIFIC PLANS AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES 
Sections: 

17.36.010 - Applicable regulations. 
    All regulations, including development and performance standards and special provisions of this title, shall apply under a specific plan or planned development zone unless specifically varied as shown on the drawings and in statements approved by the city council when adopting or amending a specific plan or planned development zone. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(F), 1982) 
17.36.020 - Fee. 
    A fee shall be required as specified by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(G), 1982) 
17.36.030 - Specific plan-Adoption provisions-Hearing. 
    Specific plans, and amendments thereto, shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of Section 65450 et seq. of the Government Code, as written as of October 12, 1982 or thereafter amended, and this chapter. Any specific plan may be set for hearing upon order of the city council. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(A), 1982) 
17.36.040 - Specific plan-Intent. 
    A specific plan is intended to be an expansion of the Blythe General Plan and to permit flexible application on parcels of land generally exceeding fifteen acres of the use classifications, uses, standards and other regulations of this title in satisfaction of the policies of the general plan. In adopting a specific plan, the city council may require that uses conform to the site plan, architectural drawings or statements submitted in support of an application, or such modification thereof as the city council may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and secure the policies of the general plan. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(B), 1982) 
17.36.050 - Specific plan-Right to request consideration. 
    The owner or authorized agent of the owner shall have the right to request that the city consider a specific plan of land use for his real property. The right to request consideration of a specific plan does not imply that the plan will be approved. The city council may initiate preparation of a specific plan. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(C)(1), 1982) 
17.36.060 - Specific plan-Environmental Quality Act compliance. 
    An application for a specific plan shall not be set for public hearing until all procedures to implement the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, including the preparation of an environmental impact report, if required, have been completed. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(C)(2), 1982) 
17.36.070 - Specific plan-Application generally. 
    Applications shall be made to the planning director, who shall follow procedures required for amendment to the zoning ordinance by Chapter 17.66. A fee shall be required as specified by the city council by resolution. The applicant shall supply all required information, which may include part or all of the following, depending on the nature of the plan, and shall be in the form of a text and accompanying maps, plans and exhibits: 
A.  A preliminary development plan of the entire proposed development, drawn to scale, showing: land uses, density, lot design, traffic circulation, street design, private roadways, pedestrian circulation, estimated population, reservations and dedications for public uses, including schools, parks, playgrounds and open spaces, and major landscaping features. All elements and amounts to be listed shall be characterized as existing or proposed, including topography, and shall be shown only in such detail as is necessary to indicate clearly the intent or impact of development; 
B.  A tabulation of land area to be devoted to various uses, including open spaces, and a calculation of the overall density and the average densities per net residential acre of the various residential areas proposed; 
C.  A stage development schedule showing various units of development through completion and indicating the areas and sizes of such development phases; 
D.  A statement and graphics describing the existing topography, vegetation, soil conditions and drainage of the proposed development; 
E.  A statement proposing the method of maintaining and perpetuating common open areas and facilities; 
F.  A description of the proposed grading program; 
G.  Identification of proposed future ownership and maintenance of all streets, driveways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, open space areas, recreation spaces, structures and facilities; 
H.  Proposed use of natural features such as ponds, lakes, river beds and floodplains; 
I.  Design and acreage of any golf courses and other open space features, their intended means of maintenance and whether to be public or private or semiprivate; 
J.  A statement of solid waste disposal and utility service; 
K.  Such additional information as may be required for a particular project. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.03(C)(3), 1982) 
17.36.080 - Specific plan-Application supplements for commercial or industrial uses. 
    Whenever an application is filed which includes a specific plan for commercial or industrial uses, the application shall include the following additional information: 
A.  Proposed form of ownership and related application, if required; 
B.  Description of basic types of uses, including their ultimate range of square footage; 
C.  Market analysis; 
D.  Traffic analysis; 
E.  Where applicable, an analysis of the availability of employees and employee housing necessary for the proposed development; 
F.  Architectural design criteria for proposed centers or a perspective rendering depicting the basic architectural theme of the project. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(C)(4), 1982) 
17.36.090 - Planned development-Intent. 
    The planned development zone is intended to implement the policies of the Blythe General Plan by permitting flexible application on a parcel of land of one acre or larger of the use classifications, uses, standards and other regulations of this title in satisfaction of the policies of the general plan. The planned development zone shall be applied to specific properties and shown on the official zoning map in the same manner as for any other zone. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(D), 1982) 
17.36.100 - Planned development-Application. 
    The planned development features of the P-D zone shall be initiated by the filing of an application for a conditional use permit at the discretion of the owners or the authorized agent of owners of parcels of property for which the permit is requested. The conditional use permit shall be processed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.68 and this chapter. Applications may be required by the planning director to contain all of the information listed in Sections 17.36.050 through 17.36.080. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.03(E) (part), 1982) 
17.36.110 - Planned development-Uses permitted. 
    When the P-D zone is applied to properties as an amendment to the official zoning map and for those portions of the properties on which no conditional use permit is in effect, uses permitted shall be the same as those permitted under the R-M-L zone, subject to all regulations applicable in the R-M-L zone. The city council may substitute another zone for the R-M-L zone at the time the P-D zone is applied to property. A suffix shall then be added to the P-D symbol which shall be the symbol of the zone so designated by the city council. When a conditional use permit is in effect and has not lapsed or been revoked, properties shall be developed only in accordance with the provisions of such permit. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.03(E) (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.38 - MOBILE HOMES OR MANUFACTURED HOUSING ON RESIDENTIAL LOTS 
Sections: 

17.38.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to, where approved, allow the placement of mobile homes or manufactured housing on individual lots. The mobile home or manufactured housing would have to conform with the minimum lot size and setbacks for the zone in which it is located and, in addition, meet the criteria set forth in this chapter. This chapter is based on the city council's concern over the increasing cost of housing and the need to increase the supply and variety of house types available to the public. This title also allows mobile home or manufactured housing subdivisions in the same manner as residential subdivisions. 
(Ord. 638 § 11 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.04(A), 1982) 
17.38.020 - Single-family requirements enforcement. 
    It is the intent of this chapter that all requirements applicable to single-family residence construction be enforced in this chapter. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.04(B), 1982) 
17.38.030 - Tax status. 
    A mobile home or manufactured housing unit which has been placed on a foundation system pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to be a mobile home or manufactured housing and subject to local property taxation pursuant to provisions of the California Health and Safety Code and the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. 638 § 11 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.04(C), 1982) 
17.38.040 - Approval of planning director required. 
    A mobile home or manufactured housing on a foundation system on a private lot is permitted upon approval of the planning director. 
(Ord. 638 § 11 (part), 1988; Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.04(D), 1982) 
17.38.050 - Eligibility of mobile home, or manufactured housing. 
    A mobile home shall not be located on a permanent foundation on a private lot unless it: 
A.  Was constructed after July 1, 1976 and was issued an insignia of approval by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; and 
B.  Has not been altered in violation of applicable codes. 
(Ord. 638 § 11 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.04(E), 1982) 
17.38.060 - Use and installation requirements. 
    Mobile homes or manufactured housing located on a foundation system on a private lot shall: 
A.  Be occupied as a residential use type; 
B.  Be subject to all provisions of this title applicable to residential structures; 
C.  Meet all requirements for the zone in which they locate; 
D.  Be attached to a foundation system in compliance with all applicable building regulations, and Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
E.  Have a minimum width of twenty feet except in those areas zoned R-M-L/C-M-O which have twenty-five foot lots as recorded prior to August 8, 1989, where the minimum width shall be fourteen feet. All units shall meet the setback, landscaping, minimum square footage, and parking requirements of this title; 
F.  Be covered with an exterior material customarily used on conventional dwellings and approved by the planning director. The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground, except that when solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation; 
G.  Have a roof which consists of shingles or other materials compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; 
H.  The mobile home or manufactured housing may be required to have porches and eaves, or roofs with eaves, when, in the opinion of the planning director, this is necessary to achieve compatibility with other dwellings in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. 679 § 3, 1992; Ord. 659 § 2, 1989; Ord. 638 § 11 (part), 1988; Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.04(F), 1982) 
17.38.070 - Modification of requirements. 
    Modification of a criterion set forth in Section 17.38.060 may be granted by the planning director if he finds that such modification will not be detrimental to the public interest or surrounding residences or properties. No modification may be granted from subsections A through E of Section 17.38.060. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.04(G), 1982) 
17.38.080 - Building permit. 
    Prior to installation of the mobile home or manufactured housing on a permanent foundation system, the mobile home or manufactured housing owner or a licensed contractor shall obtain a building permit from the director of public works. To obtain such a permit, the owner or contractor shall comply with all requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 638 § 11 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.04(H) (part), 1982) 
17.38.090 - Certificate of occupancy-Surrender of license plate and registration. 
    Subsequent to the granting of the required building permits, and prior to occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code and Chapter 17.80 of this title. Thereafter, any vehicle license plate with a certificate of ownership and certificate of registration by a state agency is to be surrendered to the appropriate agencies. Any mobile home vehicle or manufactured housing unit which is permanently attached with underpinning or foundation to the ground must bear a California insignia or federal label pursuant to the requirements of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 638 § 11 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.04 (H) (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.40 - MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS 
Sections: 

17.40.010 - Conditional use permit required-Applicable zone regulations. 
    Manufactured housing parks shall be permitted with a valid conditional use permit in zones designated in this title for such use. (See Chapter 17.08.) All regulations and standards of the zone in which the manufactured housing park is located shall apply unless modified by the conditions of the permit and the minimum standards specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(A), 1982) 
17.40.020 - Minimum standards compliance. 
    Manufactured housing parks approved pursuant to the provisions of this title shall comply with the minimum standards set out through Section 17.40.270 except where the city council finds that the size, shape or location of the land, topographic conditions or other factors make strict compliance therewith impractical. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B) (part), 1982) 
17.40.030 - Area. 
    The minimum area that may be developed as a manufactured housing park shall be five acres, excluding public streets. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05 (B)(1), 1982) 
17.40.040 - Setbacks. 
A.  Where a property across any public street or highway from a manufactured housing park is zoned in a residential zone, the manufactured housing park shall have the same setback as the residential zone. In all other zones, this setback may be reduced to ten feet. On all other property lines, the manufactured housing shall observe a five-foot minimum setback. 
B.  No manufactured housing unit or structure other than fences and walls may occupy the ten-foot front yard, the five-foot side yard and five-foot rear-yard setbacks established in this section for the manufactured housing park. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(2), 1982) 
17.40.050 - Plot plan. 
    A plot plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with an application for a conditional use permit for a manufactured housing park showing the proposed development and improvements: 
A.  For manufactured housing parks up to ten acres, the scale shall be one inch equals thirty feet. On larger than ten acres the scale may be one inch equals fifty feet. 
B.  A vicinity map showing the general location shall be included on the plot plan. 
C.  A typical manufactured housing space showing slab, parking area, trailer location and all dimensions at one inch equals twenty feet or one inch equals six feet scale shall be included on the plot plan. 
D.  North arrow, property dimensions, access street, adjoining property lines, side yard dimensions and all easements shall be shown. 
E.  A typical interior street cross-section shall be shown on the plot plan. Proposed street grades shall be shown on the plot plan. 
F.  A drainage plan shall be shown on the plot plan. This shall include a plan to control both on-site and off-site storm water runoff through the manufactured housing park. 
G.  Existing contours shall be shown. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(3), 1982) 
17.40.060 - Improvements standards. 
    Improvements in a manufactured housing park shall conform to the minimum standards set out through Section 17.40.160. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4) (part), 1982) 
17.40.070 - Paved parking space. 
    A paved space for two cars shall be provided for each manufactured housing site not less than nine feet by forty feet in size. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4)(a), 1982) 
17.40.080 - Streets. 
A.  Streets shall be paved with a minimum of two and one-half inches of plant-mix or road-mix surfacing to a minimum width of twenty-five feet and parking shall not be permitted on the street. Roll curbs shall be installed. 
B.  Minimum radii on street curves shall be not less than twenty feet; cul-de-sac radii shall not be less than thirty feet. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4)(b), 1982) 
17.40.090 - Slab, porch or deck. 
    A concrete slab not less than eight feet by twenty feet in size shall be provided for each manufactured housing site. A wooden porch or deck may be constructed adjacent to the manufactured housing unit in lieu of a concrete slab, which shall be not less than eight feet by twenty feet in size, and shall meet the structural and safety requirements of the director of public works. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4)(c), 1982) 
17.40.100 - Off-street visitor parking. 
    Off-street visitor parking shall be provided at the recreation area at the rate of one parking space for each ten manufactured housing sites. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05 (B)(4)(d), 1982) 
17.40.110 - Highway and street access. 
    Highway access shall be safe and convenient and designed in accordance with accepted traffic engineering standards. The number of access points to one street shall be limited to two. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4)(e), 1982) 
17.40.120 - Paving specifications. 
    Paving and parking spaces, whenever required by these standards or the conditions of approval, shall consist of two and one-half inches of plant-mix asphalt material on a proper sub-base. Edges shall be formed with two-and-one-half-inch redwood lumber. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4)(f), 1982) 
17.40.130 - Lighting. 
    Lighting shall be designed and maintained so as not to shine or be reflected beyond the park boundaries. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4)(g), 1982) 
17.40.140 - Sanitary and water systems. 
    Sanitary facilities, sewage disposal and the domestic water system shall be designed as approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4)(h), 1982) 
17.40.150 - Laundry facilities. 
    Laundry facilities (including drying yard) shall be located at the rear or interior of the park and shall be screened from view. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(4)(i), 1982) 
17.40.160 - Rubbish and garbage disposal. 
    Rubbish and garbage disposal shall be handled by closed bins of specifications as prescribed by the director of public works and located on cemented areas which shall be situated at the rear or interior of the manufactured housing park. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05 (B)(4)(j), 1982) 
17.40.170 - Recreation areas. 
    Recreation areas of not less than five percent of the total area of the park shall be provided. Recreational facilities shall be located in the interior of the park rather than at the boundaries and shall be properly maintained at all times. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(5), 1982) 
17.40.180 - Walls or fences. 
    Walls or fences shall be installed as follows: The manufactured housing park boundary shall have installed a forty-two-inch solid wall along all boundary lines except as hereinafter provided. Such wall shall be constructed in such a manner as to facilitate the natural drainage flow. Wherever the boundary line abuts or is adjacent to a Palo Verde Irrigation District canal or ditch, then the fence shall be chain link fence not less than six feet in height. Should any boundary line abut or be adjacent to any area of the city in a residential zone, then such solid wall in the front yard may be located in accordance with a design approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 638 § 13, 1988: Ord. 630 § 3, 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(6), 1982) 
17.40.190 - Public address system. 
    Public address systems, if installed, shall be designed and operated so that sounds therefrom are not carried beyond the park boundaries. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(7), 1982) 
17.40.200 - Utility services. 
    All utility services shall be installed underground and according to plans and specifications approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(8), 1982) 
17.40.210 - Landscaping. 
    Shade trees and landscaping are required in manufactured housing parks. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(9)(a), 1982) 
17.40.220 - Accessory storage. 
    A metal storage facility is required for each manufactured housing unit, having minimum dimensions of not less than five feet by seven feet and installed on a concrete slab. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(9)(b), 1982) 
17.40.230 - Skirting. 
    Skirting is required for each manufactured housing unit, with adequate ventilation provided. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(9)(c), 1982) 
17.40.240 - Illumination. 
    Adequate lighting illuminating streets, driveways, recreational and service areas is required in manufactured housing parks. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(9)(d), 1982) 
17.40.250 - Fire hydrants. 
    Fire hydrants of a type approved by the city fire marshal shall be installed at such locations in the manufactured housing park as he designates. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(9)(e), 1982) 
17.40.260 - Recommended facilities. 
    The following additional facilities are recommended but not required in manufactured housing parks: 
A.  Screening between trailer ports; 
B.  Public telephone; 
C.  Adult recreation facilities; 
D.  Fencing around open recreation areas. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(10), 1982) 
17.40.270 - Distance between structures. 
    Manufactured housing units and accessory structures shall not be located closer than six feet to another manufactured housing unit or other building or accessory structure. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(B)(11), 1982) 
17.40.280 - Condominium development or conversion. 
    A manufactured housing condominium may not be developed nor a manufactured housing park converted to a condominium unless such condominium meets all requirements of Chapter 17.32, Condominiums and Community Apartments, and Chapter 17.38, Mobile Homes or Manufactured Housing on Residential Lots. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part), 1988; Ord. 595 § 6.05(C), 1982) 
17.40.290 - Temporary use as living quarters. 
    A manufactured housing unit not on a foundation outside a manufactured housing park may not be used as living quarters unless a temporary permit for such use has been issued by the planning director in accordance with Chapter 17.72. Such a permit may be issued at construction sites, for watchmen in industrial areas, and under unique circumstances when denial of such a permit would cause severe hardship. 
(Ord. 638 § 12 (part) 1988; Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.05(D), 1982) 
Chapter 17.42 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
Sections: 

17.42.040 - Minimum standards compliance. 
    Recreational vehicle parks approved pursuant to the provisions of this title shall comply with the minimum standards set out in this chapter, except where the city council finds that the size, shape or location of the land, topographic conditions or other factors make strict compliance therewith impractical. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.050 - Area-Density. 
    Each parcel of land used for a recreational vehicle park shall have a minimum of three acres. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.055 - Dimensions, separations and setbacks. 
A.  Width: each recreational vehicle space shall have a minimum width of twenty-five feet. 
B.  Depth: each recreational vehicle space shall have a minimum depth of forty feet; provided, however, that any space within the park which is to accommodate an RV unit greater than thirty-two feet in length, the minimum space depth shall be increased to forty-eight feet. 
C.  Separation: the minimum spacings between any two recreational vehicles shall be ten feet. The minimum spacing between any two buildings or covered structures shall be ten feet. 
D.  Setback: the minimum setback for the recreational vehicle unit space to the edge of any private street shall be five feet. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.060 - Height regulations. 
    No principal building shall exceed two stories in height and no accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet in height. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.070 - Streets. 
    Park roadways shall have a minimum width of twenty-four feet between curbs. The entrance street shall be paved with asphaltic concrete or equivalent and landscaped. The interior streets shall be of dust-free material as approved by the city. The radii of curves shall be as per adopted city standards. Curbs may be of a flat or rolled design or other design approved by the planning director as appropriate for recreational vehicle parks. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.080 - Off-street parking. 
    One parking space shall be provided for each recreational vehicle space. Parking spaces shall be paved or shall be constructed of treated gravel edged with two inch by six inch redwood. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.090 - Illumination. 
    Adequate lighting shall be provided for all park roadways, walks and service facilities. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.100 - Storm drainage. 
    Proper surface storm drainage will be provided and the drainage plan will be approved by the planning director and city engineer. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.110 - Recreational areas. 
    In addition to the space devoted to individual recreation on individual spaces, there shall be provided a developed area, or areas, devoted to recreational and service purposes consisting of at least ten percent of the gross park area, and will be provided and maintained by the park operator. Swimming pools are encouraged. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.120 - Utilities-Fire hydrants. 
    Electricity, city water and city sewer shall be provided for at least fifty percent of the recreational spaces. Partial or limited utilities may be provided in some spaces. No aboveground utility lines shall be permitted. Water mains and fire hydrants and necessary easements shall be built to city standards and dedicated to the city. Sewer facilities shall be owned and maintained by the park owner. Approved fire hydrants shall be located per adopted city standards. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.130 - Sanitary facilities. 
    Sanitary facilities including showers shall be provided. These shall conform to state and county health regulations. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.140 - Dump stations. 
    Sanitary dump stations designed to receive the discharge of sewage holding tanks of self-contained vehicles shall be installed in an accessible location in every recreation vehicle park. Sanitary dump stations shall be designed and constructed as required by provisions of the California Administrative Code. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.150 - Landscaping and screening. 
    Recreational vehicle parks shall be screened from surrounding areas by the use of fences, walls or landscaping or the combination of same. Each park shall be enclosed by fence or wall. Each park shall have a landscaping plan which shall be approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
17.42.160 - Conformance of spaces rented, leased or sold. 
    No recreation vehicle space may be rented, leased or sold for transient occupancy unless such space is within a recreational vehicle park or campground approved in accordance with this chapter. There shall be no permanent occupancy of recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds except for one residence for operator/employee of the park. Such residence may be a manufactured housing unit located according to adopted codes of the city. 
(Ord. 638 § 14 (part), 1988) 
Chapter 17.44 - MOBILE HOMES AND OFFICE UNITS 
Sections: 

17.44.010 - Occupancy of unfixed mobile homes. 
    Mobile homes not on foundations shall not be used as a place of human habitation other than in a mobile home park except as a watchman's quarters during the construction of a building and pursuant to the issuance of a temporary use permit under the provisions of Chapter 17.72. 
(Ord. 601 § 3 (part), 1984: Ord. 595 § 6.07(A), 1982) 
17.44.020 - Temporary use of mobile office units. 
    Mobile office units not on foundations may be temporarily used in the commercial, industrial and appropriate P-D zones pursuant to the granting of a temporary use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.72 by the city council. The following conditions must be satisfied before a temporary use permit can be granted: 
A.  The proposed use for the mobile unit shall be permitted in the zone in which it is to be located. 
B.  All requirements of this title for development in the zone in which the mobile unit is to be placed shall be satisfied. 
C.  The mobile unit shall be compatible in appearance with surrounding structures and improvements. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.07(B), 1982) 
Chapter 17.46 - PUBLIC UTILITIES AND SERVICES 
Sections: 

17.46.010 - Provisions not to interfere with public utilities-Location of facilities. 
    The provisions of this title shall not be construed as to limit or interfere with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of any use coming under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission, which uses are related to public utility purposes, of water and gas pipes, mains and conduits, electric light and power transmission and distribution lines, telegraph and telephone lines, sewers and sewer mains and incidental appurtenances. The location of such lines, mains and conduits shall be subject to city council review and approval. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.08, 1982) 
Chapter 17.47 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
Sections: 

17.47.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this section are to: 
A.  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
B.  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas; 
C.  Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
D.  Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
E.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal, now and in the future; 
F.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
G.  Development of an orderly handling procedure to accommodate the growing need for commercial communications towers; 
H.  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications service to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently; 
I.  Consider the public health and safety and welfare of the community in the siting of communications towers; and 
J.  To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
    In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city of Blythe general plan, zoning map, existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.020 - Applicability. 
    This section applies to all wireless communications facilities existing and proposed to be located within the corporate limits of the city, as defined in Section 17.47.030. Including personal wireless services as defined by the Telecommunications Act ("TCA") and licensed by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC"), including, but not limited to, the types commonly known as cellular, personal communications services ("PCS"), specialized mobile radio ("SMR"), enhanced specialized mobile radio ("ESMR"), paging, land based repeaters for satellite broadcast services, micro-cell antennas and similar systems which exist now or may be developed in the future and exhibit technological characteristics similar to them. This chapter shall also apply to wireless communication facilities within public rights-of-way except as prohibited by state and federal law. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply. These definitions shall be adapted to the context for appropriate grammatical tense, number, case and gender. 
A.  "Accessory structure" means a building, part of building or structure which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building, structure or use of the same lot. 
B.  "Alternative tower structure" means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
C.  "Ancillary structures" means any structure or device used to contain ancillary equipment for a wireless communications facility, such as cabinets, shelters, and additions to existing structures, pedestals and other devices serving similar purposes. Typically, it may include an air conditioning unit, a heating unit, electrical supply, telephone hookup and back-up power supply and may include any service roads or other access accommodations used to service the facility. 
D.  "Antenna" means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building structure or alternative tower structure, and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
E.  "Antenna structure" refers collectively to an antenna and its supporting mast, if any. 
F.  "Array antenna" means an antenna consisting of two or more radiating elements, generally similar, which are arranged and excited in such a manner as to obtain directional radiation patterns. It includes any structural members which are necessary to maintain the proper electrical relationships between the radiating elements, but does not include the mast or other structure used to support the array as a whole, nor does it include the transmission line which supplies energy to or receives energy from the array as a whole. 
G.  "Backhauls network" means the lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
H.  "Broadcast receiving antenna" means an outside antenna used for the reception of signals transmitted by stations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission in the radio broadcast services, including AM, FM and TV. 
I.  "Building inspector" means the development services director of the city, or any of the directors authorized representatives. 
J.  "Corporate limits" means all properties currently existing within the city limits, as well as all properties annexed into the city limits at any point in the future. 
K.  "Collinear antenna" means a linear array in which the radiating elements are disposed end-to-end in a substantially straight vertical line. 
L.  "Co-location" means the use of a common wireless communications facility or common site by two or more service providers, or use by one applicant/permittee of a single site for two or more technologies. It is also called "site sharing." 
M.  "Commercial communications antenna" means a telecommunications antenna designed to transmit or receive communications as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The commercial communication antenna shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC, or home satellite/television antennas. 
N.  "Coverage map" means a map or maps showing the realistically forecasted service area of the facility at a given height and strength. 
O.  "Current" means at the time building permit application is made. 
P.  "Development services director" means the city's development services director or his or her designee. 
Q.  "Dipole" means a driven element in the form of a conductor approximately one-half wavelength long, split at its electrical center for connection to the transmission line feeding the antenna. 
R.  "Director" means the city's development services director or his or her designee. 
S.  "Director element" means a parasitic element located forward of the driven element of an antenna, intended to increase the directive gain of the antenna in the forward direction. 
T.  Dish antenna. See "parabolic antenna." 
U.  "Driven element" means a radiating element coupled directly to the transmission line feeding the antenna. 
V.  "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
W.  "Facility" means any component of the wireless communication installation including any towers, antennae and antenna array. 
X.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Y.  "Height" means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel on which the structure is located, to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
Z.  "Improvement plan(s)" means on and off-site construction drawings. 
AA.  "Inverted-V antenna" means an antenna consisting of a singular dipole constructed of wire and supported at the center and ends in such a manner as to form an inverted "V" in a vertical plane. 
BB.  "Leasehold area" means that portion of a lot leased by the applicant/developer. See "site." 
CC.  "Linear array" means an array antenna having the centers of the radiating elements lying along a straight line. 
DD.  "Lot" means a parcel of real property which is shown as a single lot in a lawfully recorded subdivision, approved pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or, a parcel of real property, the dimensions and boundaries of which ate defined as a single lot by a lawfully recorded record of survey map. See "site." 
EE.  "Mast" means a pole of wood or metal, or a tower fabricated of metal, used to support a broadcast receiving antenna or a communications antenna and maintain it at the proper elevation. 
FF.  "Modification" means the addition of structures or equipment to a previously approved installation. The term does not include replacement of existing equipment or structures, provided the replacement equipment or structure is substantially similar to the pre-existing equipment or structure, and creates no new impacts not addressed in connection with the previous approval. 
GG.  "Parabolic antenna" means an antenna consisting of a driven element and a reflector element, the latter having the shape of portion of a paraboloid or revolution. 
HH.  "Parasitic element" means a radiating element which is not directly coupled to the transmission line feeding the antenna. It includes director elements and reflector elements. 
II.  "PCS" means personal communications service, as defined in the Telecommunications Act and Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
JJ.  "Preexisting towers" and "preexisting antennas" means any tower or antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
KK.  Propagations study. See "coverage map." 
LL.  "Radiating element" means a basic subdivision of an antenna which in itself is capable of effectively radiating or receiving radio waves. It includes driven elements and parasitic elements. 
MM.  "Reflector element" means a parasitic element located in a direction other than forward of the driven element of an antenna, intended to increase the directive gain of the antenna in the forward direction. 
NN.  "Site" means the area of the lot to be developed. See "leasehold area." 
OO.  "Stealth" means intended to escape observation. See "alternative tower structure." 
PP.  "Stealth facility" means a facility designed to visually and operationally blend into the existing natural environment in a manner compatible with local community character. See "alternative tower structure." 
QQ.  "TCA" means the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
RR.  "Tower" means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto. 
SS.  "Whip antenna" means an antenna consisting of a single, slender, rod-like driven element which is supported only at its base and is fed at or near its base. It may include at its base a group of conductors disposed horizontally, or substantially so, forming an artificial ground-plane. 
TT.  "Wireless communications" means any electronic wireless services as defined by the TCA and/or licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, including, but not limited to, the types commonly known as cellular, personal communications services ("PCS"), specialized mobile radio ("SMR"), enhanced specialized mobile radio ("ESMR"), paging, ground based repeaters for satellite radio services, micro-cell antennae and similar systems which exist now or may be developed in the future and exhibit technological characteristics similar to them. Failure to describe any electronic service shall not act as a limitation to these definitions. 
UU.  "Yagi antenna" means a linear array in which the radiating elements are parallel to each other and are disposed along and perpendicular to a single supporting boom. The plane of the radiating elements may be vertical or horizontal. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.040 - General requirements. 
A.  Principal or Accessory Use. A different use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
B.  Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the development services director an inventory of its existing towers, antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower. The director may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative, plot plan or conditional use permit approval under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the city, provided, however, that the director is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing the accuracy of the information or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
C.  State or Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for nullification of the conditional use permit or other city approval. 
D.  Building Codes-Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
E.  Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
F.  Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all franchises, if any, required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the development services director prior to final building inspection. 
G.  Public Notice. For purposes of this section, any conditional use request, plot plan request, variance request or appeal of an administratively approved use or conditional use shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the corresponding separation distance listed in Sections 17.47.080(D) and 17.47.090(D), in addition to any notice otherwise required by this code, California Environmental Quality Act, or California Government Code. 
H.  Signs. Commercial communications towers and antennas or ancillary structures representing religious, cultural, commercial or other symbols, signs or statuary shall be prohibited. Such facilities shall not bear any signs or advert sign devices other than those required by federal regulations or other applicable law. 
I.  RF Emissions. The city requires the same information submitted to the FCC regarding radio frequency (RF) emissions with any application to establish a new or expand an existing communications facility. If the application pertains to co-location, or to an additional facility on a parcel, a cumulative emissions report for the site is required. The city requires the information pursuant to its responsibility under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), to determine cumulative environmental impacts for all permitted projects. 
17.47.050 - Supplementary application materials. 
    In addition to any information required for applications for conditional use permits, plot plans, project review committee or building permits, applicants shall submit the following: 
A.  The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit and/or residentially zoned property; 
B.  The separation distance from any other existing or proposed tower(s) within a one thousand foot radius; 
C.  A realistic visual impact analysis with photo simulation of the proposed facility; 
D.  Elevations drawn to scale showing all sides of any proposed buildings and structures; 
E.  Proof that the location and design of the proposed antenna is approved by the FAA or local airport authority, if such approval is required; 
F.  A description of the services that will be provided by the proposed site, including: 
1.  A description of the location, type, capacity, field strength or power density, and calculated geographic service area of the proposed antenna or antenna array. The city retains the right to retain experts to review and assess the technical data. 
2.  Copies of documentation showing the applicant/permittee is in compliance with all applicable licenses, permits or authorizations required by the FCC, 
3.  Location of all existing, proposed and anticipated wireless communications facilities in the applicant/permittee's network located in the city, or within one-half mile of the city's corporate limit in any direction, 
4.  A description of how the proposed facility fits into the applicant/permittee's network, 
5.  In the instance where a facility is proposed within one hundred feet of residential dwellings, schools, child day care centers and hospitals, the applicant/permittee shall submit a narrative description of alternative sites considered, if any, and include specific reasons these alternative sites were not chosen. 
6.  If in a residential zone, locate each of the closest commercial zones and show why these sites were not chosen. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.060 - Permitted zones. 
A.  Commercial communication towers and commercial communication antennas may be permitted in residential zones pursuant to Section 17.47.070 and subject to standards set forth in Section 17.47.080. No such facility shall exceed sixty feet in height. 
B.  Commercial communication towers and commercial communication antennas may be approved in any of the following zones pursuant to Section 17.47.070 and subject to standards as set forth in Section 17.47.090. 
C-G ..... General Commercial C-C ..... Community Commercial C-N ..... Neighborhood Commercial I-S ..... Service Industrial I-G ..... General Industrial P/Q-P ..... Public/Quasi-Public A ..... Agricultural  
17.47.070 - Levels of review. 
A.  City Council Review. The following shall be reviewed by the city council, subject to a conditional use permit: 
1.  All new wireless communications facilities, including but not limited to, lattice towers and monopoles that exceed sixty feet in height; 
2.  Increased height of an existing city-approved antenna that exceeds seventy-five feet in height; 
3.  All new wireless communications facilities including but not limited to, lattice towers and monopoles, in residential zones, except as noted in Section 17.47.070(B)(4); and 
4.  All new wireless communications facilities on residentially designated property that is developed with a legal non-residential use (e.g., school, church, etc.) that exceed sixty feet in height. 
B.  Planning Commission Review. The following shall be reviewed by the planning commission, subject to site plan approval: 
1.  All new wireless communications facilities, including but not limited to, lattice towers and monopoles that do not exceed sixty feet in height which are located in a commercial or industrial zone; 
2.  Increased height of an existing city-approved antenna where all city conditions of approval have been met, to a maximum of seventy-five feet in height and where the structure is located in a commercial or industrial zone; 
3.  Placement of an antenna on any building in a commercial or industrial zone not screened from public view; and 
4.  All new wireless communications facilities on residentially designated property that is developed with a legal non-residential use (e.g., school, church, etc.) that do not exceed sixty feet in height. 
C.  Administrative Review. The following shall be reviewed by the project review committee, subject to standard building permits: 
1.  Commercial communications facilities in non-residential zones up to a maximum of fifteen feet in height that are mounted on a building or rooftop and that are screened from view from all adjacent public rights-of-way; 
2.  Commercial communications facilities in non-residential zones mounted on existing structures including, but not limited to, water tanks, pump stations, utility poles, ball field lighting where antenna height does not exceed structure height; 
3.  Co-location of equipment on an existing city-approved support structure where all city conditions of approval have been met; and 
4.  The installation of ground or building mounted satellite dishes for commercial use in non-residential zones. 
D.  Exemptions. The following installations in residential zones exempt from the provisions of this section: 
1.  The installation of one ground mounted satellite dish antenna in the rear yard which is less than twelve feet in diameter and less than fourteen feet in height; 
2.  One satellite dish antenna which is less than twenty-four inches in diameter may be installed on a building provided that such antenna does not extend above the roofline of said building. 
3.  Residential single-pole, tower roof, ground mounted television antennas; and 
4.  Amateur radio antennas where the boom of any active element of the array is thirty feet or less and the fixed height does not exceed sixty-five feet. Automated or hand cranked telescoping amateur radio antennas may extend to a height of one hundred feet only while in use. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.080 - Residential zone development standards. 
A.  Tower Height. No tower located within a residential zone shall exceed sixty feet in height. 
B.  Stealth Installation. All commercial communication towers and antennas located on residentially zoned property shall be designed as a stealth facility, intended to blend in with their existing natural environment (i.e. monopoles designed as artificial palm trees). 
1.  Because palm trees are plentiful throughout the city a suggested screening method for a monopole antenna or large commercial antenna may be a "monopalm." 
a.  A "monopalm" designed large commercial antenna shall include a cluster of at least three "Washingtonia robusta" (Mexican fan palm) or "Phoenix dactylifera" (date palm) to enhance the camouflaged antenna. Palms shall have a height that is within fifteen feet of the height of the monopalm and at varying heights planted around the monopalm at the time of installation. Existing landscaping material (real palm trees) may be considered in order to screen the monopalm. 
b.  The monopalm itself will be textured in such a way to appear as the trunk of a palm tree. Manufactured palm fronds shall adequately camouflage the panel antennas from view from adjacent properties and public streets. 
2.  Other screening methods may be utilized where approved by the city council. 
C.  Setbacks. Commercial communication tower/antenna setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower/antenna to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. Accessory structures shall comply with the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located. The city council may reduce the required setbacks if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. 
D.  Separation From Off-site Uses. Commercial communication tower/antenna shall be separated from residentially zoned lands or residential uses a minimum of three hundred feet. Said separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the closest point of off-site use. The city council may reduce the standard separation from off-site uses to a minimum of one hundred twenty-five percent of the tower height if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. 
E.  Fencing. Fencing shall be eight foot high wrought iron/brick pillar combination. Vertical spacing of the wrought iron members shall not exceed four inches. Brick pillars shall be located at each of the four corners, on each side of the entrance gate and every six feet in the field. No other type of fencing material is permissible in any residential zone without approval of the city council. 
1.  Where brick pillars are installed, the developer/applicant shall provide a 12? × 12? sign, posted on one of the entrance gate pillars, that reads, "For graffiti removal please call ____________ - ____________ - ____________ ." Upon notification, the developer/ applicant shall remove or cause to be removed all graffiti from the site. Removal of the graffiti shall be by high pressure wash or sand blasting, not by painting. 
F.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the project site/leasehold area. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, ground cover, shrubs and desert vegetation. A permanent, automated, underground, full-coverage irrigation system shall be installed and properly maintained. A comprehensive landscape and irrigation plan must be approved by the planning department. The city council may reduce the landscape requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. 
G.  Lighting. If security or maintenance lighting of the facility is required, the placement, size and type of lighting shall be shown on improvement plans and shall be approved by the development services department. Lighting alternatives and design must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
H.  Emergency Access. Emergency access to the site shall be provided as per current city standards and specifications and state of California fire code. The developer/applicant shall equip all gates with KNOX locks. 
I.  Ancillary Equipment. The facility shall use the most quiet cooling equipment and emergency power generating apparatus available. 
1.  Installation of emergency power generating apparatus (i.e. back-up/standby generator) shall comply with all of the following: 
a.  If a fuel tank is required for the emergency power generating apparatus it shall be self-contained and use the best available technology for the type of tank and installation; or use natural gas as a fuel source. Commercial above ground propane tanks are prohibited within residential zones. 
b.  Written approval from Mojave Desert air quality management district shall be submitted prior to installation of the emergency power generating apparatus. 
c.  Emergency power generating apparatus shall be equipped with a residential exhaust silencer meeting city standards at the time of installation. Noise levels shall be reduced to 60 dB L dn (or CNEL) or less within outdoor activity areas and 45 dB L dn ( or CNEL) or less within interior living spaces. Where it is not possible to reduce exterior noise levels within outdoor activity areas to 60 dB L dn (or CNEL) or less after the practical application of the best available noise reduction technology, an exterior noise level of up to 65 dB L dn (or CNEL) will be allowed. 
d.  The automatic exerciser on the emergency power generating apparatus shall be set to run only between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday only. 
e.  Installation of the emergency power generating apparatus shall comply with all current city standards and all state and/or national codes applicable to the facility. The developer/applicant shall provide documentation from Southern California Edison showing that all concerns and requirements with regard to the auto transfer switch have been addressed. 
J.  Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings housing equipment in support of commercial antennas shall not exceed a height of twelve feet and shall not be used for offices or material storage. All accessory structures or buildings shall comply with the minimum required setbacks of the zone in which it is located. The use of materials and colors for accessory structures/buildings or cabinets shall be designed to blend with the exterior of existing structures within the area. A materials and color sample (minimum 12? × 12?) shall be submitted as part of the conditional use permit application. 
K.  Building and tower appearance shall be consistent with approved elevations and specifications. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.090 - Non-residential zone development standards. 
A.  Tower Height. No tower shall exceed seventy-five feet in height. Additional height may be approved by the city council provided that technical data justifies the need for greater height. 
B.  Stealth Installation. All commercial communication towers and antennas shall be designed as a stealth facility, intended to blend in with their existing natural environment (i.e. monopoles designed as artificial palm trees). 
1.  Because palm trees are plentiful throughout the city a suggested screening method for a monopole antenna or large commercial antenna may be a "monopalm." 
a.  A "monopalm" designed large commercial antenna shall include a cluster of at least three "Washingtonia robusta" (Mexican fan palm) or "Phoenix dactylifera" (date palm) to enhance the camouflaged antenna. Palms may have a height that is within fifteen feet of the height of the monopalm. and at varying heights planted around the monopalm at the time of installation. Existing landscaping material (real palm trees) may be considered in order to screen the monopalm. 
b.  Where visible from a public right-of-way, the monopalm itself shall be textured in such a way to appear as the trunk of a palm tree. Manufactured palm fronds shall adequately camouflage the panel antennas from view from adjacent properties and public streets. 
c.  Where not visible from a public right-of-way, the monopalm itself shall be treated in such a way to appear as the trunk of a palm tree. Manufactured palm fronds shall adequately camouflage the panel antennas from view from adjacent properties and public streets. 
2.  Other screening methods may be utilized where approved by the city council. 
3.  Where it can be demonstrated by the applicant that stealth installation is neither practical or feasible, the city council may approve non-stealth installation. 
C.  Non-stealth Installation. Non-stealth installation shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Towers shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. A color sample (minimum 12? × 12?) shall be submitted as part of the conditional use permit application. 
D.  Setbacks. Commercial communication tower/antenna setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower/antenna to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. Accessory structures shall comply with the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located. The reviewing body may modify the required setbacks if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. 
E.  Separation From Off-site Uses. Commercial communication tower/antenna shall be separated from existing off-site structures a minimum of one hundred ten percent of the proposed tower height. Said separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the closest point of off-site structure except in residentially zoned areas as defined in Section 17.47.080(D) (three hundred feet). 
F.  Fencing. 
1.  Industrial Zones. Fencing shall be eight foot high chain link or material similar to that used on adjacent properties. 
2.  Commercial and Quasi-Public Zones. Where visible from a public right-of-way, fencing shall be eight foot high wrought iron/brick pillar combination. Vertical spacing of the wrought iron members shall not exceed four inches. Brick pillars shall be located at each of the four corners, on each side of the entrance gate, and every six feet in the field. Where not visible from a public right-of-way, fencing may be eight foot high chain link or material similar to that used on adjacent properties. 
a.  Where brick pillars are installed, the developer/applicant shall provide a 12? × 12? sign, posted on a one of the entrance gate pillars, that reads, "For graffiti removal please call ____________ - ____________ - ____________ ." Upon notification, the developer/ applicant shall remove or cause to be removed all graffiti from the site. Removal of the graffiti shall be by high pressure wash or sand blasting, not by painting. 
G.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the project site/leasehold area. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, ground cover, shrubs and desert vegetation. A permanent, automated, underground, full-coverage irrigation system shall be installed and properly maintained. A comprehensive landscape and irrigation plan must be approved by the planning department. The reviewing body may modify the landscape requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. 
H.  Lighting-If security or maintenance lighting of the facility is required, the placement, size and type of lighting shall be shown on improvement plans and shall be approved by the development services department. Lighting alternatives and design must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
I.  Emergency Access. Emergency access to the site shall be provided as per current city standards and specifications and state of California fire code. The developer/applicant shall equip all gates with KNOX locks. 
J.  Ancillary Equipment. The facility shall use the most quiet cooling equipment and emergency power generating apparatus available. Installation of emergency power generating apparatus (i.e. back-up/standby generator) shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  If a fuel tank is required for the emergency power generating apparatus it shall be self-contained and use the best available technology for the type of tank and installation; or use natural gas as a fuel source. Commercial above ground propane tanks are prohibited within residential zones. 
2.  Written approval from Mojave desert air quality management district shall be submitted prior to installation of the emergency power generating apparatus. 
3.  Emergency power generating apparatus shall be equipped with a residential exhaust silencer meeting city standards at the time of installation. Noise levels shall be reduced to 60 dB L dn (or CNEL) or less within outdoor activity areas and 45 dB L dn (or CNEL) or less within interior living spaces. Where it is not possible to reduce exterior noise levels within outdoor activity areas to 60 dB L dn (or CNEL) or less after the practical application of the best available noise reduction technology, an exterior noise level of up to 65 dB L dn (or CNEL) will be allowed. 
4.  The automatic exerciser on the emergency power generating apparatus shall be set to run only between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday only. 
5.  Installation of the emergency power generating apparatus shall comply with all current city standards and all state and/or national codes applicable to the facility. The developer/applicant shall provide documentation from Southern California Edison showing that all concerns and requirements with regard to the auto transfer switch have been addressed. 
K.  Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings housing equipment in support of commercial antennas shall not exceed a height of twelve feet and shall not be used for offices or material storage. All accessory structures or buildings shall comply with the minimum required setbacks of the zone in which it is located. The use of materials and colors for accessory structures/buildings or cabinets shall be designed to blend with the exterior of existing structures within the area. A materials and color sample (minimum 12? × 12?) shall be submitted as part of the conditional use permit application. 
L.  Building and tower appearance shall be consistent with approved elevations and specifications. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.100 - Operational plan. 
    All applications for wireless communications facilities shall include written assurances that the facilities shall be operated in accordance with the following: 
A.  Maintenance. All facilities, landscaping and related equipment shall be maintained in good working order and free from trash, debris, graffiti and designed to discourage vandalism. Any damaged equipment shall be repaired or replaced within twenty-four hours. Damaged, dead or decaying plant materials shall be removed and replaced within ten days from the date of notification. 
B.  Monitoring. Once the wireless communications facility is operating, the city may, if a legitimate concern regarding the facility arises, require the applicant/permittee to submit documentation that the facility is operating within the technical standards described in the application and the Federal Communications Commission permit. Independent field strength or power density measurements shall be provided to the director within thirty days of written request to the applicant/permittee. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.110 - Construction time. 
    All wireless communications facilities which receive a permit under this section shall be completed and operational within one hundred eighty calendar days of the issuance of the permit and all related permits or licenses. The construction time may be extended for an additional one hundred eighty calendar days upon a showing of good faith efforts to complete the facility, which shall take into account complications beyond the control of applicant/permittee. If the facility is not completed and operational by the end of the extension period, then the permit shall expire, and the applicant/permittee must reapply for the permit; however, this provision shall not apply when the applicant/permittee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that the operational delay is due entirely to factors beyond the control of the applicant/permittee, in which event the director may extend the construction time in his or her discretion. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.120 - Decommissioning. 
    Any commercial antenna carrier who intends to decommission or discontinue use of a commercial antenna shall notify the city by certified mail no less than thirty days prior to such action. The commercial antenna carrier or owner of the affected real property shall have ninety days from the date of decommissioning or discontinuance, or a reasonable time as may be approved by the director, to dismantle and remove the commercial antenna and all ancillary structures and restore the site to its original condition. In the case of multiple carriers sharing use of a single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all carriers cease operation. The subject conditional use permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.130 - Abandonment. 
    Any facility that ceases operating for more than one hundred eighty consecutive days shall be considered abandoned. Upon a finding of abandonment, the city shall provide notice to the commercial antenna carrier last known to use such facility and, if applicable, the owner of the affected real property, providing ninety days from the date of the notice to 1) apply for all permits required at the time of expiration to reactivate the operation, or 2) dismantle and remove the commercial antenna and all ancillary structures and restore the site to its original condition. In the event the applicant/permittee fails to apply for permits or perform the removal and restoration within ninety days, the property owner shall have the facility removed. 
17.47.140 - Removal by city. 
    If the property owner does not remove the equipment or does not request a hearing before the director on the issue of whether the equipment is abandoned and subject to removal, the city may have the equipment removed and store it in a secure location. The owner shall have fourteen days from the date the city provides the owner with written notice of removal of the equipment and notification of the current location of equipment to reclaim the equipment. If the equipment is not reclaimed in accordance with this section, the city may dispose of the equipment in accordance with the city's existing policy for disposal of abandoned or lost property. All expenses associated with the removal of the facility shall be charged back to the applicant/permittee and/or property owner. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.150 - Technological advancement. 
    At such time as is technologically allowable, modification to the facility shall be performed by the applicant, permittee, assignee or any successor-in-interest within a twenty-four-month period. Modification may include, but shall not be limited to, lowering of the tower height, removal of the microwave dishes, or the installation of cellular telephone locating capabilities as may be required by state of federal statute. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.160 - Application of standards to existing projects. 
A.  Modifications to Existing Projects. Any modification to a wireless communication facility existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be processed through a new conditional use permit and the facility as modified shall comply with the standards contained in this section. 
B.  All wireless communication facilities existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall either be removed or be modified through the approval of a new conditional use permit as specified in subsection A of this section, on or before the tenth anniversary of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the deadline for removal or modification of an existing wireless communications facility may be extended upon application by the owner of the facility. The extension shall be granted if the owner can demonstrate that as applied to the owner's facility the amortization period stated in subsection B of this section is unreasonably short when considering factors including, but not limited to, the depreciated value of the facility to be removed or modified, the remaining useful life of the facility to be removed or modified and the harm to the public that would result from the continued existence of the facility without modification. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
17.47.170 - Installation of wireless communication facilities on sites with nonconforming conditions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the installation of a wireless communications facility and ancillary structures may be permitted on a property on which there exists a nonconforming building, structure, use or site conditions, provided the wireless communications facility and ancillary structures are approved through a conditional use permit, as required by this section, except that such installation shall not be permitted on any site on which there exists a nonconforming sign or fire safety hazard, as documented by the development services director. 
(Ord. 783 § 1 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 17.49 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
Sections: 

17.49.010 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
B.  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the council finds: 
1.  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
2.  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
3.  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
4.  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
5.  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
6.  At least fifty communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
7.  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States-six hundred in 1982, two thousand two hundred in 1983, four thousand six hundred in 1984, eight thousand five hundred fifty-five in 1985 and two hundred fifty-three thousand four hundred forty-eight through December 31, 1992. 
8.  As of January 31, 1998, there have been one hundred five thousand one hundred twenty-one reported cases of AIDS in the State of California, resulting in sixty-six thousand four hundred fifty deaths. 
9.  Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV anti-body test in Blythe, California. 
10.  The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has steadily declined since 1991, with fifty-three thousand eight hundred fifty-five cases reported in 1991 and twenty thousand one hundred eighty-seven cases reported in 1996. 
11.  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with over three hundred twenty-five thousand cases being reported in 1996. 
12.  The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
13.  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
14.  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
15.  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
16.  The findings noted in subsection (B)(1) through (15) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. 
17.  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
18.  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
19.  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
20.  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
21.  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
22.  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
23.  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
24.  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
25.  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following shall apply: 
    "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    "Adult bookstore," "adult novelty store" or "adult video store" means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
2.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
1.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or 
2.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
3.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
1.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
2.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
3.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
    "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
    "Escort" means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    "Escort agency" means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    "Establishment" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
3.  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
4.  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    "Licensee" means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
    "Nude model studio" means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
1.  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
3.  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
    "Nudity" or a "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    "Semi-nude" or in a "semi-nude condition" means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast; but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
1.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
2.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    "Sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    "Specified anatomical areas" means: 
1.  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
2.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    "Specified criminal activity" means any of the following offenses: 
1.  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries; 
2.  For which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
3.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
    "Specified sexual activities" means any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
3.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (2) above. 
    "Substantial enlargement" of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent, as the floor areas exist on the date the ordinance codified in this section takes effect. 
    "Transfer of ownership or control" of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
2.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
3.  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.030 - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
A.  Adult arcades; 
B.  Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores; 
C.  Adult cabarets; 
D.  Adult motels; 
E.  Adult motion picture theaters; 
F.  Adult theaters; 
G.  Escort agencies; 
H.  Nude model studios; and 
I.  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.040 - License required. 
A.  It is unlawful: 
1.  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
3.  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. 
C.  All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter. 
D.  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
E.  The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is eighteen years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
2.  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state (a) the sexually oriented business's fictitious name and (b) submit the required registration documents. 
3.  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each. 
4.  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
5.  Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses. 
6.  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
7.  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any. 
8.  The applicant's mailing address and residential address. 
9.  A recent photograph of the applicant(s). 
10.  The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number. 
11.  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
12.  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within one thousand feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within five hundred feet of the property to be certified. 
    Note: For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
13.  If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in Section 17.49.140. 
F.  Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the city the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual; 
2.  Age, date, and place of birth; 
3.  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
4.  Present residence address and telephone number; 
5.  Present business address and telephone number; 
6.  Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other identification card information; 
7.  Social Security number; and 
8.  Proof that the individual is at least eighteen years of age. 
G.  Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as provided above, shall be the following: 
1.  A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
2.  A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name of the operation, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
3.  A statement of whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.050 - Issuance of license. 
A.  Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the city shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
1.  The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
2.  The applicant is under the age of eighteen years; 
3.  The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter; 
4.  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or 
5.  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application. If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in Section 17.49.100. 
B.  A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the city that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in Section 17.49.060. 
C.  Within thirty days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the city shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The city shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
1.  An applicant is under eighteen years of age. 
2.  An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business. 
3.  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
4.  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve months. 
5.  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter. 
6.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
7.  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
8.  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to Section 17.49.030. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time. 
E.  The health department, fire department, and the building official shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within twenty days of receipt of the application by the city. 
F.  A sexually oriented business license shall be issued for only one classification as found in Section 17.49.030. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.060 - Fees. 
A.  Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a five hundred-dollar nonrefundable application and investigation fee. 
B.  In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the city an annual nonrefundable license fee of one hundred four dollars within thirty days of license issuance or renewal. 
C.  Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation, and license fee. 
D.  All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the development services department. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.070 - Inspection. 
A.  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, zoning department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
B.  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.080 - Expiration of license. 
A.  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 17.49.040 application for renewal shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
B.  When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.090 - Suspension. 
A.  The city shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
1.  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; 
2.  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.100 - Revocation. 
A.  The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 17.49.090 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve months. 
B.  The city shall revoke a license if it determines that: 
1.  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
2.  A licensee has negligently allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
3.  A licensee has negligently allowed prostitution on the premises; 
4.  A licensee negligently operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
5.  Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has negligently allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
6.  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due. 
C.  When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
D.  After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.110 - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.120 - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
A.  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than C-G (general commercial), as defined and described in the city zoning ordinance. 
B.  A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within five hundred feet of: 
1.  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
2.  A public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
3.  A boundary of a residential district as defined in the city of Blythe zoning ordinance; 
4.  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities; 
5.  The property line of a lot developed to a residential use as defined in the zoning ordinance; 
6.  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; or 
7.  A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state. 
C.  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet of another sexually oriented business. 
D.  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
E.  For the purpose of subsection B of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in said subsection B. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
F.  For purposes of subsection C of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
G.  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on July 1, 1998, that is in violation of subsections A through F of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established businesses is/are nonconforming. 
H.  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection B of this section within one thousand feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been revoked. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.130 - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
A.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
B.  A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
C.  For purposes of subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.140 - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
A.  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
2.  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
3.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city. 
4.  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
5.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
6.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (A)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
7.  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
8.  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level. 
9.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
10.  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
11.  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
12.  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
13.  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
14.  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight inches of the floor. 
B.  A person having a duty under subsection (A)(1) through (14) of this section commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.150 - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
A.  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen years. 
B.  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.160 - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
A.  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen years. 
B.  A person under the age of eighteen years commits an offense if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. 
C.  A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
D.  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.170 - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
A.  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities. 
B.  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
C.  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business. 
D.  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.180 - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
A.  A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
B.  A person under the age of eighteen years commits a misdemeanor if the person enters or remains in a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.190 - Hours of operation. 
    No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of one a.m. and eight a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and between the hours of one a.m. and noon on Sundays. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.200 - Exemptions. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under Section 17.49.170 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
A.  By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
B.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
C.  In a structure: 
1.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
3.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
17.49.210 - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of Section 17.49.120 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars or thirty days' imprisonment. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. 746 § 2 (part), 1998) 
Chapter 17.50 - AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS 
Sections: 

17.50.010 - Applicability. 
    The provisions set out in this chapter shall be the minimum standards for any service station granted a conditional use permit in the C-N zone, and may be used as a guide in granting a conditional use permit in other commercial and industrial zones. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10 (part), 1982) 
17.50.020 - Lot area. 
    Each service station lot shall have a minimum area of fourteen thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(A), 1982) 
17.50.030 - Lot width. 
    Each service station lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred twenty feet on that street or those streets which is or are classified as a part of the "Select System of Roads and Streets," as defined by the California Streets and Highways Code, but in no event can the dimension along the intersecting street be less than ninety feet. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(B), 1982) 
17.50.040 - Setbacks. 
A.  There shall be a minimum setback for any service station building of ten feet from any property line, except where the lot line of the property involved abuts a public alley and a five-foot masonry wall is erected pursuant to Section 17.50.100(C) or a building is constructed adjacent to such alley. 
B.  Gasoline pumps, or other facilities for providing vehicles with gasoline, and pump islands on which they are placed shall be set back fifteen feet from any property line. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(C), 1982) 
17.50.050 - Access. 
A.  Each developed service station site shall have not more than two accessways (driveways) to any one street. 
B.  Accessways shall be located so that there is a minimum of five feet of full-height curb between the way and adjoining residential property lines. 
C.  No driveway shall exceed a width of thirty-five feet. 
D.  No driveway shall encroach into the curve of a street corner unless the radius of the curb return is greater than thirty feet. 
E.  There shall be a minimum distance of twenty-two feet of full-height curb between curb cuts along any street frontage. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(D), 1982) 
17.50.060 - Parking. 
A.  Off-street parking at service stations shall be provided as required in Chapter 17.16. In addition, one parking space shall be provided at all times for each employee on duty. 
B.  No parking of commercial vehicles over six thousand pounds shall be permitted between ten p.m. and six a.m. within fifteen feet of an abutting residential zone. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(E), 1982) 
17.50.070 - Landscaping. 
A.  Three-foot-wide planters shall be located and maintained adjacent to every street frontage, except for driveways or curb cut openings, at service stations. 
B.  One hundred square feet of planting area shall be located and maintained at the intersection of two property lines at a street corner. 
C.  All planting areas shall be separated from abutting paving by minimally six-inch-high curb walls. 
D.  All planting shall be a variety that will not achieve a height greater than thirty inches, shall not be thorny or spiked and shall not extend over the sidewalk. 
E.  All landscaped areas shall have permanent irrigation systems approved by the planning director and such areas shall be planted and maintained. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.10(F), 1982) 
17.50.080 - Signs. 
    Signs at service stations shall be limited to the following: 
A.  There shall be no more than two principal identification signs. 
1.  One sign may be freestanding with a maximum sign face area of two hundred square feet and a maximum height of fifty feet; and 
2.  One fin or pylon sign, with a maximum sign face area of forty square feet, provided that the pylon sign is placed on a structure which is integrated with the main. 
B.  Two freestanding posterboard signs may be located no closer than thirty-five feet to the point of intersection of the property lines extended on a corner site. In lieu of that, one such posterboard sign may be placed nearer than thirty-five feet to the point of intersection of the property lines extended, provided that it is placed behind a line drawn between two points, each of which is fifteen feet from the point of intersection. These posterboard signs shall be permanently placed; however, they may contain changeable copy. The maximum area of any such sign face shall not exceed twenty-four square feet. 
C.  All signs in addition to those provided for in subsections A and B of this section shall be placed on or affixed to a structure. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 595 § 6.10(G), 1982) 
17.50.090 - Outside lighting. 
A.  All outside lighting at service stations shall be so arranged and shielded as to prevent any glare or reflection, nuisance, inconvenience or hazardous interference of any kind on adjoining streets or property. 
B.  All outside lights and signals, except for those necessary for security lighting, shall be turned off when the station is not in operation. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(H), 1982) 
17.50.100 - Screening. 
A.  Entrances to all service station restrooms shall be screened from view of adjacent properties or street rights-of-way by decorative screening six feet high. The bottom of such screens shall be raised eighteen inches above grade for visibility and ventilation. 
B.  All outside trash, garbage, refuse and storage areas shall be enclosed on all sides by a five-foot-high structure. Provisions for adequate vehicular access shall be provided to and from such areas for collection of trash. Where installation of a permanent enclosure is physically impossible, a trash container of a type approved by the director of public works may be substituted. 
C.  Where the rear property line abuts a public alley, there shall be erected a five-foot masonry wall dividing the service station property from the alley. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(I), 1982) 
17.50.110 - Displays. 
    All displays at service stations shall be restricted to within five feet of the principal building, on the pump island, or in permanently placed, fully enclosed display cabinets. The display cabinets may be placed on the interior perimeter property line, but, in any case, no closer than ten feet to a street property line. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(J)(1), 1982) 
17.50.120 - Hours. 
    Service stations which abut residentially zoned property shall close between midnight and six a.m., and all business activities except for services and emergency repairs shall be confined to the hours between six a.m. and ten p.m. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(J)(2), 1982) 
17.50.130 - Alcoholic beverages. 
    There shall be no sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages from the premises of any automobile service station without the issuance of a conditional use permit by the city council. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 595 § 6.10(J)(3), 1982) 
17.50.140 - Underground utilities. 
    Utilities to all service-station structures, including signs, shall be installed underground. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.10(K), 1982) 
Chapter 17.52 - FUEL DISPENSING AND STORAGE 
Sections: 

17.52.010 - Applicability. 
    The provisions set out in this chapter shall be the minimum standards for fuel dispensing facilities (service stations) granted a conditional use permit for gasoline dispensing and storage in the C-N zone, and may be used for the granting of a conditional use permit in the C-C (community commercial) and C-G (general commercial) zones for the dispensing and storage of propane. 
(Ord. 770 § 1 (part), 2000: Ord. 595 § 6.11, 1982) 
17.52.020 - Performance standards. 
    All activities involving, the installation of facilities for, and all storage of, flammable and explosive materials shall be in compliance with Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids of the 2016 California Fire Code as adopted by reference, and Title 15 of the city of Blythe Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 770 § 1 (part), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 846, § 2, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 879, § 2, 11-8-16) 
Chapter 17.54 - ANIMALS, POULTRY AND FOWL 
Sections: 

17.54.010 - Applicability. 
    Regulations governing the keeping of animals, poultry and fowl shall be as set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.12 (part), 1982) 
17.54.020 - Animals prohibited within city. 
    No person shall keep, maintain, cause or otherwise permit to be kept or maintained, any of the following on any property or premises within the city: 
A.  Oxen or swine; 
B.  Dangerous or poisonous reptiles, except in scientific biological laboratories or educational institutions; 
C.  Lions, tigers, elephants; all species of monkeys, apes and chimpanzees; or similar such animals which shall be considered wild and/or dangerous by their nature or ancestry; or 
D.  Any other animals, poultry or fowl not specifically provided for in this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.12(A), 1982) 
17.54.030 - Animals prohibited in residential and commercial zones. 
    No person shall keep or maintain any sheep, goats, cattle, jacks, jennies, burros or any other type or kind of livestock on any property or premises within the city in any residential or commercial zone classification, except as may otherwise be regulated and permitted as set forth in Section 17.54.060. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.12(B), 1982) 
17.54.040 - Noisy animals, poultry or fowl. 
    No person shall keep or maintain upon any property or premises in the city any crowing rooster, peacock, guinea fowl, geese or any other animal, poultry or fowl which by any sound or cry unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, urban environment, tranquility or welfare of the public generally. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.12(C), 1982) 
17.54.050 - Number of dogs and cats. 
    No person shall keep or maintain more than three dogs and three cats more than three months of age upon any lot or premises located in any residential zone of the city. Such dogs and/or cats shall be kept only for the personal use and enjoyment of the occupants of the premises upon which such dogs or cats are so kept or maintained. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.12(D), 1982) 
17.54.060 - Number of poultry, fowl, rabbits or small animals. 
    No person shall keep or maintain any combination of poultry, fowl, rabbits or small animals exceeding nine, or more than three of each type, kind or species, upon any lot or premises in any residential zone, except in the R-E zone. In the R-E zone, no person shall keep or maintain any combination of poultry, fowl, rabbits or small animals exceeding twenty for each ten thousand square feet of lot area. These restrictions shall apply regardless of the age of such poultry, fowl, rabbits or small animals. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.12(F), 1982) 
Chapter 17.56 - SOLAR ACCESS AND SHADING 
Sections: 

17.56.010 - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide for the protection and encouragement of the use of solar energy collectors as an alternate energy source. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.13 (part), 1982) 
17.56.020 - Solar energy collectors as permitted use. 
    The use of solar energy collectors for the purpose of providing energy for heating and/or cooling is a permitted use within all zones, whether as part of a structure or incidental to a group of structures in the nearby vicinity. Use of solar energy collectors is subject to the restraints imposed by the existing buildings and structures within the city limits plus the zoning, height and setback limitations continued within this code, and existing trees. No guarantee is hereby given that all property within the city limits is entitled to the use of solar collectors. However, as a general policy, reasonable care should be taken to protect the opportunity for the utilization of solar collectors at all of the locations available. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.13(A), 1982) 
17.56.030 - Variances for solar access. 
    Variances shall be granted by the planning director from zone restrictions such as height, setback and lot density where such variances are necessary to permit unimpaired access to the sun during the hours of ten a.m. to two p.m. so long as such variances do not interfere with an existing solar collector on northerly property within the reasonable vicinity and are not otherwise injurious to adjacent property. Such variances shall be considered minor variances within the meaning of Section 17.70.070. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.13(B), 1982) 
17.56.040 - Yard variation for block solar development. 
    If, for the reason of solar orientation, an entire area between two intersecting streets in a block is developed cooperatively as a unit, all yard regulations may be varied to carry out the purpose, providing that the city council, after public notice and hearing, is of the opinion that such a development will not be injurious to adjacent property. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.13(C), 1982) 
Chapter 17.58 - GARAGE AND YARD SALES 
Sections: 

17.58.010 - Goods sold-Displays of goods. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale personal property in a manner commonly known as a "garage" sale, "patio" sale or "yard" sale, except personal property owned, utilized and maintained by such person or members of his family on or in connection with premises which they occupy; provided, however, that a sale of donated property of others may be conducted on behalf of a church or charitable organization if the church or the organization joins in the application and the entire proceeds of such sale are donated to the sponsoring church or charitable organization. Personal property offered for sale shall not be displayed in the front yard, or the side yard of any corner lot which adjoins a street, of any such premises. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.14(A), 1982) 
17.58.030 - Number and duration. 
    Only two sales may be conducted in any twelve-month period at the address for which the permit is issued and shall be limited to not more than three consecutive days for each sale. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.14(C), 1982) 
17.58.040 - Signs. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, one sign not exceeding four square feet in area shall be permitted during such sale. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.14 (D), 1982) 
17.58.050 - Court-ordered sales exempted. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales of personal property made under court order or process. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.14(D), 1982) 
Chapter 17.60 - MINIWAREHOUSING 
Sections: 

17.60.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to permit the lease or rental of small spaces for the enclosed storage of personal property and the open storage of automobiles, boats, recreation vehicles and travel trailers. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.15(A), 1982) 
17.60.020 - Permitted manner of development. 
    It is the intent of this chapter that such use may be developed: 
A.  As an accessory or associated use with mobile home parks, and recreation vehicle or travel trailer parks subject to the conditions and requirements of a conditional use permit; 
B.  As a permitted use in zones I-S and I-G and by conditional use permit in zones C-G, C-C, P-D and C-M-O subject to all the development standards of the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 595 § 6.15(B), 1982) 
17.60.030 - Size of units. 
    Individual storage units may vary in size but they may not exceed three hundred square feet in area. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.15(C)(1), 1982) 
17.60.040 - Screening of open units. 
    Open storage units shall be screened with a suitable six-foot fence or wall subject to the approval of the planning director. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 6.15(C)(2), 1982) 
17.60.050 - Design of outside storage. 
    Outside storage shall be designed according to standards for nonresidential parking specified in Sections 17.16.110, 17.16.120 and 17.16.130. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.15(C)(3), 1982) 
Chapter 17.62 - COMMERCIAL MANUFACTURING OVERLAY ZONE 
Sections: 

17.62.010 - Purpose. 
    The C-M-O zone is intended to designate areas where a transition, in-filling or expansion of commercial and light industrial uses is desired into an area of intermittent residential uses. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.16(A), 1982) 
17.62.020 - Conditional use permit-Manner of development. 
    Commercial and industrial uses shall be established subject to a conditional use permit, the primary purpose of which is to provide conditions protecting the residential uses in the area. All uses shall be developed in a manner to upgrade the general quality of the area and to assure reasonable compatibility between uses. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.16(B), 1982) 
17.62.030 - Residential uses-Zoning map designation. 
    The basic underlying use in the C-M-O zoned areas is residential. Where the C-M-O zone symbol is designated on the zoning map, it shall be followed by a residential zone symbol. Residential uses shall be those permitted in the designated zone, and subject to the provisions of the zone and all other provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 6.16(C), 1982) 
Chapter 17.63 - FARMWORKER HOUSING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 862, § 8, adopted October 8, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 17.64. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 17.63. 

17.63.010 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to facilitate and encourage the provision of decent, affordable housing for farmworkers by not requiring a conditional use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance for farmworker housing that is not required of any other agricultural activity in the agriculture (A) zone. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
17.63.020 - Agricultural use. 
    Farmworker housing shall be considered to be an activity that in no way differs from an agricultural use. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
17.63.030 - Occupancy. 
    The permitted occupancy in employee housing in a zone allowing agricultural uses shall include agricultural employees who do not work on the property where the employee housing is located. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
Chapter 17.63A - EMERGENCY SHELTER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 862, § 8, adopted October 8, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 17.66. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 17.63A. 

17.63A.010 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to facilitate and encourage the provision of emergency shelter for homeless persons and households by allowing emergency shelters without a conditional use permit or other discretionary action in the service industrial (I-S) and general industrial (I-G) zones and subject only to the same development standards that apply to the other permitted uses in these zones, except for standards unique to emergency shelters as set forth in Section 17.63A.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
17.63A.020 - Special development and management standards. 
    In addition to the applicable development and performance standards set forth in Division III of Title 17, the following development and management standards shall apply to emergency shelters as authorized by Section 65583(a)(4) of the California Government Code: 
A.  The maximum number of beds or persons to be served nightly by an emergency shelter shall be thirty-five. 
B.  Off-street parking shall be based upon demonstrated need, provided that parking for an emergency shelter shall not be more than that required for other commercial or industrial uses permitted in the service industrial (I-S) and general industrial (I-G) zones. 
C.  Appropriately sized and located exterior and interior on-site waiting and intake areas shall be provided. 
D.  Appropriate exterior lighting shall be provided. 
E.  On-site management shall be provided. 
F.  Security shall be provided during the hours that the emergency shelter is in operation. 
G.  The maximum length of stay by a homeless person in an emergency shelter shall be six months. 
H.  An emergency shelter shall not be located within three hundred feet of another emergency shelter. 
I.  No individual or household shall be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
Chapter 17.63B - SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO)[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 862, § 8, adopted October 8, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 17.68. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 17.63B. 

17.63B.010 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to facilitate and encourage the provision of affordable shelter for low-income persons with special housing needs by allowing SRO housing without a conditional use permit or other discretionary action in the service industrial (I-S) and general industrial (I-G) zones. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
17.63B.020 - Occupancy. 
    An SRO unit shall be occupied by a single person. Occupancy of SRO units may be restricted to seniors or be available to persons of all ages. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
17.63B.030 - Special development and management standards. 
    In addition to the applicable development and performance standards set forth in Division III of Title 17, the following development and management standards shall apply to SRO housing: 
A.  Units in an SRO housing development shall consist of a single room and may have a private or shared bathroom. A shared common kitchen and activity area may also be provided. 
B.  On-site management shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
Chapter 17.63C - SUPPORTIVE HOUSING[8] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 862, § 8, adopted October 8, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 17.70. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 17.63C. 

17.63C.010 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to facilitate and encourage the provision of affordable shelter for low-income persons with special housing needs by allowing supportive housing without a conditional use permit or other discretionary action in all residential zones and subject only to the same development standards that apply to the other permitted residential uses in these zones. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
Chapter 17.63D - TRANSITIONAL HOUSING[9] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 862, § 8, adopted October 8, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 17.72. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 17.63D. 

17.63D.010 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to facilitate and encourage the provision of affordable shelter for low-income persons with special housing needs by allowing transitional housing without a conditional use permit or other discretionary action in all residential zones and subject only to the same development standards that apply to the other permitted residential uses in these zones. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 8, 10-8-13) 
Chapter 17.63E - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS RELATED USES AND ACTIVITY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 883, § 1, adopted June 13, 2017, repealed the former Chapter 17.63E, §§ 17.63E.010-17.63E.060, and enacted a new Chapter 17.63E as set out herein. The former Chapter 17.63E pertained to marijuana dispensaries and derived from Ord. No. 873, adopted January 12, 2016 and Ord. No. 882, adopted May 9, 2017. 

17.63E.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to further fulfill the purposes and intents set forth in Title 5 of the Blythe Municipal Code. No person shall operate a commercial cannabis business without first obtaining a city commercial cannabis business permit and complying with all the requirements of Title 5 of the Blythe Municipal Code and complying with all applicable state law requirements including obtaining a license or permit required by the state to operate a commercial cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
17.63E.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, the terms used in this part shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Title 5 of the Blythe Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
17.63E.030 - Location of commercial cannabis businesses-Dispensaries. 
    Commercial cannabis dispensaries shall be permitted only as follows: 
A.  In the C-C, commercial community business, C-G general commercial, and in I-G, general industry zone. 
B.  The dispensary must not be located on a parcel located within a six hundred feet radius of a school (whether public, private, or charter, including pre-school, transitional kindergarten, and K-12). If any part of a parcel falls within the six hundred feet, then the entire parcel shall meet the requirements of this paragraph. 
C.  No closer than six hundred feet from any portion of any parcel in the City limits containing any of the following: 
1.  A youth facility; 
2.  A daycare facility serving nine or more children and is licensed by the county or city. 
3.  Parks and places of worship at the discretion of the city council. 
D.  No closer than one thousand feet from any portion of any parcel containing a commercial adult day care facility serving nine or more adults and licensed by the state, county or city. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
17.63E.040 - Location of commercial cannabis businesses-All types other than dispensaries-Cultivation, manufacturing, testing facilities and distributors. 
    Commercial cannabis businesses other than dispensaries, including those permitted to engage in cultivation, manufacturing, testing and distribution of cannabis and cannabis products shall be permitted only if all the following requirements are met: 
A.  Commercial cannabis businesses other than a dispensary must be located on property zoned C-C community commercial, C-G, general commercial, I-G general industrial, and I-S service industrial; and 
B.  The property on which the commercial cannabis business is located must also be no closer than six hundred feet from any portion of any parcel containing any of the following: 
1.  A school (whether public, private, or charter, including pre-school, transitional kindergarten, and K-12); 
2.  A daycare facility serving nine or more children and is licensed by the county and city; 
3.  Any park or place of worship at the discretion of the city council; 
4.  A youth facility; 
5.  An adult day care facility serving nine or more adults and licensed by the state, county or city. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 885, § 16, 10-10-17; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 8-14-18) 
17.63E.050 - Distances measured; applicable properties. 
    The distance between parcels shall be the horizontal distance measured in a straight line from any property line of the sensitive use to the closest property line of the lot on which the commercial cannabis business is to be located, without regard to any intervening structures. The distance requirements in this chapter shall only be applicable with respect to properties located in the city's limits, unless otherwise required by state law. The distance requirements shall not be applicable with respect to any property located outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
17.63E.060 - Certification from the planner or designee. 
    Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business must obtain a certification from the planner or designee certifying that the business is located on a site that meets all the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
17.63E.070 - Medical dispensaries, cultivation of medical marijuana and all commercial medical marijuana uses in the city. 
    Marijuana cultivation by any person, including primary caregivers, qualified patients and dispensaries, is prohibited throughout the city of Blythe unless permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 6-13-17) 
DIVISION V. - ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS AND VARIANCES 
Chapter 17.64 - ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND DUTIES 
Sections: 

17.64.010 - City council responsibilities. 
    The city council shall: 
A.  Adopt regulations as stated in this title and amendments hereto; 
B.  Approve any changes to the zoning map; 
C.  Grant or deny conditional use permits and variances; and 
D.  Perform such other duties as are required by state law, acting in joint capacity as planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.00(A), 1982) 
17.64.020 - Planning director responsibilities generally. 
    The planning director shall be responsible for: 
A.  Investigations; 
B.  Reports; 
C.  Public notices; 
D.  Records; 
E.  Interpretations of provisions of this title; and 
F.  Other activities required by this title or the city council to fairly and effectively administer all zoning regulations. 
(Ord. 630 § 1, 1987: Ord. 595 § 7.00(B), 1982) 
17.64.030 - Application and action recordkeeping. 
A.  The planning director shall give each application filed with him or action initiated by the city council an identification number. Each type of application shall have a separate number series which thereafter shall be numbered sequentially. 
B.  The planning director shall prepare and maintain a file on each application or action initiated by the city council, and an index to facilitate location of files and applicability of cases to specific properties. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord 595 § 7.08(A, B), 1982) 
17.64.040 - Notice to affected property owners. 
    The planning director shall, upon receiving an application under this title or starting a file on a city-council-initiated or planning-director-initiated action, cause the owners or authorized agent of owners of parcels of property to which the action applies to be notified in writing of hearing dates, times and locations, when applicable, and of final action for or against proposals being considered. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.08(C), 1982) 
17.64.050 - Enforcement responsibility. 
    The director of public works, building inspector and all officials charged with the issuance of licenses or permits shall enforce the provisions of this title. The chief of police and all officials charged with the enforcement of the law shall also enforce the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 8.00, 1982) 
17.64.060 - Design review committee. 
    The provisions for the design review committee are set out in Sections 17.64.061 through 17.64.066. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.64.061 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the design review committee is to provide an additional level of design review to the central business district, as defined in the "Blythe Downtown Design and Implementation Program" (as amended). The design review committee shall prevent the erection of structures or signs which are inharmonious and incompatible with the Design Standards and Architectural Guidelines of the implementation plan. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.64.062 - Composition of design review committee. 
    The design review committee shall be composed of five members, to consist of three members of the downtown implementation advisory committee, who shall be appointed by city council; the city manager; and the director of planning. The committee may also include a nonvoting design professional who may be an architect, landscape architect or related design professional. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.64.063 - Public meetings of design review committee. 
    The design review committee shall hold one regularly scheduled public meeting each year, the agenda of which shall be posted on the door of the city council chambers seven calendar days in advance of said meeting. Additional meetings of the design review committee shall be noticed in the same manner. Recommendations of the design review committee with the concurrence of a minimum of three members, shall be adopted. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.64.064 - Scope of committee review. 
    The design review committee shall be responsible for the review of site plans, building plans and elevations, signage plans and landscape plans and other issues which may affect the development's conformance with the Design Standards and Architectural Guidelines of the downtown design implementation program. The adequacy of materials provided for committee review shall be determined by the planning director. The following plans shall be submitted to the planning director as part of the required application materials for plot plans, conditional use permits, public use permits, subdivisions or other plans which affect the appearance of the downtown area. 
A.  Site Plans. Site plans shall be drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of structures and other improvements including, where appropriate, driveways, pedestrian walkways, off-street parking and loading areas, landscape areas, fences and walls. Site plans shall also indicate ingress and egress and full width adjacent streets. 
B.  Landscape Plan. A comprehensive landscape plan shall be drawn to scale, indicating the location and design of the landscape elements including biological and common names of each species and size to be planted, symbols on plan indicating planting type and size at maturity, mounding or berms and other landscaping features. 
C.  Architectural drawings and Elevations. The required architectural drawings and elevations shall be drawn to scale and shall clearly illustrate the appearance of proposed new construction or renovations. Plans and drawings shall fully indicate types of exterior materials and finishes to be used. All elevations of buildings shall be shown in equally clear detail. 
D.  Signage. All proposed signage, whether freestanding or mounted on existing or new structures, shall be shown in plans drawn to scale, indicating dimensions of the sign, its location on the site, height, materials and colors to be used and method of illumination. 
E.  Additional Information. Additional materials, other than those listed in this section, may be required by the planning director for review by the design review committee. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.64.065 - Review and action of the design review committee. 
    Within thirty days from the finding of adequacy of the application materials by the planning director, the design review committee shall review an render a determination of adequacy of the proposed application, either approving design elements or returning plans and drawings to the applicant for modification. Failure on the part of the design review committee to conduct the design review within the thirty-day review period shall result in the approval of plans, drawings or elevation, unless a time extension has been requested by the applicant and approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
17.64.066 - Appeal to the redevelopment agency. 
    Within ten days from the date of determination by the design review committee, the applicant may file an appeal with the planning director to bring the matter before the redevelopment agency. The redevelopment agency shall hear the appeal within thirty days from the submittal of the appeal application and appropriate fee. Failure of the redevelopment agency to act within the prescribed time limit shall result in the automatic approval of submitted design materials, unless an extension of time is requested by the applicant. 
(Ord. 636 (part), 1988) 
Chapter 17.66 - AMENDMENTS-REZONES 
Sections: 

17.66.010 - Scope. 
    This chapter includes proceedings to changes zones applicable to specific properties, to alter boundaries of zones, to add or remove uses permitted within zones, to add new regulations to this title or to modify or remove regulations from this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.01(A), 1982) 
17.66.020 - Initiation-Applicable procedures. 
    When initiated by the city council, amendments to this title shall be processed in accordance with requirements of the California Planning and Zoning Law and the council's adopted procedures for enacting ordinances. In addition, a change of the zone applicable to specific properties or an alteration of zone boundaries may be initiated by parties other than the city council in accordance with the procedures detailed in the following sections and requirements of the California Planning and Zoning Law. The provisions of this title shall prevail when more restrictive than the state law. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.01(B), 1982) 
17.66.030 - Application for rezone. 
    An application for a change of zone may be filed with the planning director by the owners or the authorized agent of the owners of the parcels of property for which a change of zone is sought. The application shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Address and legal description of the property; 
C.  A statement and maps, site plans, charts, diagrams, renderings and other data or exhibits which clearly define the use to be made of the property and its relationship to adjacent properties; 
D.  Maps showing all properties, public and private streets, alleys and pertinent easements within three hundred feet of the property described in the application; 
E.  Such additional information as the planning director may require. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.01(C), 1982) 
17.66.040 - Fee. 
    A fee shall accompany the application in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.01(D), 1982) 
17.66.050 - Review and recommendation of director. 
    The planning director shall review applications for zone change and: 
A.  Advise the city council when a hearing is required; and 
B.  Prepare a report to the city council of his finding and recommendations. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.01(E), 1982) 
17.66.060 - Public hearings. 
    The city council shall schedule and hold two public hearings prior to making its decision and may, at its own discretion, continue the hearings or schedule and hold additional hearings. Hearings shall be set and notice given as provided in Section 17.74.010. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.01(F), 1982) 
17.66.070 - Action by city council. 
    Within sixty days of the close of scheduled public hearings, the council shall either enact an ordinance amending this title or deny the application. Amendments enacted may encompass any boundary changes or application of zones appearing in the advertisement of hearing and discussed at the hearing. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.01(G), 1982) 
17.66.080 - Reapplication after denial. 
    Following denial of a change of zone applicable to properties or an alteration of zone boundaries, no application for the same or substantially the same change on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.01(H), 1982) 
Chapter 17.68 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
Sections: 

17.68.010 - Purpose-Uses requiring CUP. 
    Certain uses of land, structures and buildings possess characteristics which, if not specifically regulated, could be detrimental to adjacent properties or to the general welfare of the city, yet should logically be located in certain zoned districts, or in the city without regard to zone district classification. Such uses would serve the general welfare and not be detrimental to adjacent properties if subject to conditions designed to minimize the adverse effects at specific sites. A conditional use permit, approved by the city council, is required for the location and operation of such uses. All uses subject to conditional use permits are identified in this title together with the zone or zones within which such permit is required. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(A), 1982) 
17.68.020 - Who may initiate. 
    A conditional use permit application may be initiated by the city council or by the owners or the authorized agent of the owners of the parcels of property for which a conditional use is sought. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(B), 1982) 
17.68.025 - Residences in nonresidential zones. 
    Single-family residential units may be permitted in I-S or C-G zones with a conditional use permit using the procedures of this title with the additional provisions. 
A.  The following findings must be made: 
1.  The proposed dwelling is in character with the existing neighborhood; 
2.  The proposed dwelling is in an area where adjacent land uses are residential; 
3.  The proposed dwelling does not conflict with the permitted uses of the zone in regards to access and traffic generation. 
B.  The conditions of approval shall include: 
1.  A statement of the potential conflicts that may arise due to the issuance of the conditional use permit; 
2.  A statement of nonliability for conflicts arising due to the conflict of uses in the zone. 
C.  Conditional use permits may be issued to existing dwellings in the above zones to allow renovations under the above provisions. 
(Ord. 690 § 2, 1992) 
17.68.030 - Application. 
    The application of an owner or his authorized agent for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the planning director and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Address and legal description of the property; 
C.  A statement and maps, site plans, charts, diagrams, renderings and other data or exhibits which clearly define the use to be made of the property and its relationship to adjacent properties; 
D.  Two maps showing all properties, public and private streets, alleys and pertinent easements within three hundred feet of the property described in the application; 
E.  Such additional information as the planning director may require. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.02 (B), 1982) 
17.68.040 - Fee. 
    A fee shall accompany the application for a conditional use permit in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(C), 1982) 
17.68.050 - Review and recommendations of director. 
    The planning director shall review applications for conditional use permits and: 
A.  Advise the city council when a hearing is required; and 
B.  Prepare a report to the city council of his finding and recommendations. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.02(D), 1982) 
17.68.060 - Hearing before council. 
    The city council shall schedule and hold one public hearing prior to making its decision and may, at its own discretion, continue the hearing or schedule and hold additional hearings. Hearings shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 17.74.010. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(E), 1982) 
17.68.070 - City council findings and action. 
A.  Within thirty days following closure of the scheduled public hearing or hearings, the city council shall grant with appropriate conditions or deny the application. 
B.  Before final approval of a conditional use permit, the council shall make the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed location of the conditional use is in accord with the objectives of this title and the purposes of the zone in which the site is located; 
2.  That the proposed location of the conditional use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(F), 1982) 
17.68.080 - Reapplication after denial. 
    Following the denial of a conditional use permit application or the revocation of a conditional use permit, no application for a conditional use permit for the same or substantially the same conditional use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(G), 1982) 
17.68.090 - Continuation of existing conditional use. 
    A conditional use legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or prior to the effective date of subsequent amendments to the regulations or zone boundaries of this title shall be permitted to continue, provided that it is operated and maintained in accord with the conditions prescribed at the time of its establishment, if any. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(H), 1982) 
17.68.100 - Permit runs with land. 
    A conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this title shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the conditional use permit application. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(I), 1982) 
17.68.110 - Lapse from disuse. 
    A conditional use permit issued under the terms of this title shall lapse if no improvements to the real estate concerned have been made, and the holder of the permit shall not have utilized it within one year from the date upon which such permit shall have been granted unless by conditions of the permit a greater time is allowed. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(J), 1982) 
17.68.120 - Suspension and revocation. 
    A conditional use permit may be suspended and subsequently revoked in accordance with procedures established in Chapter 17.74. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.02(K), 1982) 
Chapter 17.69 - NON-DISCRETIONARY PERMIT FOR LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES 
Sections: 

17.69.010 - Definition. 
    "Large family day care home" means a detached, single-family dwelling which provides family day care for seven to fourteen children, inclusive, including children under the age ten years who reside at the home as defined in Section 1596.78 of the California Health and Safety Code and as permitted by the licensing agency. 
(Ord. 774 § 1 (part),2001) 
17.69.020 - Zoning use chart. 
City of Blythe Child Care Zoning Regulations Legend P Permitted NP Not Permitted NDP Non-Discretionary Permit CUP Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit CUP* Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit if in conjunction with public/quasi- 
public uses. Otherwise not allowed. Type of Services R-A R-R R-E R-1 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 R-4 P-O C-1 C-2 C-3 M-1 M-2 O-A A-S A-D Small Day Care Home (6 or less children) (8 under certain conditions) P P P P P P P P CUP NP CUP CUP NP NP NP NP NP Large Family Day Care Home (7 to 12 children) NDP NDP NDP NDP NDP NDP NDP NDP CUP NP CUP CUP NP NP NP NP NP Day Care Center (Other than large or small family day care homes Includes pre-schools, infant centers and extended day care facilities). NP NP NP NP NP CUP 
* CUP 
* CUP 
* Permitted by right if facility is in conjunction with and primarily serves adjoining businesses. 

Conditional Use Permit required if facility is not in conjunction with or primarily does not serve adjoining businesses.  
(Ord. 774 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.69.030 - Non-discretionary permit fee. 
    A fee of two hundred fifty dollars for large family day care homes is required. 
(Ord. 774 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.69.040 - Requirement for large family day care homes. 
A.  The applicant shall obtain all licenses and permits required by State law for operation of the facility and shall keep all State licenses or permits valid and current. If the license is revoked for any reason, the applicant shall immediately notify the planning department. 
B.  Applicants who reside on rented or leased property shall provide proof of written notice to the landlord or owner of the property that they intend to operate a family day care home on the rented or leased premises in accord with Section 1597.40(d) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  Use of a single-family dwelling for the purposes of a large family day care home shall not constitute a change of occupancy or use. Therefore, the facility shall comply with all zoning standards applicable to other single-family residences. 
D.  The facility is the residence of the provider and the use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes. 
E.  No structural changes are proposed which will alter the character of the single-family or multi-family residence. 
F.  The facility shall comply with all standards relating to fire and life safety applicable to single-family residences established by the State Fire Marshal contained in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations as amended from time to time. 
G.  The subject site shall not be located closer than one thousand two hundred lineal feet from any other large family day care home on the same street. 
H.  An outdoor play area which satisfies the requirements of the state, community care licensing division shall be provided in the rear yard and shall be enclosed by a natural barrier, wall, solid fence or other solid structure a minimum of five feet in height. The provider shall comply with all adopted and/or future noise ordinances and policies. 
I.  All outdoor play areas shall be adequately separated from vehicular circulation and parking areas by a strong fence such as chain link, wood or masonry. 
J.  Required garages shall be prohibited for use as a family day care home and shall be utilized for parking two of the applicant's onsite vehicles during the daily operation of the day care home rather than parking the vehicles on the street or in the driveway. 
K.  The applicant shall designate the onsite driveway as the official drop-off and pick-up area for children and shall notify parents of this requirement. The driveway shall remain free and clear of parked cars. 
L.  The applicant shall require that employees park in locations which will not inconvenience nearby residents. To disrupt the neighborhood as little as possible, best efforts shall be made by the applicant to require employees to park as close as possible to the family day care home. 
M.  Proof of notification (by the applicant) of all property owners and/or occupants within one hundred feet of the subject property shall be provided. Please attach proof of notification (i.e. registered mail receipts or occupant's signature confirming receipt of letter). 
N.  Large family day care home providers shall make a written application to the zoning administrator and shall include all materials deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to show that the requirements of this section are met. The zoning administrator shall grant the permit without a hearing if all the requirements of this section are satisfied. The decision of the zoning administrator shall be made within fifteen working days of the receipt of a complete application and provided to the applicant in writing. The decision of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the planning commission within ten days of the date of the notification by the zoning administrator. Any appeal shall be filed in accordance to the procedures set forth in Section 17.62.020C1a of this title; the appellant shall pay the fee applicable to single-family dwellings. 
(Ord. 774 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.69.050 - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall go into effect and be in full force and operation from and after thirty days after its final passage and adoption. 
(Ord. 774 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.69.060 - Publication. 
    At least two days prior to its final adoption, copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be posted in at least three prominent and distinct locations in the city; and a notice shall be published once in the Palo Verde Valley Times, the official newspaper of the city of Blythe, setting forth the title of this ordinance, the date of its introduction and the places where this ordinance is posted. 
(Ord. 774 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.70 - VARIANCES 
Sections: 

17.70.010 - Findings required to grant. 
    A variance is a modification of a regulation contained in this title which may be granted only when it can be found that: 
A.  Because of special circumstances applicable to a property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, strict application of a regulation contained in this title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification; 
B.  The conditions under which the variance is to be granted will assure that the authorized modification of regulations shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated; 
C.  The variance does not authorize a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation governing the property. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.03(A), 1982) 
17.70.020 - Who may initiate-Procedures. 
    The city council may initiate a variance which thereafter shall be processed in accordance with the procedures to be followed by the planning director and the city council as set forth in the following sections of this chapter. An application for a variance may be filed with the planning director by the owners or the authorized agent of the owners of such property and processed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.03(B), 1982) 
17.70.030 - Application by property owner or agent. 
    An application for a variance shall be filed with the planning director by the owners or the authorized agent of the owners of the parcels of property for which the variance is sought. The application shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Address and legal description of the property; 
C.  A statement and maps, site plans, charts, diagrams, renderings and other data or exhibits which clearly define the use to be made of the property and its relationship to adjacent properties; 
D.  Two maps showing all properties, public and private streets, alleys and pertinent easements within three hundred feet of the property described in the application; 
E.  Such additional information as the planning director may require. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.03(C), 1982) 
17.70.040 - Fee. 
    A fee shall accompany the application for a variance in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.03(D), 1982) 
17.70.050 - Determination of major or minor nature. 
    The planning director shall review all variance applications and determine whether each is a major or minor variance within the meaning of Sections 17.70.060 and 17.70.070 and shall process each in accordance with his determination. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.03(E), 1982) 
17.70.060 - Minor variance-Notice. 
    The planning director shall give notice of a filing for a minor variance in the same manner as specified for hearings before the city council in Section 17.74.010. Notice shall specify that the planning director will receive comments in writing for or against the variance for a period of ten days subsequent to publication or placement of the notice, after which time he will render his decision. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.03(F), 1982) 
17.70.070 - Minor variance-Granting. 
    The planning director, after giving notice as required in Section 17.70.060 and after making the findings specified in Section 17.70.010, may grant the following variances: 
A.  Front, side and rear yard setbacks: Side yards may be varied only to three feet unless meeting conditions for zero side yards specified in Chapter 17.10; 
B.  Lot width: up to ten percent of required width; 
C.  Allowance of the use of common recreation space as a substitute for private space; 
D.  Variances pertaining to fences, hedges and walls; 
E.  Building height affecting architectural features, signs and tower appropriate to the use of the premises and solar energy features; 
F.  The planning director may grant a variance to the setback regulations applicable in zones R-E, R-L-1 and R-L-2 by increasing or diminishing required side and rear setbacks up to forty percent, provided that square footage of buildable area of the lot as determined by the setback provisions of Chapter 17.12 is not increased and provided that the ground floor area of all roofed structures, both main and accessory, constitute less than forty percent of the lot area. Variances meeting these standards are declared to be consistent with the finding required under Section 17.70.010. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.03(G), 1982) 
17.70.080 - Minor variance-Request for hearing-Processing as major. 
    The planning director may, on his own initiative, or shall, upon receipt in writing of a request for a hearing before the city council and payment of an appeal fee as prescribed by the city council by resolution, continue to process a minor variance in accordance with procedures for a major variance. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.03(H), 1982) 
17.70.090 - Major variance-Findings and recommendations of director. 
    The planning director shall review all applications he determines to be major variances and all appeals of his decisions on minor variances and: 
A.  Advise the city council of the need for a public hearing; and 
B.  Report to the city council his findings and recommendations. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.03(I), 1982) 
17.70.100 - Major variance-Hearing before council. 
    The city council shall schedule and hold one public hearing prior to making its decision and may, at its own discretion, continue the hearing or schedule and hold additional hearings. Hearings shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 17.74.010. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.03(J), 1982) 
17.70.110 - Major variance-Grant or denial. 
    Within thirty days following closure of the scheduled public hearing or hearings, the city council shall grant with appropriate conditions or deny the application. Before final approval of a variance, the city council shall make the findings defined in Section 17.70.010. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.03(K), 1982) 
17.70.120 - Reapplication after denial or revocation. 
    Following the denial of a variance application or the revocation of a variance, no application for a variance for the same or substantially the same variance on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial or revocation of the variance. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.03(L), 1982) 
17.70.130 - Variances run with land. 
    A variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this title shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the variance application. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.03(M), 1982) 
17.70.140 - Lapse for lack of action. 
    An approved variance shall lapse if no action has been taken under it for a period of one year from the date of grant unless a greater time is allowed in the conditions of grant. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.03 (N), 1982) 
17.70.150 - Suspension and revocation. 
    A variance may be suspended and subsequently revoked in accordance with procedures established in Chapter 17.74. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.03(O), 1982) 
Chapter 17.72 - TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 
Sections: 

17.72.010 - Initiation-Processing. 
    A temporary use permit application may be initiated by the planning director, or by the owners or the authorized agent of the owners of parcels of property on which the temporary use is to be located. When initiated by the director of public works, the planning director shall process the permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Other parties shall file an application as required by Section 17.72.030. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.04(A) (part), 1982) 
17.72.020 - Required when. 
    A temporary use permit is required for the following uses: 
A.  Temporary display and sales of art work; 
B.  Christmas tree sales; 
C.  Carnivals, circuses, special events of not over seventy-two consecutive hours; 
D.  Garage or yard sales subject to the limitation of Chapter 17.58; 
E.  Parking and temporary moving of construction equipment; 
F.  Storage of materials incidental to the carrying on of a public works project, subdivision or other construction project; 
G.  Real estate sales office or a development site; 
H.  Garage or shed on development site; 
I.  Model homes, model home sales offices; 
J.  Such other uses as the planning director may consider to be within the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.04(A) (part), 1982) 
17.72.030 - Application. 
    An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed with the planning director by the owners or the authorized agent of owners of the parcels of property for which the permit is sought. The permit shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Address and legal description of the property; 
C.  A statement and maps, site plans, charts, diagrams, renderings and other data or exhibits which clearly define the use to be made of the property and its relationship to adjacent properties; 
D.  Two maps showing all properties, public and private streets, alleys and pertinent easements within three hundred feet of the property described in the application. This requirement may be waived by the director of public works; 
E.  Statement of the date and time the use is to cease; 
F.  Such additional information as the planning director may require. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.04(B), 1982) 
17.72.040 - Fee-Deposit. 
    A fee shall accompany the application in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council. In addition, the director may require a deposit not to exceed one hundred percent of the fee. The deposit is to be refunded to the applicant upon determination by the planning director within fifteen days after the use is scheduled to cease that the property has been restored to a clean, sanitary and usable condition. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.04(C), 1982) 
17.72.050 - Thirty days' duration or less. 
    The planning director may grant permits for temporary use of thirty days or less upon a finding that the use, under conditions imposed, will not have a significant adverse impact on adjacent properties and the community. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.04(D), 1982) 
17.72.060 - Thirty-one to one hundred eighty days. 
A.  The planning director may grant a temporary use for thirty to one hundred eighty days upon a finding that the use will not, under conditions imposed, have a significant adverse impact on adjacent properties or the community. 
B.  A permit for use for thirty-one to one hundred eighty days shall be processed as if it were a minor variance. 
C.  A permit processed under this section may be extended by the planning director for an additional one hundred eighty days and subsequently, by the city council, for one year. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.04(E), 1982) 
Chapter 17.74 - NOTICES-SUSPENSIONS AND REVOCATIONS 
Sections: 

17.74.010 - Notice of required public hearings. 
    When public hearings are required by this title and reference is made to this section, such notice shall be given by: 
A.  Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city not less than ten days before the date of a scheduled public hearing. Such notice shall state the nature of the matter to be heard, the location of the property involved, and the time and place of the hearing; and 
B.  Posting of notices of such hearing at a distance not more than one hundred feet apart along both sides of each and every street upon which the property abuts for a distance of not less than three hundred feet from the boundaries of the property. The nature of the proposed action shall be printed in plain type with letters not less than one inch in height and in addition in smaller type a statement describing the property involved and the character of the proposed action. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.05, 1982) 
17.74.020 - Suspension and revocation of permits and variances-Cause. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this title or with the conditions which are a part of an approved permit or variance are cause for suspension and revocation of a permit or variance granted under terms of this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 7.06(A), 1982) 
17.74.030 - Suspension and revocation of permits and variances-Procedure. 
    The planning director may suspend a permit or variance for ninety days for failure to comply with the provisions of this title or the conditions which are a part of an approved permit or variance. The planning director shall notify the city council of his determination of noncompliance if such noncompliance has not been corrected at the end of sixty days following notice of violation having been given to the owners of the parcels of property which are in noncompliance. Thereafter, the city council may extend the suspension of the permit or variance for an additional one hundred eighty days and may initiate procedures to revoke the permit. Procedures to revoke a permit or variance shall be the same as those for granting the permit or variance. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.06(B), 1982) 
Chapter 17.76 - INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.76.010 - Responsibility of planning director-Written statements. 
    The planning director shall interpret the provisions of this title and, when requested by persons who believe they may be injured by an interpretation, shall prepare a written statement of such interpretation. 
(Ord. 630 § 2, 1987: Ord. 595 § 7.07(A) (part), 1982) 
17.76.020 - Review by planning commission. 
    Upon payment of an appeal fee established by resolution of the city council, a person who asserts that he may be injured by an interpretation of the provisions of this title by the planning director may file with the planning director a request for review by the planning commission. The director shall submit to the planning commission within thirty days the request for review and his report containing his interpretation, together with such supporting data as he may deem necessary. The planning commission shall act on the request for review within thirty days of receipt of the request for review. 
(Ord. 789 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.07 (A) (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.78 - ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION 
Sections: 

17.78.010 - Assessments and impact reports. 
    The planning director shall make an environmental assessment of all matters requiring action by the city council under this title. When the planning director determines that an environmental impact report is required under the state law and Administrative Code, he may require an applicant under this title to provide such information and data as he may deem necessary for this preparation of the required report. 
(Ord. 630 § 3 (part), 1987; Ord. 595 § 7.10, 1982) 
Chapter 17.80 - BUILDING PERMITS-CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
Sections: 

17.80.010 - Building permit-Required. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title unless a building permit has been issued for such work. No building permit shall be issued for the erection or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 8.01, 1982) 
17.80.020 - Building permit-Site plan required. 
A.  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the location, height and area of the building to be erected and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this title. 
B.  Where a building is to be erected in any district and the proposed front yard is less than the prescribed minimum for the district in which the building is to be erected and when such minimum front yard is permitted to be reduced as hereinbefore specified, the site plan shall include the premises on both sides in the same block on which the premises' buildings have already been erected, together with the location of such buildings. 
(Ord. 595 § 8.02, 1982) 
17.80.030 - Certificate of occupancy-Required when. 
A.  No building erected, moved, enlarged or altered shall be occupied, used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the director of public works. Such certificate shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued only after such building, erection, enlargement or alteration has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this title and when the proposed use conforms thereto. Any use legally occupying an existing building at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter became effective may be continued but shall not be changed unless a certificate of occupancy for the new use has been issued by the director of public works, after finding that such use conforms with the provisions of this title and applicable ordinances. 
B.  A certificate of occupancy shall also be applied for before any vacant land is used or before an existing use of vacant land is changed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. No certificate of occupancy shall be required where the land is to be used for tilling the soil and the growing of farm, garden or orchard products. 
(Ord. 595 § 8.03 (part), 1982) 
17.80.040 - Certificate of occupancy-Content-Records. 
A.  The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all the laws and ordinances and with the provisions of this title. 
B.  A record of all certificates shall be kept on file by the director of public works and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(Ord. 595 § 8.03 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.82 - VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 

17.82.010 - Abatement, removal and enjoinment-Citizen duty to aid enforcement. 
A.  Any building or structure erected or maintained and/or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this title is unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such building, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting or maintaining such building or structure, or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title. 
B.  It shall be the right and duty of every citizen to participate and assist the city officials in the enforcement of this title. 
(Ord. 595 § 8.04, 1982) 
17.82.020 - Misdemeanor penalty. 
    Any person violating, or anyone acting in behalf of a person violating, any of the provisions of this title shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine or imprisonment or both such fine and imprisonment to the maximum penalty permitted by the law of the state for a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation of this title is continued or permitted to exist without compliance shall constitute a separate offense punishable upon conviction in the manner prescribed in this section. 
(Ord. 595 § 8.05, 1982) 
Chapter 17.84 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCEDURE 

17.84.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 9, 10-8-13) 
17.84.020 - Applicability. 
A.  A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative or any entity, when the application of a requirement of this zoning ordinance or other city requirement, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or developmental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This chapter is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts. 
B.  A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. 
C.  A reasonable accommodation is granted to the household that needs the accommodation and does not apply to successors in interest to the property. 
D.  A reasonable accommodation may be granted in compliance with this chapter without the need for the approval of a variance. 
E.  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Section 17.84.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 9, 10-8-13) 
17.84.030 - Application procedure. 
A.  Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the development services department, or in the form of a letter, to the city planner and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
2.  Address of the property for which the request is being made; 
3.  The current actual use of the property; 
4.  The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts; 
5.  The zoning ordinance provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested; and 
6.  Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual. 
B.  Review with Other Land Use Applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (e.g., conditional use permit, design review, etc.), then the applicant shall file the application for discretionary approval together with the information required by subsection A above for concurrent review. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 9, 10-8-13) 
17.84.040 - Review authority. 
A.  City Planner. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the city planner, or his/her designee if no approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation. 
B.  Other Review Authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority responsible for reviewing the discretionary land use application. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 9, 10-8-13) 
17.84.050 - Application review. 
A.  City Planner Review. The city planner, or his/her designee, shall make a written determination within forty-five days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 17.84.060 (Findings and decision). 
B.  Other Review Authority. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the authority responsible for reviewing the discretionary land use application in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary review. The written determination to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made in accordance with Section 17.84.060 (Findings and decision). 
(Ord. No. 862, § 9, 10-8-13) 
17.84.060 - Findings and decision. 
    The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
A.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual disabled under the Acts; 
B.  Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts; 
C.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; 
D.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning; 
E.  Potential impact on surrounding uses; 
F.  Physical attributes of the property and structures; and 
G.  Alternative reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 9, 10-8-13) 
17.84.070 - Conditions of approval. 
    In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by Section 17.84.060. The conditions shall also state whether the accommodation granted shall be rescinded in the event that the person for whom the accommodation was requested no longer resides on the property. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 9, 10-8-13) 
Title 18 - GRAFFITI AND VANDALISM ABATEMENT 
Chapters: 
Chapter 18.01 - GRAFFITI AND VANDALISM ABATEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 864, § 1, adopted August 12, 2014, repealed the former Chapter 18.01, §§ 18.01.010-18.01.100, and enacted a new Chapter 18.01 as set out herein. The former Chapter 18.01 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 802, 2005. 

18.01.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for the abatement of graffiti from public and private property to reduce blight and deterioration within the city, protect public safety, and for the expeditious removal of graffiti from structures on both public and private property. The city council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  The increase of graffiti, on both public and private property, is creating a condition within the city which results in blight and deterioration of property values and of the comfortable enjoyment of life and property for adjacent and surrounding residents and owners, and contributes to the overall detriment of the city. 
B.  Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to public safety which must be abated to alleviate the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. 
C.  Certain categories of graffiti that incite violence are especially harmful and must be removed as quickly as possible to avoid or minimize harm to persons and the whole community. 
D.  Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes a city to enact ordinances to provide for the use of city funds to remove graffiti from public or private property, and in order to promote expeditious removal of obnoxious graffiti, the use of public funds is authorized as provided in the following sections of the chapter. 
E.  Government Code Section 53069.5 authorizes a city to offer and pay a reward for information leading to the determination of the identity of, and the apprehension of any person who willfully damages property with graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.020 - Definitions. 
    "Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol canister, can, bottle, or other receptacle which contains paint or any substance capable of defacing property, which is, and/or can be adapted or made to be pressurized in order to impel and/or propel any such substance. 
    "Broad-tipped marker" means any felt-tip indelible or permanent ink marker and/or any similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth of an inch, which contains any ink or pigmented liquid that is not water soluble. 
    "City" means the city of Blythe. 
    "City council" means the city council of the city of Blythe. 
    "Continuously viewable" means within line of sight of an employee or store manager at all times during business hours. Continuously viewable shall include viewable via closed circuit security cameras. 
    "Director" means the director of public works of the city of Blythe or his/her designee. 
    "Etchers" mean any tool, device, and/or other mechanism including, but not limited to, any tool, device and/or other mechanism commonly known as "glass etchers," "metal etchers," "cutting instrument." 
    "Drill bits" or any other instrument that can be applied by pressure or any other contact with any surface which can cause any permanent markings commonly known as graffiti or related vandalism (as defined in this section). 
    "Expense of abatement" includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant and his or her parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program, disbursed reward money, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the person who created, caused, or committed the graffiti on the publicly or privately owned real or personal property within the city. 
    "Graffiti and related vandalism" means any unauthorized inscription, symbol, design and/or configuration of letters and/or numbers written, drawn, scribed, etched, marked, painted, stained, stuck on or adhered to any surface (public or private), including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, under/overpasses, bridges, trestles, buildings, and/or any other structures or surfaces, regardless of the material of the component. 
    "Graffiti implements" or "paraphernalia" means any substance or material such as, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, markers, paint sticks, etchers, gum labels, also including, but not limited to, tips (or nozzles) which can be applied to aerosol paint containers, any record or chronicle of graffiti or related vandalism including, but not limited to, pictures, photographs, drawings, scrap books and/or other records depicting or illustrating any forms or graffiti or related vandalism (as described in this section). 
    "Gum label" means any substance consisting of a material such as, but not limited to, paper, fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl and/or any other similar material, where the material also contains one or more surfaces containing a substance such as, but not limited to, any material commonly known as an adhesive or glue, which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts, including, but not limited to, decals, stickers, patches, stamps or labels. 
    "Paint balloon" means any canister, can, container, bottle or other receptacle including, but not limited to, anything commonly known as a balloon or other receptacle made of any material such as, but not limited to, latex, plastic, rubber, paper, glass or other material which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye or any other pigmented substance intended for the purpose of defacing any property, public or private, upon impact or contact of any surface including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, under/overpasses, bridges, trestles, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces regardless of the material of the component. 
    "Paint stick/graffiti stick" means any device which contains any substance, solid or liquid, including, but not limited to, any form of any substance commonly known as paint, stain, ink, chalk, wax, epoxy and/or any other similar substance which can be applied to any surface by applying pressure in such a way as to leave any visible mark thereon. 
    "Stamp" or "stamping device" means any tool, device or implement which can cause upon impact or contact any mark (described as graffiti or related vandalism in this section) by means or ink, paint, stain or any other substance or material including, but not limited to, any device commonly known as a rubber stamp or similar device (whether manufactured, handmade or devised) for the purpose of defacing property, public or private. 
    "Supplier" means any person(s) or entity such as, but not limited to, any business, company, co-op, corporation, enterprise, manufacturer, organization, partnership, proprietor, retail or wholesale store or outlet which sells, trades, donates, gives or requisitions to the public in any capacity whatsoever, any graffiti implements. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.030 - Prohibition of graffiti. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to apply graffiti to any surface on any public or privately owned real or personal property within the city. 
B.  It shall further be unlawful for any person to solicit or command another person to apply graffiti, or for any person to aid or abet, or agree to aid or abet another person to plan to apply graffiti, including but not limited to, acting as a "lookout." 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.040 - Graffiti-Declaration of nuisance. 
    The application of graffiti by any person, pursuant to Section 18.01.030 of this code is declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.050 - Sale and possession. 
A.  Implement Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement with the intent to apply graffiti, while upon public or private property. 
B.  Implement Possession by Minors. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon public property, or upon private property, without the prior written consent of the owner of such private property. 
2.  The foregoing provision shall not apply while the person is attending or travelling to or from a school at which the person is enrolled, if the person is participating in a class at said school which has, as a written requirement of said class, the need to use any graffiti implement. 
C.  Sale of Graffiti Implements to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or guardian, to knowingly sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to anyone under the age of eighteen years. 
D.  Proper Identification Presented Prior to Sale. No person shall sell any pressurized can containing paint or dye, marking pens, adhesive stickers, etchers or any other graffiti implement without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity from the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.060 - Public access to graffiti implements; signage. 
A.  Restricted Access. Aerosol paint containers and actuators shall not be accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such supplies. 
B.  Continuously Viewable Implements. 
1.  Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling paint sticks, marking pens, or etching creams shall store or cause such supplies to be stored in an area continuously viewable by store employees. 
2.  Etching Tools. Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling masonry or glass drill bits, carbide drill bits, glass cutters, grinding stones, awls, chisels or carbide scribes, or other similar implement shall store or cause such items to be stored in an area continuously viewable by store employees. 
C.  Customer Signage. Every retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall post a sign in clear public view at or near display of such products stating: "Pursuant to Penal Code Section 594.1, Graffiti is against the law. Any person who defaces real or personal property with paint or any other liquid, tool, or device is guilty of a crime punishable by imprisonment of up to six (6) months and/or a fine up to $1,000." 
D.  Additional Signage. Every retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating: "Pursuant to Blythe Municipal Code Title 18, Section 18.01.050, selling Graffiti Implements to persons less than eighteen (18) years of age is against the law and punishable by six (6) months in jail and/or a fine of $1,000." 
E.  Merchandise Inventory. Upon request of a Blythe police officer or code enforcement officer, any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall provide copies of any merchandise inventory. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.070 - Penalties. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable by either six months in jail, a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  In lieu of, or in addition to the penalties specified in this section, a minor or adult who is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to graffiti violations shall be required to perform community service as described by the court, based on the following minimum requirements: 
1.  The minor or adult shall perform not less than forty hours of community service. 
2.  The period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police. 
3.  Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.080 - Reward provisions. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 53069.5 of the Government Code, the city does hereby offer a reward of up to five hundred dollars. The amount of the award to be determined by the police chief, for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for violation of Penal Code Section 594 or Section 18.01.030 of this code, the use of graffiti, not to exceed one reward of five hundred dollars per violation. In the event of multiple contributors of information for a single violation, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner deemed appropriate by the city police chief. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction. The chief of police may award up to five hundred dollars to any person who provides credible information regarding any graffiti violation in the city, which leads to probable cause for an arrest of an individual(s). 
B.  Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed, processed, and paid in accordance with procedures established by the police chief. 
C.  The person convicted of committing the graffiti offense shall be liable for any rewards paid pursuant to this section and, if that person is an unemancipated minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for any rewards paid pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.090 - Removal and prevention provisions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or who has primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property ("property owner"), to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of ten days after notice of same, unless: (a) said person shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that he or she does not have the financial or physical ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or (b) it can be demonstrated that the responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of fifteen days after notice of same. 
B.  The existence of any surface of a structure on a parcel of land which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five times in twelve months by the city at its expense is a public and private nuisance, and may be abated by modifications to the structure or surface, or to the immediate surrounding area. The structure or surface may be required to be retrofitted, at the cost of the property owner, with such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal thereof. The owner of such a property shall either make the modifications him/herself, or he/she shall permit the city to enter upon the property and to make the modifications. If the property owner can provide clear and convincing evidence that he/she is financially or physically unable to remove the graffiti, the property owner shall permit the city to perform the necessary modifications at the city's cost. 
C.  Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property within the city, the city shall be authorized to use city funds for the removal of the graffiti, or painting or repairing the property, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city manager determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or the person causing the graffiti, or if a minor, his or her parent or guardian, agree to or are ordered to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. 
D.  To further discourage graffiti while providing overall consistency, utility fixtures and equipment shall be of a uniform paint-type and color. Any investor owned, gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operation in the city of Blythe shall paint its above-surface metal fixtures with a uniform paint type and color which meets with the approval of the city manager. Since most utility fixtures and equipment are located in the public rights-of-way and are highly visible, graffiti on these structures shall be removed by the utility company within forty-eight hours of being reported to the utility. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.100 - Use of city funds to remove graffiti. 
A.  The city may use city funds to remove graffiti from publicly or privately owned real or personal property located within the city, and to replace or repair public or privately owned property within the city that has been defaced with graffiti that cannot be removed cost effectively. 
B.  The city shall only remove the graffiti itself, or, if the graffiti cannot be removed cost effectively, the repair or replacement of the portion of the property that was defaced, and not the painting, repair, or replacement of other parts of the property that were not defaced. 
C.  The removal, repair, or replacement may be performed, in the case of publicly owned real or personal property, only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the property, and in the case of privately owned real or personal property, only after securing the consent of the owner or possessor. 
D.  The Blythe police department may promulgate procedures for pre-removal preservation of sufficient evidence of the graffiti for criminal prosecutions or proceedings pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code pertaining to the person or persons who inscribed the graffiti. These procedures shall be followed by the city prior to or during removal of the graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.101 - Abatement. 
    The city may abate any nuisance at the expense of the persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining it. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.102 - Cost recovery against the person who created, caused, or committed the nuisance. 
A.  The city shall summarily abate any nuisance resulting from the defacement of the property of another by graffiti at the expense of the minor or adult creating, causing, or committing the nuisance. The expense of abatement of the nuisance shall be a lien against property of the minor or adult and a personal obligation against the minor or adult. 
B.  If the person causing the graffiti nuisance is a minor, then the parent or guardian of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor. The expense of abatement of any nuisance, resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another by graffiti, shall be a lien against the property of a parent or guardian, having custody and control of the minor, and a personal obligation against the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772 and 38772.6. 
C.  The property of the minor causing the graffiti nuisance, and the property of the parent or guardian of the minor, shall collectively or individually be referred to as the "assessed property." 
D.  Cost of Abatement. Where the director is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he/she shall keep an accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses for the abatement. The term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and the cost of printing and mailing any notices required by this chapter, as well as administrative costs in the amount of thirty-three percent of the total cost of abatement. Within thirty days of the conclusion of the abatement, the director shall submit an itemized statement of costs to the city manager. Within ninety days of the close of the police department's investigation, the director shall set a hearing to review the cost accounting before the city manager. The director shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the person causing the nuisance, and to his/her parents or guardian in the event the person causing the nuisance is a minor, and to any other interested person requesting the same, by United States Mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his last known address at least ten days in advance of the hearing. The cost hearing shall be set no later than forty-five days following the date the director causes notice of the time and place of the hearing to the person causing the nuisance, and to his/her parents or guardian in the event the person causing the nuisance is a minor. 
E.  Cost Accounting Statement-Processing. At the cost hearing, the city manager shall hear and pass upon the statement of the director, together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. The city manager may hear any relevant evidence at the cost hearing; the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Thereupon, the City manager shall make such revision, correction and modification to the statement as he/she may deem just, after which the statement is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified shall be conformed. The city manager shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing, and it shall include reference to Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
F.  Right to Judicial Review. If the city manager's decision is in favor of the city, the appellant may seek judicial review of the city manager's decision by filing a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
G.  Assessment of costs/liens against the subject property. 
1.  Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 38772 and 38773.6, all expenses as determined by the hearing officer in connection with such abatement shall be charged, and become an indebtedness, to the owner of the assessed property, as well as a lien upon the assessed property. 
2.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.6, the confirmed cost of abatement of a graffiti nuisance within the city shall constitute a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land that comprise the assessed property. After confirmation of the report, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the Riverside County Auditor/Controller, whereupon it shall be the duty of the auditor/controller to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land that comprise the subject property for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
3.  Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in the form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
Claim of City of Blythe 
Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of the Blythe Municipal Code, the Director of Public Works of the City of Blythe did on, or about the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , cause the premises located at ____________ to be rehabilitated or the building or structure on the property to be repaired, painted over or otherwise modified in order to abate a public nuisance on real property; and the City of Blythe, shall assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair or demolition upon the real property located at ____________ , belonging to the person causing the graffiti nuisance, or the person's parent or guardian in the case of a minor (the "Assessed Property"); and the assessed cost has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that the City of Blythe does hereby claim a lien on the Assessed Property for the rehabilitation, repair or demolition in the amount of this assessment, to wit; the sum of $ and the same shall be a lien upon the Assessed Property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
The Assessed Property, hereinabove mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Blythe, County of Riverside, State of California, and more particularly described as follows: 
(description) 
Assessor Parcel Number(s): 
Dated: This ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
City Manager, 
City of Blythe. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.103 - Cost recovery against the property where the nuisance is maintained. 
A.  The city shall summarily abate any graffiti nuisance and may make the expense of abatement of nuisances a lien against the property on which it is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner, in accordance with California Government Code Sections 38773 and 38773.5. 
B.  Cost of Abatement. Where the director is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he shall keep an accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses for the abatement. The term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and the cost of printing and mailing any notices required by this chapter, as well as administrative costs in the amount of thirty-three percent of the total cost of abatement. Within thirty days of the conclusion of the abatement, the director shall submit an itemized statement of costs to the city manager and shall set a hearing to review the cost accounting before the city manager. The director shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the owner and/or occupant of the property to which the same relate, and to any other interested person requesting the same, by United States Mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his last known address at least ten days in advance of the hearing. The cost hearing shall be set no later than forty-five days following the date the city manager receives the itemized cost of abatement. 
C.  Cost Accounting Statement-Processing. At the cost hearing, the city manager shall hear and pass upon the statement of the director, together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. The city manager may hear any relevant evidence at the cost hearing; the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Thereupon, the city manager shall make such revision, correction and modification to the statement as he may deem just, after which the statement is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified shall be conformed. The city manager shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing, and it shall include reference to Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
D.  Right to Judicial Review. If the city manager's decision is in favor of the city, the appellant may seek judicial review of the city manager's decision by filing a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
E.  Assessment of Costs/Liens Against Property. 
1.  Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 38773 and 38773.5, all expenses as determined by the city manager in connection with such abatement shall be charged, and become an indebtedness, to the owner of such structure or premises, as well as a lien upon the affected property as elsewhere herein provided. 
2.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5, the confirmed cost of abatement of a nuisance upon any lot or parcel of land shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates. After confirmation of the report, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the Riverside County Auditor/Controller, whereupon it shall be the duty of the auditor/controller to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
F.  Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in the form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
Claim of City of Blythe 
Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of the Blythe Municipal Code, the Director of Public Works of the City of Blythe did on, or about the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , cause the premises, hereinafter described to be rehabilitated or the building or structure on the property hereinafter described, to be repaired or demolished in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the City of Blythe, shall assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair or demolition upon the real property hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that the City of Blythe does hereby claim a lien on such rehabilitation, repair or demolition in the amount of said assessment, to it; the sum of ____________ and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
The real property, hereinabove mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Blythe, County of Riverside, State of California, and more particularly described as follows: 
(description) 
Assessor Parcel Number(s): 
Dated: This ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
City Manager, 
City of Blythe. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.104 - Civil liability for acts of willful misconduct resulting in property damage. 
    Notwithstanding any of the provisions of Section 18.01.102, the city may seek civil restitution for the cost of abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement of the property of another by graffiti as follows: 
A.  Any person that causes any injury to or the defacement of the property of another by any act of graffiti shall be personally liable for any damages resulting from the graffiti, pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714. 
B.  Any act of graffiti by a minor that results in any injury to or the defacement of property of another shall be imputed to the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes of civil damages, including the cost of abatement to the prevailing party, and the parent or guardian having custody and control shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any damages resulting from the graffiti, not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars except as provided in subsection C, for each tort of the minor. 
C.  The amount listed in subsection B shall be adjusted every two years in accordance to the amounts set by the judicial council to reflect any increases in the cost of living in California, as indicated by the annual average of the California Consumer Price Index, pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1. The maximum liability imposed by this section is the maximum liability authorized under this section at the time that the act of graffiti by a minor was committed. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.105 - Severability. 
    If any portion, provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of the ordinance codified in this chapter is rendered or declared to be invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining portions, provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences and words of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall remain in full force and effect and shall be interpreted by the court so as to give effect to such remaining portions of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.106 - Ordinance shall work in conjunction with state statutes and county ordinances. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be interpreted as to work with and in conjunction with (when and where applicable) any and all state and/or county ordinances relating to the control of graffiti and/or related vandalism, including, but not limited to, Sections 594, 594.1, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 of the California Penal Code, Section 1714.1 of the California Civil Code, Section 53069.3 of the California Government Code and Riverside County Ordinances 704 and 733. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
18.01.107 - Effective date. 
    The city clerk shall certify to the passage of this chapter, and cause it to be published as required by law. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective thirty days after the date of adoption by the Blythe city council. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 8-12-14) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR CALIFORNIA CITIES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes relevant to California cities. They are current with all 2017 Regular Session laws. 
General Provisions 
Code adoption 
Government Code § 50022.1 et seq. 
Ordinances 
Government Code § 36900 et seq. 
Penalties for ordinance violations 
Government Code §§ 36900 and 36901 
Imprisonment 
Government Code §§ 36903 and 36904 
Citations for misdemeanors 
Penal Code § 853.5 et seq. 
Administrative fines and penalties 
Government Code § 53069.4 
Judicial review of city decisions 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6 
Expedited judicial review of First Amendment cases 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8 
Elections 
Government Code §§ 34050 and 36503 and Elections Code §§ 1301, 9200 et seq. and 10100 et seq. 
Classification of cities 
Government Code § 34100 et seq. 
General powers 
Government Code § 37100 et seq. and Cal. Const. art. XI §§ 7, 9 
Conflict of interest code 
Government Code § 87100 et seq. 
Eminent Domain Law 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1230.010 et seq. 
Administration and Personnel 
City officers generally 
Government Code § 36501 et seq. 
Legislative body 
Government Code § 36801 et seq. 
Meetings 
Government Code § 54950 et seq. 
Mayor 
Government Code § 40601 et seq. 
City clerk 
Government Code § 40801 et seq. 
City treasurer 
Government Code § 41001 et seq. 
City assessor 
Government Code § 41201 et seq. 
Chief of police 
Government Code § 41601 et seq. 
City attorney 
Government Code § 41801 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-City manager form of government 
Government Code § 34851 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-Election of legislative body by or from districts 
Government Code § 34870 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-Elective mayor 
Government Code § 34900 et seq. 
City records 
Government Code § 34090 et seq. 
Removal from office 
Government Code § 3000 et seq. 
Political activities of public employees 
Government Code § 3201 et seq. 
Local planning agencies 
Government Code § 65100 et seq. 
California Emergency Services Act 
Government Code § 8550 et seq. 
Fire department 
Government Code § 38611 
Peace officer standards and training 
Penal Code § 13500 et seq. 
Personnel system, merit system or civil service system 
Government Code § 45000 et seq. 
Retirement systems 
Government Code § 45300 et seq. 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial powers 
Government Code § 37200 et seq. 
Transfer of tax function to county 
Government Code § 51500 et seq. 
Property tax assessment, levy and collection 
Government Code § 43000 et seq. 
Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 
Transient occupancy tax 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280 et seq. 
Documentary Transfer Tax Act 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 
Unclaimed property 
Civil Code § 2080 et seq. 
Unclaimed money 
Government Code § 50050 et seq. 
Planning and zoning fees for specific purposes 
Government Code § 66012 et seq. 
Public works and public purchases 
Government Code § 4000 et seq. 
Local Agency Public Construction Act 
Public Contract Code § 20100 et seq. 
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act 
Public Contract Code § 22000 et seq. 
Claims against public entities 
Government Code § 900 et seq. 
Development project fees 
Government Code § 66000 et seq. 
Business Licenses, Taxes and Regulations 
Authority to license businesses 
Government Code § 37101, Business and Professions Code § 16000 et seq. 
Automatic checkout systems 
Civil Code § 7100 et seq. 
Bingo 
Penal Code § 326.4 et seq. 
Charitable solicitations 
Business and Professions Code § 17510 et seq. 
Commercial filming 
Government Code § 65850.1 
Community antenna TV systems 
Government Code § 53066 et seq. 
Gambling Control Act 
Business and Professions Code § 19800 et seq. 
Massage parlors 
Government Code § 51030 et seq. 
Private investigators 
Business and Professions Code § 7512 et seq. 
Taxicabs 
Vehicle Code §§ 16500 et seq., 21100, 21112 and Government Code § 53075.5 et seq. 
Telecommunications facilities 
Government Code § 50030 
Animals 
Animals generally 
Food and Agriculture Code § 16301 et seq. 
Dogs 
Government Code § 38792 and Food and Agriculture Code § 30501 et seq. 
Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs 
Food and Agriculture Code § 31601 et seq. 
Rabies control 
Health and Safety Code § 121575 et seq. 
Cruelty to animals and related offenses 
Penal Code §§ 596 et seq. through 600.5 
Health and Safety 
Garbage and refuse collection and disposal 
Public Resources Code § 49300 et seq. 
Nuisances and nuisance abatement 
Government Code § 38771 et seq. and Penal Code § 370 et seq. 
Weed and rubbish abatement 
Government Code § 39501 et seq. 
Littering 
Penal Code §§ 374 through 374.8 
Smoking-Places of employment 
Labor Code § 6404.5 
California Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976 
Health and Safety Code § 118875 et seq. 
Graffiti abatement 
Government Code § 38772 and Penal Code § 594.5 
Fire prevention 
Health and Safety Code § 13000 et seq. 
Fireworks 
Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq. 
Noise control 
Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. and Government Code § 65302(f) 
Hospitals 
Government Code § 37600 et seq. 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
Crimes against religion and conscience, and other offenses against good morals 
Penal Code § 302 et seq. 
Obscenity 
Penal Code § 311 et seq. 
Material harmful to minors 
Penal Code § 313 et seq. 
Indecent exposure, obscene exhibitions, and bawdy and other disorderly houses 
Penal Code § 314 et seq. 
Crimes against the public peace 
Penal Code § 403 et seq. 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Rules of the road 
Vehicle Code § 21000 et seq. 
Local traffic rules and regulations 
Vehicle Code § 21100 et seq. 
Traffic signs, signals and markings 
Vehicle Code § 21350 et seq. 
Driving on right side of road, overtaking and passing 
Vehicle Code § 21650 et seq. 
Right-of-way 
Vehicle Code § 21800 et seq. 
Pedestrians' rights and duties 
Vehicle Code § 21949 et seq. 
Turning, stopping and turning signals 
Vehicle Code § 22100 et seq. 
Vehicle speed 
Vehicle Code § 22348 et seq. 
Special stops required 
Vehicle Code § 22450 et seq. 
Stopping, standing and parking 
Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq. 
Bicycles 
Vehicle Code §§ 21200 et seq. and 39000 et seq. 
Vehicle size, weight and load 
Vehicle Code § 35000 et seq. 
Penalties 
Vehicle Code § 42000 et seq. 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Improvement Act of 1911 
Streets and Highways Code § 5000 et seq. 
Construction of sidewalks and curbs 
Streets and Highways Code § 5870 et seq. 
Underground utility districts 
Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq. 
Obstructions and encroachments on public ways 
Government Code § 38775 
Municipal parks 
Public Resources Code § 5181 et seq. 
Tree Planting Act of 1931 
Streets and Highways Code § 22000 et seq. 
Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972 
Streets and Highways Code § 22500 et seq. 
Charitable solicitations 
Business and Professions Code § 17510 et seq. 
Advertising displays 
Business and Professions Code § 5229 et seq. 
Public Services 
Municipal water systems 
Government Code § 38730 et seq. 
Municipal sewers 
Government Code § 38900 et seq. and Health and Safety Code § 5470 et seq. 
Water wells 
Water Code § 13700 et seq. 
Buildings and Construction 
Authority to regulate buildings and construction 
Government Code §§ 38601 and 38660 
State Housing Law 
Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq. 
Adoption of construction codes 
Health and Safety Code §§ 17922 and 17958 
California Building Standards Law 
Health and Safety Code § 18901 et seq. 
Mobilehome Parks Act 
Health and Safety Code § 18200 et seq. 
Signs 
Government Code §§ 38774 and 65850; Business and Professions Code § 5200 et seq. 
Inspection warrants 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1822.50 et seq. 
Development fees 
Government Code § 66000 et seq. 
Subdivisions 
Subdivision Map Act 
Government Code § 66410 et seq. 
Zoning 
Planning and Zoning Law 
Government Code § 65000 et seq. 
Local authority to regulate land use 
Government Code § 65850 
Local zoning administration 
Government Code § 65900 et seq. 
Open-space zoning 
Government Code § 65910 et seq. 
Family day care homes 
Health and Safety Code § 1597.30 et seq. 
Environmental Protection 
California Environmental Quality Act 
Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq. 
California Noise Control Act of 1973 
Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
Number 1 Board of trustees meetings (Repealed by 60) 2 City seal (1.08) 3 Officers' bond (2.32) 4 Transfer of assessor and tax collector's duties (3.04) 5 Fixes amount of tax for 1916-1917 (Special) 6 Officers' compensation (Not codified) 7 Sale of alcoholic liquor (Repealed by 32 and 56) 8 1916-1917 tax levy (Special) 9 Street and alley vacation (Special) 10 Demands against the city (3.08) 11 Datum plane and benchmark (Repealed by 498) 12 Imprisonment (1.20) 13 Health officer, nuisances related to health and sanitation (Not codified) 14 Street and alley vacation (Special) 15 Fire districts, building inspector and building regulations (Repealed by 238) 16 Concealed weapons (Repealed by 498) 17 Amends subdivision 3 of § 1 of Ordinance 6, officers' compensation (Not codified) 18 Street grades (Repealed by 22) 19 Specifications for streets, curbs and sidewalks (12.04) 20 Bread regulations (Repealed by 45) 21 Business licenses (Repealed by 629) 22 Street grades, repeals Ordinance 18 (Special) 23 Election notices (2.36) 24 Grants use of land to Standard Oil Company (Special) 25 Excavations and improvements (Repealed by 215) 26 Procedure for payment of city advertising and printing (2.44) 27 Protection of streets and sidewalks (12.04) 28 Animals (Repealed by 498) 29 Fixes amount of tax for 1917-1918 (Special) 30 Franchise granted to Southern Sierras Power Company (Special) 31 1917-1918 tax levy (Special) 32 Alcoholic liquor regulations, repeals Ordinance 7 (Repealed by 56) 33 Amends § 7 of Ordinance 13, health and sanitation (Not codified) 34 Amends subdivision "2nd" of § 1 of Ordinance 6, officers' compensation (Repealed by 87) 35 Fixes amount of tax for 1918-1919 (Special) 36 1918-1919 tax levy (Special) 37 Public library established (12.24) 38 Electrical inspector and electrical regulations (Repealed by 498) 39 Special election for waterworks bonds (Special) 40 1919-1920 tax levy (Special) 41 Waterworks bonds (Special) 42 Adds §§ 20-1/2, 31-1/2 and 41-1/2 and amends §§ 14, 27, 29, 31, 37 and 41 of Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 43 Levies tax and creates waterworks bond and interest sinking fund (Special) 44 Compensation for city marshal and city recorder (Not codified) 45 Bread regulations, repeals Ordinance 20 (8.20) 46 Datum plane and benchmark (1.12) 47 Street grades (Special) 48 1920-1921 tax levy (Special) 49 Public peace, morals and welfare (9.24, 9.84) 50 Weeds and rubbish (Repealed by 487) 51 Waterworks superintendent, water regulations (2.20, 3.24, 13.04) 52 Street grade (Special) 53 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 1, board of trustees meetings (Repealed by 60) 54 Adds § 44a, amends § 32 and repeals § 33 of Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 55 1921-1922 tax levy (Special) 56 Intoxicating liquor, repeals Ordinances 7 and 32 (Repealed by 498) 57 Fireworks (Repealed by 237) 58 1922-1923 tax levy (Special) 59 Amends § 2 of Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 60 Board of trustees meetings, repeals Ordinances 1 and 53 (Repealed by 498) 61 Sale of uninspected meat (8.16) 62 Adds § 13A to Ordinance 15, building regulations (Repealed by 498) 63 Board of trustees meetings (Repealed by 498) 64 Public campgrounds (Repealed by 498) 65 1923-1924 tax rate (Special) 66 Repeals and replaces § 1 of Ordinance 15, fire districts (Repealed by 232) 67 Amends §§ 7 and 47 of Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 86) 68 Adds §§ 5A and 6A to Ordinance 49, public peace, morals and welfare (9.24) 69 Leaving of vehicles and hitching of animals on public highways (Repealed by 498) 70 Special election for sewer bonds (Special) 71 Adds §§ 9-a, 9-b and 9-c to Ordinance 15, building regulations (Repealed by 238) 72 Building numbering system (12.20) 73 Obstruction of fire department (Repealed by 752) 74 Compensation of city clerk and city recorder, repeals subsection "5th" of § 1 of Ordinance 6 (Not codified) 75 1924-1925 tax levy (Special) 76 Special election for sewer bonds (Special) 77 Sewer bonds (Special) 78 Repeals and replaces § 4 of Ordinance 72, building numbering system (12.20) 79 Repeals and replaces § 2 of Ordinance 72, building numbering system (12.20) 80 Adds § IA to Ordinance 66, fire districts (Repealed by 232) 81 Damaging paved streets (12.12) 82 Adds § 9d and repeals subsection 65 of S9-c of Ordinance 71, building regulations (13.12) 83 1925-1926 tax levy (Special) 84 Peddlers' regulations, repeals and replaces § 44 of Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 85 Adds § 2-a and repeals § 2 of Ordinance 74, compensation (Not codified) 86 Circus, menagerie, tent show regulations, repeals Ordinance 67 (5.28) 87 Compensation for city clerk and city treasurer, repeals Ordinance 34 and § 1 of Ordinance 74 (Not codified) 88 Adds §§ 31-A, 31-B, 31-C and 31-D and repeals § 31-1/2 of Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 89 Amends § 2 of Ordinance 3, officers' bond (2.32) 90 1926-1927 tax levy (Special) 91 City garbage collector, garbage collection regulations (Repealed by 196) 92 Sign regulations (Repealed by 595) 93 1927-1928 tax levy (Special) 94 Stop intersections on Hobsonway (Repealed by 498) 95 1928-1929 tax levy (Special) 96 1929-1930 tax levy (Special) 97 City clerk compensation; repeals § 1 of Ordinance 87 (Not codified) 98 1930-1931 tax levy (Special) 99 Natural Gas Corporation of California franchise (Special) 100 Amends § 6 of Ordinance 51, water regulations (Repealed by 498) 101 1931-1932 tax levy (Special) 102 City clerk compensation; repeals § 1 of Ordinance 97 (Not codified) 103 Abatement of dilapidated buildings (15.32) 104 1932-1933 tax levy (Special) 105 Oleomargarine (Repealed by 498) 106 Sale of alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 629) 107 1933-1934 tax levy (Special) 108 Adds subsection d to § 1 and subsections b, c and d to § 2, and amends subsections a and c of § 1 and § 2, all of Ordinance 92, sign regulations (Repealed by 595) 109 1934-1935 tax levy (Special) 110 Amends subsection a of § 5 of Ordinance 51, water regulations (Repealed by 498) 111 1935-1936 tax levy (Special) 112 Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places (9.28) 113 Game device tax established (Repealed by 498) 114 Special gas tax street improvement fund (3.28) 115 Street grades (Special) 116 Amends § 2 of Ordinance 100, water regulations (Repealed by 498) 117 1936-1937 tax levy (Special) 118 Gas franchise granted to L.R. Lachey (Special) 119 Secondhand automobiles (Repealed by 805) 120 1937-1938 tax levy (Special) 121 Adds § 39a to Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 266) 122 Amends § 4 of Ordinance 69, leaving of vehicles on public highways (Repealed by 498) 123 Inspection of food establishments (8.08) 124 Compensation of city clerk and city treasurer (Not codified) 125 Zoning (Repealed by 220 and 495) 126 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 1, board of trustees meetings (Repealed by 498) 127 1938-1939 tax levy (Special) 128 Milk dairy inspection (Repealed by 498) 129 Rezone (Special) 130 Amends § 4 of Ordinance 82, building regulations (13.12) 131 1939-1940 tax levy (Special) 132 Conditional exception to zoning (Special) 133 Sewer system fees (Special) 134 Rubbish disposal (Repealed by 498) 135 Motor vehicle parking (10.08) 136 City council meetings (2.12) 137 1940-1941 tax levy (Special) 138 Adds subsection 3 to § 1 of Ordinance 92, sign regulations (Repealed by 595) 139 Commissioners and committees, council proceedings (2.08) 140 Flammable liquids, 1939 National Board of Fire Underwriters' Pamphlet No. 30 (Repealed by 498) 141 1941-1942 tax levy (Special) 142 Conditional exceptions to zoning (Special) 143 Amusement games and machines (5.08) 144 Adds § 39a to Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 266) 145 Arcades, marquees and canopies (15.40) 146 1941 Uniform Electrical Code (Repealed by 239) 147 Defense council (Repealed by 498) 148 Air raid precautions (Repealed by 498) 149 Rezone (Special) 150 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 124, compensation of city clerk and city treasurer (Not codified) 151 1942-1943 tax levy (Special) 152 Camp cars or trailers (5.20) 153 Adds § 50 to Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 154 Repeals § 4 and substitutes § 5 of Ordinance 152, camp cars or trailers (5.20) 155 1943-1944 tax levy (Special) 156 Conditional exception to zoning (Special) 157 Fortunetelling and astrology (Repealed by 752) 158 1944-1945 tax levy (Special) 159 Conditional exceptions to zoning (Special) 160 Conditional exceptions to zoning (Special) 161 1945-1946 tax levy (Special) 162 Adds § 39b to Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 266) 163 Conditional exception to zoning (Special) 164 Vehicle parking (Repealed by 395) 165 Conditional exceptions to zoning (Special) 166 Subdivisions (Repealed by 475) 166A Adds §§ 18 and 19 to Ordinance 164, vehicle parking (Repealed by 395) 167 1946-1947 tax levy (Special) 168 Conditional exceptions to zoning (Special) 169 Southern California Gas Company franchise (Special) 170 Adds § 16a to Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 171 1946 Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 238) 172 Amends § 6 of Ordinance 51, water regulations (Repealed by 498) 173 1947-1948 tax levy (Special) 174 Public dances (Repealed by 260) 175 Taxicabs (5.72) 176 Amends § 5a of Ordinance 51, water regulations (13.04) 177 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 66, fire districts (Repealed by 232) 178 Amends § 12 of Ordinance 175, taxicabs (5.72) 179 Adds § 2a to Ordinance 171, building code (Repealed by 238) 180 Office of city inspector created (2.16) 181 1948-1949 tax levy (Special) 182 Adds § 44A to Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 183 Sales and use tax (Repealed by 259) 184 Special election for sewer bonds (Special) 185 Intoxicating liquor in certain public places (9.28) 186 Sewer bonds (Special) 187 1948 Uniform Plumbing Code (Repealed by 240) 188 Burning of rubbish and waste materials (Repealed by 498) 189 Loading areas for fruit and vegetables (8.12) 190 Transfers certain land to county for street improvements (Special) 191 Peddlers and solicitors (5.68) 192 Amends portion of Ordinance 187, plumbing code (Repealed by 240) 193 Regulates untreated water which has passed through refrigeration systems (Repealed by 263) 194 1949-1950 tax levy (Special) 195 Flammable liquids at service stations (Repealed by 498) 196 Garbage, repeals Ordinance 91 (Repealed by 488) 197 Special election for sewage treatment plant bonds (Special) 198 Sewage treatment plant bonds (Special) 199 1950-1951 tax levy (Special) 200 Amends § 3 of Ordinance 183, sales and use tax (Repealed by 259) 201 Transient or itinerant photographer (5.36) 202 Prostitution and immoral acts (Repealed by 498) 203 Disaster council (Repealed by 337) 204 1951-1952 tax levy (Special) 205 Annexation (Special) 206 Amends subsection e of § 12 of Ordinance 178, taxicabs (5.72) 207 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 193, untreated water which has passed through refrigeration systems (Repealed by 263) 208 Amends § 7 of Ordinance 13, health and sanitation (Not codified) 209 Vehicle parking (Repealed by 498) 210 Transfers certain land to county for street improvements (Special) 211 1952-1952 tax levy (Special) 212 Registration of convicted persons (Repealed by 498) 213 Advertising by sound-amplifying devices (9.40) 214 Adds §§ 17, 18, 19 and 20; amends §§ 1, 2, 9 and 12, all of Ordinance 196, garbage (Repealed by 488) 215 Excavations and street improvements, repeals Ordinance 25 (12.08) 216 1953-1954 tax levy (Special) 217 Amends § 2 of Ordinance 164, vehicle parking (Repealed by 395) 218 Amends § 2 of Ordinance 215, excavations and street improvements (12.08) 219 Park regulations (12.28) 220 Zoning, repeals Ordinance 125 (Repealed by 495) 221 Roller skating rinks (Repealed by 714) 222 1954-1955 tax levy (Special) 223 Amends § 12.7 of Ordinance 220 and rezones certain property, zoning (Repealed by 495) 224 Amends § 2 and deletes §§ 3 and 4 of Ordinance 86, circus and tent regulations (5.28) 225 Intent to vacate alley (Special) 226 Sewer regulation (Repealed by 548) 227 Amends §§ 12.3 and 13.2 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 498) 228 Multiple amplified television service (5.56) 229 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 183, sales and use tax (Repealed by 259) 230 1955-1956 tax levy (Special) 231 Parking of vehicle or agricultural implement on sidewalk or parkway (Repealed by 498) 232 Fire zones designated, repeals § 1 of Ordinance 15 and Ordinances 66, 80 and 77 (Repealed by 825) 233 Rezone (Special) 234 Annexation (Special) 235 Sales and use tax (Repealed by 440) 236 Rezone (Special) 237 Repeals Ordinance 57 (Repealer) 238 1955 Uniform Building Code, repeals Ordinances 15, 71, 171, and 179 (Repealed by 289) 239 1953 Uniform Electrical Code, repeals Ordinance 146 (Repealed by 275) 240 1955 Uniform Plumbing Code, repeals Ordinances 187 and 192 (Repealed by 291) 241 1956-1957 tax levy (Special) 242 Loitering by minor (Repealed by 710) 243 Junk dealers and junkyards (5.52) 244 Adds subsection (a) to § 28; amends §§ 5, 10, 12(a), 21 and 29(b) of Ordinance 166, subdivisions (Repealed by 475) 245 Special election for municipal bonds (Special) 246 Amends §§ 2(c), 3, 4(a)(1), 4(b)(1), 5(a), 5(b)(1), and 8 of Ordinance 235, sales and use tax (Repealed by 440) 247 Rezone (Special) 248 1957-1958 tax levy (Special) 249 Amends §§ 10.1(c) and 11.3 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 250 Amends § 2 of Ordinance 164 and § 1 of Ordinance 217, vehicle parking (Repealed by 395) 251 Adds § 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18; amends §§ 1, 2(c) and 6 of Ordinance 175, taxicabs (5.72) 252 Compensation of city clerk and city treasurer (2.28) 253 Special election for municipal bonds (Special) 254 Zones certain property (Special) 255 1958-1959 tax levy (Special) 256 Amends §§ 5, 8 and 11 of Ordinance 196, garbage (Repealed by 488) 257 Sales and use tax (Repealed by 498) 258 Excise tax (Repealed by 498) 259 Repeals Ordinances 183, 200 and 229 (Repealer) 260 Public dances; repeals Ordinance 174 (5.60) 261 Special election for sewer bonds (Special) 262 Sewer bonds (Special) 263 Disposal of unpolluted water into sewer after passing through refrigeration systems, repeals Ordinances 193 and 207 (13.28) 264 Amends § 1 of Art. IV of Ordinance 226, sewers (Repealed by 548) 265 Amends §§ 5 and 11 of Ordinance 196, garbage (Repealed by 488) 266 Cardrooms, repeals Ordinances 121, 144, and 162 (Repealed by 598) 267 1959-1960 tax levy (Special) 268 Amends business license fees (Repealed by 498) 269 Amends (b) of § 9 of Ordinance 164, vehicle parking (Repealed by 270 and 395) 270 Amends §§ 9 and 10(b) of Ordinance 164, vehicle parking, and repeals Ordinance 269 (Repealed by 395) 271 1960-1961 tax levy (Special) 272 Foodhandlers (8.04) 273 Adopts Ordinance 455 of Riverside County, dogs (Repealed by 477) 274 Annexation (Special) 275 1961 Uniform Wiring Code, repeals Ordinance 239 (Repealed by 384) 276 Rezone (Special) 277 Annexation (Special) 278 Amends § 2(b) of Ordinance 196 and §§ 6, 19(a) and 19(b) of Ordinance 214, garbage (Repealed by 488) 279 Zones certain property (Special) 280 1961-1962 tax levy (Special) 281 Annexation (Special) 282 Annexation (Special) 283 Rezone (Special) 284 Amends §§ 4(a)(2), 5(b)(2), and 5(b)(3)(ii); renumbers § 4(b)(4)(iii) to 4(b)(4)(ii), and repeals §§ 2(e) and 4(b)(4)(ii) of Ordinance 235, sales and use tax (Repealed by 440) 285 Zones certain property (Special) 286 Amends § 2 of Ordinance 252, compensation of city clerk and city treasurer (2.28) 287 Zones certain property (Special) 288 1961 Uniform Housing Code (Repealed by 456) 289 1961 Uniform Building Code, repeals Ordinance 238 (Repealed by 382) 290 Bicycles (10.16) 291 1961 Uniform Plumbing Code, repeals Ordinance 240 (Repealed by 386) 292 Adds § 34 and amends § 1 of Ordinance 166, subdivisions (Repealed by 475) 293 Annexation (Special) 294 Annexation (Special) 295 1962-1963 tax levy (Special) 296 Annexation (Special) 297 Amends § 5 of Ordinance 263, disposal of certain unpolluted water (13.28) 298 Adds § 3106 to Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 498) 299 Adds §§ 3.25 and 3.26; amends §§ 3.13, 5.1(b), 7.3 and 7.5 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 300 Amends § 301 of the 1961 Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 498) 301 Zones certain property (Special) 302 Zones certain property (Special) 303 Zones certain property (Special) 304 1963-1964 tax levy (Special) 305 Prohibits parking on portion of U.S. Highway 60 and 70 (10.08) 306 State aid for law enforcement training (2.40) 307 Recovery of costs of sewer and water lines installation (13.24) 308 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 268, business license fees (Repealed by 498) 309 Parallel parking on portion of U.S. Highway 60 and 70 (10.08) 310 Unclaimed property in possession of the police department (2.48) 311 Rezone (Special) 312 Sewer service outside city limits (13.20) 313 1964-1965 tax levy (Special) 314 Special election for water and sewer bonds (Special) 315 Acceptance of certain lot (Special) 316 Transient occupancy tax (3.20) 317 Annexation (Special) 318 Annexation (Special) 319 Adds § 44A to Ordinance 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 320 Annexation (Special) 321 Amends § 4 of Ordinance 232, fire zones (Repealed by 825) 322 Water and sewer bonds (Special) 323 Zones certain property (Special) 324 Zones certain property (Special) 325 Zones certain property (Special) 326 Adds § 27A to Ordinance 166, subdivisions (Repealed by 475) 327 Annexation (Special) 328 Amends § 6 of Ordinance 299, zoning (Repealed by 360) 329 Annexation (Special) 330 Annexation (Special) 331 Outdoor swimming pools (Repealed by 825) 332 Rezone (Special) 333 1965-1966 tax levy (Special) 334 Adds (d) to § 301 of the 1961 Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 498) 335 Zones certain property (Special) 336 Zones certain property (Special) 337 Civil defense and disaster, repeals Ordinance 203 (Repealed by 415 and 441) 338 Rezone (Special) 339 Zones certain property (Special) 340 Compensation of council members (2.28) 341 Zones certain property (Special) 342 Uniform Traffic Ordinance (10.04) 343 1964 Uniform Building Code; deletes §§ 2-l0 of Ordinance 289 (Repealed by 382) 344 Adds § 1107(e); amends §§ 2 and 7 of Ordinance 291, 1964 Uniform Plumbing Code (Repealed by 386) 345 Amends § 1 and deletes §§ 8 and 9 of Ordinance 275; adds and amends certain sections of 1965 Uniform Wiring Code (Repealed by 384) 346 Billiard rooms; repeals §§ 7 and 8 of Ordinance 49 (5.12) 347 Amends § 23 of Ordinance 342, traffic (Repealed by 395) 348 Rezone (Special) 348A Amends § 4 of Ordinance 316, transient occupancy tax (3.20) 349 1966-1967 tax levy (Special) 350 Special election for sewer bonds (Special) 351 Franchise granted to Southern California Edison Company (Special) 352 Sewer bonds (Special) 353 Rezone (Special) 354 1967-1968 tax levy (Special) 355 Community antenna television system regulations (Repealed by 557) 356 City manager (2.04) 357 Repeals §§ l0 and 12 of Ordinance 307 (Repealer) 358 Real property transfer tax (3.16) 359 Repeals § 8 of Ordinance 356 (Repealer) 360 Amends § 6 of Ordinance 299, zoning; repeals Ordinance 328 (Repealed by 495) 361 Rezone (Special) 362 Rezone (Special) 363 Rezone (Special) 364 Rezone (Special) 365 CATV franchise granted to Continental Transmission Corporation (Repealed by 558) 366 Amends § 3 of Ordinance 316, transient occupancy tax (3.20) 367 1968-1969 tax levy (Special) 368 Rezone (Special) 369 Underground utilities (12.16) 370 Adds § 27B to Ordinance 166, subdivisions (Repealed by 475) 371 Rezone (Special) 372 Rezone (Special) 373 Amends § 6 of Ordinance 51, water regulations (Repealed by 498) 374 Adds §§ 51, 52, and 53 to Ordinance 21; amends business license fees (Repealed by 498) 375 Annexation (Special) 376 Adds subsection (c) to § 3.26 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 377 Rezone (Special) 378 Suspends Ordinances 164, 166A, 217, 250, 269 and 270 from 7/1/69 to 10/31/69 (Repealed by 395) 379 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 347, suspends certain provisions of Ordinances 342 and 347 for specified time, traffic (Repealed by 395) 380 Rezone (Special) 381 Rezone (Special) 382 1967 Uniform Building Code, repeals Ordinances 289 and 343 (Repealed by 498) 383 1969-1970 tax levy (Special) 384 Additions and amendments to 1968 Uniform Wiring Code, repeals Ordinances 275 and 345 (Repealed by 457) 385 1967 Uniform Mechanical Code (Repealed by 416) 386 1967 Uniform Plumbing Code; repeals Ordinances 291 and 344 (Repealed by 417) 387 Rezone (Special) 388 Rezone (Special) 389 Contract with California State Employees' Retirement System (2.56) 390 Rezone (Special) 391 Rezone (Special) 392 Rezone (Special) 393 Rezone (Special) 394 Rezone (Special) 395 Repeals §§ 23, 24, 25 and 26 of Ordinance 342 and Ordinances 164, 166A, 217, 250, 269, 270, 347, 378 and 379 (Repealer) 396 Adds § 19 to Ordinance 251, taxicabs (5.72) 397 Rezone (Special) 398 Rezone (Special) 399 Rezone (Special) 400 Rezone (Special) 401 Annexation (Special) 402 1970-1971 tax levy (Special) 403 Rezone (Special) 404 Amends §§ 1 and 2 of Ordinance 273, dogs (Repealed by 477) 405 Zones certain property (Special) 406 Rezone (Special) 407 Amends §§ 3.7, 12.3, and 13.2 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 408 Rezone (Special) 409 Amends § 6 of Ordinance 263, disposal of certain unpolluted water (13.28) 410 Amends § 14 of Ordinance 260, public dances (5.60) 411 Rezone (Special) 412 Abandoned vehicles (10.12) 413 1971-1972 tax levy (Special) 414 Amends §§ l, 3 and 5 of Ordinance 246, sales and use tax (Repealed by 440) 415 Disaster relief, repeals Ordinance 337 (Repealed by 441) 416 1970 Uniform Mechanical Code, repeals Ordinance 385 (Repealed by 458) 417 1970 Uniform Plumbing Code, repeals Ordinance 386 (Repealed by 459) 418 1970 Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 460) 419 Amends §§ 8, 10 and 11 of Ordinance 51, water regulations (13.04) 420 Amends § 3 of Ordinance 82, building regulations (13.12) 421 Amends subsection (b) of § 6 of Ordinance 244, subdivisions (Repealed by 475) 422 Amends §§ 3.13, 3.14, 3.20(c) and 3.23 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 423 Rezone (Special) 424 Rezone (Special) 425 Rezone (Special) 426 1972-1973 tax levy (Special) 427 Adds subsection (f) to § 34 of Ordinance 166, subdivisions, deletes subsection (c) of § 2 of Ordinance 292 (Repealed by 498) 428 Special election on annexation (Special) 429 Rezone (Special) 430 Annexation (Special) 431 Signs (Not codified) 432 Rezone (Special) 433 Amends § 8 of Ordinance 419, water regulations (Repealed by 573) 434 Rezone (Special) 435 Rezone (Special) 436 1973-1974 tax levy (Special) 437 Special election on annexation (Special) 438 Amends § 3 of Ordinance 316 and § 1 of Ordinance 366, transient occupancy tax (3.20) 439 Amends § 5 of Ordinance 290, bicycles (10.16) 440 Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax, repeals Ordinances 235, 246, 284 and 414 (3.12) 441 Disaster relief, repeals Ordinances 337 and 415 (2.52) 442 Dust, sand and soil as nuisances (8.32) 443 1973 Uniform Fire Code (15.24) 444 Rezone (Special) 445 Nudity in certain public places (9.36) 446 Mobilehome parks (Repealed by 595) 447 Amends § 6 of Ordinance 51, water regulations (13.04) 448 Amends § 14.4 of Article XIV of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 449 1974-1975 tax levy (Special) 450 Contract with California Public Employees' Retirement System (2.56) 451 Rezone (Special) 452 Rezone (Special) 453 Rezone (Special) 454 Rezone (Special) 455 Adds § 2.11-1/2 and amends §§ 3.20(c), 5.3, 5.6, 5.10, 6.3 and 7.3 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 456 1973 Uniform Housing Code, repeals Ordinance 288 (Repealed by 456) 457 1968 Uniform Wiring Code, repeals Ordinance 384 (Repealed by 566) 458 1973 Uniform Mechanical Code, repeals Ordinance 416 (Repealed by 516, 564) 459 1973 Uniform Plumbing Code and amendments to 1970 Uniform Plumbing Code (Not codified) 460 1973 Uniform Building Code, repeals Ordinance 418 (Repealed by 518, 565) 461 Amends § 5.1(b) of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 462 Amends §§ 1 and 2 of Ordinance 273, dogs (Repealed by 477) 463 Amends §§ 12.3 and 13.2 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 464 Coin-operated vending machines (5.32) 465 Amends § 14 of Ordinance 260, public dances (5.60) 466 1975-1976 tax levy (Special) 467 Adds §§ 5l, 52 and 53 to Ordinance 21, amends business license fees (5.08, 5.28, 5.36, 5.52, 5.56, 5.64, 5.72) 468 Rezone (Special) 469 Rezone (Special) 470 Signs (Repealed by 595) 471 Amends § 3.23 of Ordinance 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 472 Travel trailer parks, deletes subsection (c) of § 10.1 of Ordinance 220 (Repealed by 595) 473 Amends § 1 of Ordinance 404, dogs (Repealed by 477) 474 Regulates sale of personal property (Repealed by 595) 475 Subdivision Map Act, repeals Ordinances 166, 244, 292, 326, 370, 421, 426 (16.04, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.24, 16.28, 16.32, 16.36, 16.40) 476 1976-1977 tax levy (Special) 477 Animal-control regulations; repeals Ords. 273, 404, 462 and 473 (6.04, 6.08, 6.12, 6.16, 6.20, 6.24, 6.28) 478 (Not adopted) 479 Rezone (Special) 480 Annexation (Special) 481 Rezone (Special) 482 Bingo games (5.16) 483 Conflict of interest code (2.24) 484 Rezone (Special) 485 Rezone (Special) 486 1977-1978 tax levy (Special) 487 Nuisances; repeals Ord. 50 (8.28) 488 Garbage, refuse and rubbish; repeals Ords. 196, 214, 256, 265 and 278 (8.24) 489 (Number not used) 490 Rezone (Special) 491 Adds Art. 17 to Ord. 220, zoning (Repealed by 495) 492 Amends subsections (a) (4) and (a) (9) of § 7 of Ord. 475, subdivisions (16.12) 493 Sewer service charge (13.16) 494 Amends § 4 of Ord. 472, zoning (Repealed by 495) 495 Zoning; repeals Ords. 125, 220, 249, 299, 328, 360, 407, 422, 448, 455 and 491 (Repealed by 595) 496 Amends § 2 of Ord. 286, compensation of city clerk and city treasurer (2.28) 497 Annexation (Special) 498 Repeals Ords. 11; §§ 2-6, 21, 22 of 13; 16; § 24 of 21; 28; 38; §§ 1, 3, 4, 9 and 10 of 49; 56; 60; 62; 63; 64; 69; § 2 of 82; § 1 of 84; 94; 100; 105; 110; §§ 3 and 4 of 112; 113; 116; 126; 128; 134; 140; 147; 148; 172; § 2(c) (2) (F) of 175; § 2 of 185; 188; 195; 202; 209; 212; §§ l and 2 of 227; 231; § 2 of 242; 257; 258; §§ 17 and 18 of 260; 268; 298; §§ 2 and 3 of 299; 300; 334; §§ 2.5, 3.2, 3.4, 3.7, 4.2, 8.1, 10.3, 10.13, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 14, 14.l-14.12 and 15 of 342; 373; 374; 382; § 1 of 419; §§ 3 and 4 of 422; 427; §§ 12 and 14 of 440; and § 4 of 446 (5.72) 499 Amends §§ 5, 5(a) and 14 of Ord. 49, public peace, morals and welfare (9.24) 500 Amends § 2 of Ord. 12, imprisonment (Repealed by 752) 501 Amends §§ 2, 3 and subsection (d) of 10 of Ord. 369, underground utilities (12.16) 502 Amends § 5 of Ord. 346, billiard rooms (5.12) 503 Amends § 6 of Ord. 266, cardrooms (Repealed by 598) 504 Amends subsection (b) of § 6 of Ord. 106, alcoholic beverage sales (Repealed by 629) 505 Amends § 1 of Ord. 175, taxicabs (5.72) 506 Amends § 3 of Ord. 340, compensation of council members (2.28) 507 Amends § 36 of Ord. 475, subdivisions (16.40) 508 Amends subsections (a) and (b) of § 2 and (a) and (b) of § 3 of Ord. 445, nudity (9.36) 509 Amends § 1 of Ord. 185, intoxicating liquors (9.28) 510 Amends § 1 of Ord. 45, bread regulations (8.20) 511 Readopts §§ 2.5, 3.2, 3.4, 3.7, 4.2, 8.1, 10.3, 10.13, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 14, 14.1-14.12 and 15 of Ord. 342, Uniform Traffic Ordinance (Repealed by 512) 512 Repeals §§ 2.5, 3.2, 3.4, 3.7, 4.2, 8.1, 10.3, 10.13, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 14, 14.1-14.12 and 15 of Model Traffic Code (10.04) 513 General provisions (1.04) 514 General penalty (1.24) 515 Uniform Plumbing Code (Repealed by 568) 516 Uniform Mechanical Code; repeals Ord. 458 (15.12) 517 Uniform Housing Code; repeals Ord. 456 (15.20) 518 Uniform Building Code; repeals Ord. 460 (15.04) 519 Amends § 12 of Ord. 412, abandoned vehicles (10.12) 520 Amends § 1 of Ord. 187, fortunetelling and astrology (Repealed by 752) 521 Adds subsection (c) to § 44 of Ord. 21; business licenses (Repealed by 629) 522 Amends § 1 of Ord. 182, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 523 Adds § 47(a) to Ord. 21; amends §§ 9, 16(A), 20 and 42 of Ord. 21, business licenses (Repealed by 629) 524 Amends § 4 of Ord. 316, transient occupancy tax (3.20) 525 Amends § 5 of Ord. 358, real property transfer tax (3.16) 526 Repeals § 16 of Ord. 13 (Repealer) 527 Amends § 4 of Ord. 219, park regulations (12.28) 528 Amends § 4 of Ord. 215, excavations and street improvements (12.08) 529 Interim zoning (Special) 530 Rezone (Special) 531 Rezone (special) 532 Rezone (Special) 533 Interim zoning (Special) 534 CATV franchise (Repealed by 557) 535 CATV franchise (Repealed by 558) 536 New construction fees (3.32) 537 Rezone (Special) 538 Rezone (Special) 539 Rezone (Special) 540 Rezone (Special) 541 Conflict of interest provisions (2.24) 542 Rezone (Special) 543 Rezone (Special) 544 Amends § 7(a)(4) of Ord. 475, cul-de-sac, street provisions (16.12) 545 Rezone (Special) 546 Rezone (Special) 547 Amends Ch. 17.08, zoning definitions (Repealed by 595) 548 Use of sewerage and drainage system; repeals Ord. 226 and 264 (13.08) 549 Rezone (Special) 550 Amends §§ 3 and 7 of Ord. 316, transient occupancy tax (3.20) 551 Rezone (Special) 552 Parade regulations (10.20) 553 Amends § 11.1(b) of Article XI in Ord. 495, zoning (Repealed by 595) 554 Rezone (Special) 555 Amends § 2(9) of Ord. 492, streets and sidewalks (16.12) 556 Amends § 7.3 of Ord. 495, zoning (Repealed by 595) 557 CATV provisions; repeals Ords. 534 and 355 (5.40) 558 Repeals Ords. 535 and 365 (Special) 559 Amends § 27 of Ord. 342, increasing state speed limit in certain zones (10.04) 560 Rezone (Special) 561 Rezone (Special) 562 Adds §§ 7.7, 7.8, 7.9 and 7.10 and amends § 7.6 of Art. VII of Ord. 495, R-3 multiple-family residence districts (Repealed by 595) 563 Rezone (Special) 564 Uniform Mechanical Code; repeals Ord. 458 (Repealed by 587) 565 Uniform Building Code; repeals Ord. 458 (Repealed by 587) 566 1968 Uniform Wiring Code; repeals Ord. 457 (Repealed by 637) 567 1979 Uniform Fire Code (15.24) 568 Uniform Plumbing Code (15.16) 569 Uniform One and Two Family Dwelling Code (15.22) 570 Uniform Housing Code (15.20) 571 Amends §§ 2, 10-13, 15, 17-19, 21-23, 25-26, 28, 30, 34-36, 38-40, 42-43 and 51-53 of Ord. 21, §§ 1-7 of Ord. 42, §§ 2, 3 of Ord. 54, § 2 of Ord. 84, § 31A of Ord. 88, §§ 5, 6 of Ord. 143, § 1 of Ord. 153, §§ 2, 10 of Ord. 175, § 1 of Ord. 182, § 2 of Ord. 201, § 5 of Ord. 221, § 1 of Ord. 224, §§ 7, 8 of Ord. 228, § 4 of Ord. 243 and §§ 6, 10 of Ord. 266, business license fees (5.08, 5.28, 5.36, 5.52, 5.56, 5.64, 5.72) 572 Amends §§ 15.7, 18.3, 19.2 and 20.10 of Ord. 495, zoning (Repealed by 595) 573 Amends § 8 of Ord. 419, water regulations; repeals Ord. 433 (13.04) 574 Parking restrictions (10.08) 575 Drug paraphernalia restricted (Repealed by 752) 576 Rezone (Special) 577 Amends § 1 of Ord. 136, council meetings (Repealed by 595) 578 Uniform Swimming Pool Code adopted (Repealed by 825) 579 Uniform Solar Energy Code adopted (15.14) 580 Industrial development authority (2.22) 581 Amends § 51 and 2 of Ord. 252, fixing clerk's and treasurer's salaries (2.28) 582 Amends § 52 and 7 of Ord 567, director of public works (15.24) 583 Amends § 11.2(a) of Ord. 495, zoning (Repealed by 595) 584 Amends § 7(g) of Ord. 356, city manager (2.04, 2.18) 585 Amends §§ 10 and 11 of Ord. 51, water service (13.04) 586 Adds Art. 33 to Ord. 495, zoning (Repealed by 595) 587 Adopts Uniform Mechanical Code; repeals Ord. 564 (15.12) 588 Authorizes amendment to Public Employees' Retirement System contract (2.56) 589 Amends § 1 of Ord. 136, city council meetings; repeals Ord. 577 (2.12) 590 Repeals § 2 of Ord. 356 (Repealer) 591 Code adoption (1.01) 592 Prohibits property uses inconsistent with draft zoning ordinance (Expired) 593 Amends §§ 5.16.050 and 5.16.090, bingo (5.16) 594 Prohibits property uses inconsistent with draft zoning ordinance (Expired) 595 Zoning; repeals Chs. 5.48, 14.04, 14.08, 15.36 and Title 17 (17.02, 17.04, 17.06, 17.08, 17.10, 17.12, 17.14, 17.16, 17.18, 17.20, 17.22, 17.24, 17.26, 17.28, 17.30, 17.32, 17.34, 17.36, 17.38, 17.40, 17.44, 17.46, 17.50, 17.52, 17.54, 17.56, 17.58, 17.60, 17.62, 17.64, 17.66, 17.68, 17.70, 17.72, 17.74, 17.76, 17.78, 17.80, 17.82) 596 Adds Ch. 10.30, off-road use of motor vehicles (10.30) 597 Rezone (Special) 598 Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.24, cardrooms (5.24) 599 Sales and use tax; amends § 3.12.130; adds § 3.12.131 (3.12) 600 Rezone (Special) 601 Amends §§ 17.08.010, 17.10.060, 17.12.040, 17.14.010, 17.14.050, 17.16.010, 17.16.070, 17.16.120, 17.18.010, 17.22.010, 17.22.040 and 17.44.010; adds §§ 17.10.070, and 17.30.020; repeals § 17.34.040(C), zoning (17.08, 17.10, 17.12, 17.14, 17.16, 17.18, 17.22, 17.30, 17.34, 17.44) 602 Amends §§ 10.04.250 and 10.04.255, speed limits (10.04) 603-A Repeals and replaces § 10.30.050, penalty for violation of off-road motor vehicle use (10.30) 603 Amends §§ 17.14.010, 17.14.030, 17.14.050, 17.26.030(A), 17.26.050, 17.26.090, 17.26.100 and 17.26.110; adds § 17.14.080 and subsections (G) and (H) to § 17.26.020; repeals subsection (C) of § 17.26.150, zoning (17.14) 604 Creates redevelopment agency (2.60) 605 Rezone (Special) 606 Urgency ordinance creating planning commission (2.64) 607 Creates planning commission (2.64) 608 Authorizes amendment to Public Employees' Retirement System contract (2.56) 609 Amends § 10.04.260, Uniform Traffic Ordinance (10.04) 610 Amends §§ 10.04.040, 10.08.010(B), 10.08.020(B), 10.08.030(C), 10.08.040(D), 10.12.160, 10.16.060 and 10.20.120, vehicles and traffic (10.04, 10.08, 10.12, 10.16, 10.20) 611 Adopts redevelopment plan (Special) 612 Prezone (Special) 613 Prezone (Special) 614 (Not adopted) 615 Authorizes amendment to Public Employees' Retirement System contract (2.56) 616 Adds § 8.28.084; amends §§ 8.28.010, 8.28.040, 8.28.050 and 8.28.060, nuisances (8.28) 617 Amends § 17.10.040, zoning (17.10) 618 Amends § 10.08.040, parking regulations (10.08) 619 Amends Ch. 12.28, conduct in public parks (12.28) 620 Rezone (Special) 621 Amends §§ 17.08.010 and 17.08.040, airport/heliport facilities (17.08) 622 Adds Ch. 5.77, security alarm systems (5.77) 623 Adds § 17.10.041, commercial antennas, towers, and masts (Repealed by 783) 624 Rezone (Special) 625 Adds § 17.34.041, damaged building reconstruction; repeals § 17.34.040(E) (17.34) 626 Amends §§ 6.08.020, 6.08.040, 6.08.050, 6.16.020 and 6.16.030, dogs (6.08, 6.16) 627 Adds § 17.26.160; amends § 17.26.050, signs (Repealed by 792) 628 Rezone (Special) 629 Adds Ch. 5.02, business licenses; amends §§ 5.08.040, 5.16.120, 5.60.040 and 5.60.060; repeals Chs. 5.04 and 5.44 and § 5.08.110 (5.02, 5.08, 5.16, 5.60) 630 Zoning review and recommendation responsibilities; amends §§ 17.06.040, 17.06.050, 17.08.730, 17.10.020, 17.10.060, 17.12.010, 17.12.040, 17.14.010, 17.14.020, 17.14.040, 17.14.060, 17.16.120, 17.18.010, 17.20.010, 17.22.020, 17.22.050, 17.24.020, 17.26.090, 17.26.100, 17.30.020, 17.32.050, 17.36.070, 17.36.100, 17.38.040, 17.38.060, 17.38.070, 17.40.180, 17.40.290, 17.42.030, 17.42.060, 17.50.070, 17.56.030, 17.58.020, 17.60.040, 17.64.020, 17.64.030, 17.64.040, 17.66.030, 17.66.050, 17.68.030, 17.68.050, 17.70.020, 17.70.030, 17.70.050-17.70.090, 17.72.010-17.72.060, 17.74.030, 17.76.010, 17.76.020 and 17.78.010 (17.06, 17.08, 17.10, 17.12, 17.14, 17.16, 17.18, 17.20, 17.22, 17.24, 17.30, 17.32, 17.36, 17.38, 17.40, 17.50, 17.56, 17.60, 17.64, 17.66, 17.68, 17.70, 17.72, 17.74, 17.76, 17.78) 631 Gas distribution system franchise grant (Special) 632 Prezone (Special) 633 Prezone (Special) 634 Rezone (Special) 635 Amends § 5.72.180, taxicabs (5.72) 636 Amends Ord. 632, prezone; adds §§ 17.06.060-17.06.064 and 17.64.060-17.64.066 and amends §§ 17.06.010, 17.10.010, 17.10.050(A) and 17.12.030, zoning (17.06, 17.10, 17.12, 17.64) 637 Adds Chs. 15.02 and 15.10; amends Chs. 15.04, 15.12, 15.14, 15.16, 15.18, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24 and 15.32, buildings and construction; repeals Ch. 15.08 (15.02, 15.04, 15.10, 15.12, 15.14, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24, 15.32) 638 Adds §§ 17.04.365, 17.04.565, 17.04.774, 17.04.778, 17.04.815, 17.04.975, 17.08.095, 17.08.655 and 17.34.055; amends Chs. 17.38 and 17.40 and §§ 17.02.030, 17.04.020, 17.04.120, 17.04.150, 17.04.170, 17.04.240, 17.04.300, 17.04.310, 17.04.590, 17.04.770, 17.08.010, 17.08.110, 17.08.720, 17.10.040, 17.10.050(A), 17.16.020, 7.16.140, 17.20.010, 17.22.010, 17.22.020, 17.22.040, 17.22.050, 17.24.010, 17.24.020, 17.34.010, 17.34.050 and 17.40.180, zoning; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.42 (17.02, 17.04, 17.08, 17.10, 17.16, 17.20, 17.22, 17.24, 17.34, 17.38, 17.40, 17.42) 639 Rezone (Special) 640 Adds Ch. 13.06, cross-connection control program (13.06) 641 Rezone (Special) 642 Selection and training of public safety dispatchers (2.42) 643 Rezone (Special) 644 Rezone (Special) 645 (Not adopted) 646 Prezone (Special) 647 Amends §§ 2.24.060, 2.24.090, 2.24.100, 2.24.110, 2.24.150, 2.24.160 and 2.24.170, conflict of interest code (2.24) 648 Prezone (Special) 649 Amends § 16.24.160, subdivisions (16.24) 650 Adds §§ 13.08.020(J) and 13.08.145; amends § 13.08.010, sewers-use regulations (13.08) 651 Prezone (Special) 652 Rezone (Special) 653 Rezone (Special) 654 Prezone (Special) 655 Rezone (Special) 656 Rezone (Special) 657 Amends redevelopment plan (Special) 658 Prezone (Special) 659 Adds § 17.10.035; amends § 17.38.060(E), zoning (17.10, 17.38) 660 Adds Title 14, mobile homes (14.04) 661 Rezone (Special) 662 Adds Ch. 15.23; amends Chs. 15.02, 15.04, 15.12, 15.14, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24 and 15.32, technical building codes (15.02, 15.04, 15.12, 15.14, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24, 15.32) 663 Rezone (Special) 664 Amends § 17.20.010; repeals § 17.58.020, zoning (17.20) 665 Amends § 17.08.010, zoning (17.08) 666 Rezone (Special) 667 Amends § 2.28.030, city council compensation (2.28) 668 Rezone (Special) 669 Authorizes amendment to Public Employees' Retirement System contract (2.56) 670 Adopts redevelopment plan for project area No. 4 (Special) 671 Rezone (Special) 672 Rezone (Special) 673 Prezone (Special) 674 Prezone (Special) 675 Replaces Title 6, animals (6.04, 6.06, 6.12, 6.16, 6.20, 6.28) 676 Adds § 8.28.010(J); amends § 8.28.080, nuisances (8.28) 677 Rezone (Special) 678 Rezone (Special) 679 Amends §§ 17.10.030, 17.10.035 and 17.38.060(E), zoning (17.10, 17.38) 680 Rezone (Special) 681 Authorizes amendment to Public Employees' Retirement System contract (2.56) 682 Adds Ch. 8.36, mobile source air pollution reduction (8.36) 683 Repeals and replaces §§ 2.04.280 and 2.04.290, city manager; repeals §§ 2.04.300-2.04.320 (2.04) 684 Adds Ch. 8.36, sewage sludge (8.36) 685 Rezone (Special) 686 Adds § 3.1 to Ord. 558, CATV franchise (Special) 687 Adds Ch. 15.50, uniform sign code and Ch. 15.56, uniform building security code; amends § 15.02.010-15.02.030, uniform administrative code, 15.04.010, uniform building code, 15.24.040, fire code and 15.32.010, abatement of dangerous buildings (15.02, 15.24, 15.32, 15.50) 688 Amends § 10.04.255, speed limit (Repealed by 709) 689 Rezone (Special) 690 Adds § 17.68.025; amends § 17.08.010, zoning (17.08, 17.68) 691 Amends § 5.36.010, photographer's license; repeals § 5.36.030 (5.36) 692 Prezone (Special) 693 Amends § 9.84.010, discharging firearms; amends §§ 17.06.010 and 17.08.010, zoning (9.84, 17.06, 17.08) 694 Prezone (Special) 695 Adds §§ 17.16.055, 17.26.160 and 17.28.050; amends § 17.16.050, zoning (17.16, 17.28) 696 Adds § 10.08.050, parking regulations; amends § 10.04.080, city traffic engineer (10.04, 10.08) 697 Amends § 9.28.100, alcoholic beverages (9.28) 698 Adds Ch. 1.10, fiscal control (1.10) 699 Prezone (Special) 700 Amends § 10.12.130, abandoned vehicles (10.12) 701 Amends § 13.04.110, water service regulations (13.04) 702 Rezone (Special) 703 (Not adopted) 704 Amends § 3.20.030, transient occupancy tax (3.20) 705 Adds § 8.24.115, garbage and refuse and § 13.16.025, sewers-service charge (8.24, 13.16) 706 Amends redevelopment plan for redevelopment project No. 1 (Special) 707 Rezone (Special) 708 Rezone (Special) 709 Amends § 10.04.250; repeals § 10.04.255, Uniform Traffic Ordinance (10.04) 710 Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.72, curfew (9.72) 711 Adds § 9.28.025, alcoholic beverages (9.28) 712 (Not adopted) 713 Amends § 5.60.060, public dances (5.60) 714 Repeals §§ 5.64.010-5.64.080 (Repealer) 715 Approves and adopts amendment No. 2 to the redevelopment plan for redevelopment project No. 1 (Special) 716 Amends Ch. 5.24, card clubs (5.24) 717 Rezone (Special) 718 Adds § 3.20.070(C), transient occupancy tax (3.20) 719 Amends Ch. 2.64, planning commission (2.64) 720 Adopts Riverside County Ordinance 756, ambulance regulations (Not codified) 721 Adds § 15.04.011; amends §§ 15.02.010, 15.02.030, 15.04.010, 15.10.010-15.10.030, 15.12.010, 15.16.010, 15.18.010, 15.20.010, 15.23.010, 15.24.010, 15.24.040, 15.32.010, 15.50.010 and 15.56.010, buildings and construction; repeals §§ 15.02.020, 17.10.040(C) and (D) (15.02, 15.04, 15.10, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20, 15.24, 15.32, 15.50, 17.10) 722 Rezone (Special) 723 Rezone (Special) 724 Rezone (Special) 725 Grants franchise to Blythe sewer fund, sewage system (Special) 726 Grants franchise to Blythe water fund, water system (Special) 727 Assesses the utility enterprise funds a public works fee for streets and roadways repair and maintenance (Not codified) 728 Amends § 6.08.020, dogs (Not codified) 729 Rezone (Special) 730 Rezone (Special) 731 Amends § 10.04.260, Uniform Traffic Ordinance (10.04) 732 Adds § 5.02.120, business licenses (5.02) 733 Amends § 5.02.300, business licenses (5.02) 734 Rezone (Special) 735 Rezone (Special) 736 Adds Ch. 8.37, public swimming pool and spa safety (8.37) 737 Amends § 5.12.050(A)(1) and (C), billiard rooms (5.12) 738 Adds § 10.04.185, Uniform Traffic Ordinance (10.04) 739 Amends Ch. 8.24, garbage and refuse (8.24) 740 Adds Ch. 9.90, adult oriented businesses (Not codified) 741 Amends §§ 5.77.040, 5.77.060 and 5.77.070, security alarm systems (5.77) 742 Establishes a citation system for truancy/daytime loitering (Repealed by 744) 743 Rezone (Special) 744 Repeals Ord. 742 (Repealer) 745 (Not adopted) 746 Adds Ch. 17.49, sexually oriented businesses; repeals Ch. 17.48 (17.49) 747 Adds Ch. 8.38, fireworks (Repealed by 750) 748 Rezone (Special) 749 Adds § 15.24.110, issuance of citations by designated officers (15.24) 750 Repeals Ord. 747 (Repealer) 751 Amends § 2.12.010, city council meetings (2.12) 752 Amends §§ 1.20.010, 1.24.020, 1.24.030, 2.28.020 [2.48.020], 2.28.030 [2.48.030], 5.60.090(A), 9.24.060, 9.28.040, 9.28.070 and 9.28.080; amends footnotes to Chs. 1.24 and 2.48 [not codified]; repeals §§ 1.16.010, 1.20.020, 5.60.140 and 9.28.090; repeals Chs. 9.04, 9.32, 9.60 and 9.80, law enforcement required changes (1.20, 1.24, 2.48, 5.60, 9.24, 9.28) 753 Repeals and replaces Ch. 10.20, meetings, assemblies, and parades in public places (10.20) 754 (Not adopted) 755 (Not adopted) 756 Rezone (Special) 757 Adds Ch. 8.38, fireworks sales (8.38) 758 Adopts amendment No. 3 to redevelopment plan project No. 1 (Special) 759 Adds § 15.02.050; amends §§ 15.02.010, 15.02.030, 15.04.010, 15.04.011, 15.10.010, 15.10.020, 15.10.030, 15.12.010, 15.16.010, 15.18.010, 15.20.010, 15.22.010, 15.23.010, 15.24.010, 15.24.040, 15.32.010, 15.44.030 and 15.56.010, buildings and construction (15.02, 15.04, 15.10, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24, 15.32) 760 Amends Ch. 5.24 in its entirety, cardrooms (5.24) 761 Rezone (Special) 762 Amends § 5.02.300, business licenses (5.02) 763 Rezone (Special) 764 Prezone (Special) 765 Amends § 10.04.250; repeals § 10.04.255, traffic (10.04) 766 Adds Ch. 17.23, street naming system, zoning (17.23) 767 Rezone (Special) 768 Amends § 10.04.250; repeals § 10.04.255, traffic (10.04) 769 Rezone (Special) 770 Amends §§ 17.52.010 and 17.52.020, fuel dispensing and storage (17.52) 771 Approves development agreement (Special) 772 Approves tentative parcel map (Special) 773 Adds Ch. 2.65, purchasing control system (2.65) 774 Adds Ch. 17.69, non-discretionary permit for large family day care homes (17.69) 775 Amends § 2.56.020, authorizes amendment to Public Employee's Retirement System contract (2.56) 776 Rezone (Special) 777 (Not adopted) 778 (Not adopted) 779 Adopts amendment No. 4 to redevelopment project No. 1 (Special) 780 Amends §§ 15.02.010, 15.02.030, 15.02.040, 15.02.050, 15.04.010, 15.04.011, 15.04.020, 15.04.030, 15.04.040, 15.10.010, 15.10.020, 15.10.030, 15.10.040, 15.12.010, 15.12.020, 15.12.030, 15.12.040, 15.14.010, 15.14.020, 15.16.010, 15.16.020, 15.18.010, 15.18.020, 15.20.010, 15.20.020, 15.22.010, 15.22.020, 15.23.010, 15.23.020, 15.24.010, 15.24.020, 15.24.040, 15.24.070, 15.24.080, 15.24.090, 15.24.110, 15.28.010, 15.28.020, 15.28.030, 15.28.040, 15.32.010, 15.40.010, 15.40.020, 15.40.030, 15.40.040, 15.44.010, 15.44.020, 15.44.030, 15.44.040, 15.44.050, 15.44.060, 15.56.010; repeals § 15.50.010, buildings and construction (15.02, 15.04, 15.10, 15.12, 15.14, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24, 15.32, 15.40, 15.50) 781 Adds § 17.08.205; amends § 17.08.010, permitted uses (17.08) 782 (Superseded by Ord. 783) 783 Supersedes Ord. 782; adds Ch. 17.47; repeals § 17.10.041, wireless telecommunications facilities (17.10, 17.47) 784 Rezone (Special) 785 Authorizes amendment to contract between city council and board of administration of the California public employees' retirement system (Special) 786 Amends §§ 17.26.020, 17.26.080-17.26.090 and 17.26.150, signs (Repealed by 792) 787 Amends §§ 2.64.020, 2.64.040 and 2.64.110, planning commission (2.64) 788 Amends § 8.24.048, garbage and refuse (8.24) 789 Adds §§ 17.08.695, 17.10.015, 17.10.031, 17.14.090, 17.20.015; amends §§ 17.08.010, 17.10.010, 17.10.040, 17.10.050, 17.12.030, 17.12.050, 17.12.060, 17.14.010, 17.14.030, 17.14.050, 17.16.060, 17.16.110, 17.20.010, 17.50.080, 17.50.130, 17.60.020, 17.76.020 and Ch. 17.22, zoning (17.08, 17.10, 17.12, 17.14, 17.16, 17.20, 17.22, 17.50, 17.60, 17.76) 790 Adds §§ 17.30.030 and 17.30.040; amends §§ 17.30.010 and 17.30.020, zoning (17.30) 791 (Number not used) 792 Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.26, zoning (17.26) 793 (Not adopted) 794 Rezone (Special) 795 Tax levy (Special) 796 Amends § 17.06.010, zoning (17.06) 797 (Not adopted) 798 Rezone (Special) 799 Rezone (Special) 800 Adds Ch. 17.27, zoning (17.27) 801 Adds Ch. 3.34, development impact fee (3.34) 802 Adds T. 18, graffiti and vandalism abatement (18.01) 803 Adopts Ch. 15.58; amends Ch. 15.10 [§§ 15.10.010-15.10.030], California Electrical Code and California Energy Code (15.10, 15.58) 804 Rezone (Special) 805 Repeals Ch. 5.76 (Repealer) 806 Amends § 17.14.010, zoning (17.14) 807 Rezone (Special) 808 Rezone (Special) 809 Rezone (Special) 810 (Not adopted) 811 Rezone (Special) 812 Rezone (Special) 813 Rezone (Special) 814 Adds Ch. 8.40, food handlers certification (8.40) 815 Adds Ch. 8.42, food establishments and facilities (8.42) 816 Rezone (Special) 817 Prezone (Special) 818 Rezone (Special) 819 Rezone (Special) 820 Amends § 10.04.250, uniform traffic ordinance (10.04) 821 (Pending) 822 Describes program to acquire real property by eminent domain in Blythe redevelopment project no. 1 (Special) 823 Amends Ch. 5.72, taxicabs (5.72) 824 Amends Ch. 12.28, conduct in public parks and marina (12.28) 825 Adds Ch. 15.60 and §§ 15.04.012-15.04.018; amends §§ 15.02.010, 15.02.030-15.02.050, 15.04.010, 15.04.011, 15.10.010-15.10.030, 15.12.010-15.12.030, 15.14.010, 15.16.010, 15.20.010, 15.22.010, 15.24.010, 15.24.020, 15.24.040, 15.24.070-15.24.090, 15.24.110, 15.32.010, 15.40.010-15.40.040 and 15.58.010; repeals §§ 15.04.040, 15.10.040, 15.12.040, 15.14.020, 15.16.020, 15.18.010, 15.18.020, 15.20.020, 15.22.020, 15.23.010, 15.23.020, 15.28.010-15.28.040 and 15.44.010-15.44.060 and 15.56.010, buildings and construction (15.02, 15.04, 15.10, 15.12, 15.14, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24, 15.32, 15.40, 15.58, 15.60) 826 Rezone (Special) 827 Adds Ch. 17.29. floodplain management (17.29)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 9, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of Blythe, California, beginning with Supplement No. 9, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 828 10-28-08 Registration and maintenance of abandoned properties 1 Added 8.44.010- 
8.44.090 829 11-18-08 Planning commission 1 Added 2.64.200 830 Not adopted 831 5-12-09 Code adoption 1 1.24.010 832 2-10-09 Transient occupancy tax 1 3.20.040 833 Not adopted 834 Was not passed by voters 835 8-25-09 Sex offenders 1 Added 9.32.010- 
9.32.070 836 9-8-09 Interim zoning moratorium on the establishment of medical marijuana dispensaries Omit 837 Not adopted 838 1-26-10 Cardrooms 1 5.24.210(O) 839 1-26-10 Security alarm systems 1 5.77.010- 
5.77.140 840 1-26-10 Misuse of the 9-1-1 system 1 Added 9.90.010- 
9.90.050 841 1-26-10 Cannabis dispensaries Exh. 1 5.22.010- 
5.22.050 842 3-23-10 Consumption and possession of alcohol or other intoxicating substances prohibited in certain public places 1 Rpld 9.28.010- 
9.28.100 2 Added 9.29.010- 
9.29.130 843 2-9-10 Curfew and truancy of minors 1 Rpld 9.72.010- 
9.72.090 Added 9.72.010- 
9.73.110 844 Not adopted 845 6-8-10 Planning commission 1 2.64.200 846 12-14-10 Buildings and construction 15.02.010 15.04.010, 15.04.011 Rpld 15.04.012 15.04.013- 
15.04.015, Added 15.06.010- 
15.06.030 Added 15.08.010- 
15.08.040 15.10.010- 
15.10.030 15.12.010 15.16.010 Added 15.18.010- 
15.18.030 15.20.010 Rpld 15.22.010 15.24.010- 
15.24.080. 15.24.110 Added 15.26.010- 
15.26.030 Added 15.28.010- 
15.28.030 Added 15.30.010- 
15.30.030 15.32.010 15.58.010 2 17.52.020 847 1-11-11 Transparency in city government on city website 1 Added 2.14.010 848 3-8-11 Administrative citations 1 Added 1.26.010- 
1.26.120 849 7-12-11 Rezone Omit 850 7-26-11 Waste water hauling and disposal 1 Added 13.22.010- 
13.22.260 851 7-26-11 Urgency ordinance concerning compliance with the California Health Code Omit 852 9-13-11 Compliance with the California Health Code Omit 853 10-25-11 Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers 1 Added 5.57.010- 
5.57.180 854 9-11-12 Parking regulations 1 Added 10.08.006 855 1-8-13 City manager 1 2.04.100 856 2-12-13 Wastewater treatment fee Omit 857 2-12-13 Sewer collection service fee Omit 858 2-12-13 Water service fee Omit 859 Not adopted 860 9-10-13 Conduct in public parks and marina 1 Added 12.28.065 861 9-10-13 Mobile home and travel trailer parks 1 Rpld 14.04.010- 
14.04.060 862 10-8-13 Zoning 1 Added 17.04.425, 17.04.455, 17.04.865, 17.04.935, 17.04.955 2 17.06.010(A) 3 17.06.010(A), 17.08.010 4 17.08.010 5 Added 17.08.255, 17.08.315, 17.08.675, 17.08.677 6 17.08.695 7 17.12.030 8 Added 17.63.010- 
17.63.030 17.63A.010, 17.63A.020 17.63B.030- 
17.63B.030 17.73C.010 17.73D.010 9 Added 17.84.010- 
17.84.070 863 11-12-13 Buildings and construction 1 15.02.050 15.04.010, 15.04.011, 15.04.013 Rpld 15.04.014 15.04.015 15.06.010, 15.06.020 15.08.010- 
15.08.030 15.10.010- 
15.10.030 15.12.010, 15.12.020 15.16.010 15.18.010, 15.18.020 15.24.010, 15.24.020, 15.24.040 Rpld 15.24.090, 15.24.110 15.26.010, 15.26.020 15.28.010, 15.28.020 15.30.010, 15.30.020 Rpld 15.40.040 15.58.010 15.60.010 Added 15.60.020 864 8-12-14 Graffiti and vandalism abatement 1 Rpld 18.01.010- 
18.01.100 Added 18.01.010- 
18.01.107 865 1-27-15 Sex offenders 1 Rpld 9.32.010- 
9.32.070 867 1-27-15 Conflict of interest code 1 Rpld 2.24.010- 
2.24.170 868 2-10-15 Security alarm systems 1 5.77.010- 
5.77.140 869 5-12-15 Spay/neuter of doges 1 Added 6.06.050 870 5-12-15 Micro-chip identification of dogs 1 Added 6.06.040 871 5-26-15 Water conservation 1 Added 13.05.010- 
13.05.110 872 8-25-15 Small residential solar energy system permits 1 Added 15.62.010- 
15.62.070 873 1-12-16 Cannabis and marijuana dispensaries 2 5.22.010 3 Added 17.63E.010- 
17.63E.060 874 2-23-16 Wastewater treatment fees Omit 875 2-23-16 Water service fess Omit 876 2-23-16 Sewer collection service fee Omit 878 7-12-16 Purchasing control system 1 Rpld 2.65.010- 
2.65.090 Added 2.65.010- 
2.65.180 879 11-8-16 Buildings and construction; zoning 1 Rpld 15.02.030 15.04.010, 15.04.011, 15.04.013, 15.04.015, 15.04.017 15.06.010 15.08.010, 15.08.020 15.10.010- 
15.10.030 15.12.010 Rpld 15.14.010 15.16.010 15.18.010 15.24.010 Added 15.24.030 15.24.040 15.24.070 15.26.010 15.28.010 15.30.010 15.58.010 2 17.52.020 880 1-10-17 Temporary moratorium on non-medical marijuana cultivations Omit 881 4-11-17 Extends moratorium on non-medical marijuana-related business and personal outdoor non-medical cultivation Omit 882 5-9-17 Marijuana regulations 1 Rpld 17.63E.010- 
17.63E.060 Added 17.63E.010- 
17.63E.060 883 6-13-17 Commercial cannabis 1 Rpld 17.63E.010- 
17.63E.060 2 Added 5.10.010- 
5.10.460 Added 17.08.740 Added 17.63E.010- 
17.63.070 884 8-8-17 Water conservation 1 Rpld 13.05.010- 
13.05.110 Added 13.05.010- 
13.05.100 885 10-10-17 Commercial cannabis activity 2 5.10.020 3 5.10.040 4 5.10.050 5 5.10.070 6 5.10.080 7 5.10.160 8 5.10.170 9 5.10.180(A) 10 5.10.200 11 5.10.250 12 5.10.290 13 5.10.310 14 5.10.380(B) 15 17.08.740 16 17.63E.040 886 11-14-17 Rezone Omit 887 11-28-17 Approves development agreement Omit 888 4-24-18 Commercial cannabis business tax 1 Added 3.36.010- 
3.36.050 890 8-14-18 Commercial cannabis related uses and activity 1 17.63E.040 891 9-11-18 Commercial cannabis activity 1 5.10.080  
