
Brea City Code


PART I: MUNICIPAL CODE



TITLE 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      1.00   THE CODE



      1.04   PENALTIES, ADMINISTRATIVE AND CIVIL REMEDIES, AND
GENERAL PROVISIONS



      1.08   NOTICES TO APPEAR



      1.12   CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY



CHAPTER 1.00:  THE CODE



Section



   1.00.010   Brea City Code adopted



   1.00.020   Designation and contents — Citations to the Code



   1.00.030   Existing law continued



   1.00.040   Effect on past actions and rights previously accrued



   1.00.050   Definitions and rules of construction



   1.00.060   Effect of repeal of ordinances



   1.00.070   Catchlines of sections



   1.00.080   City jail



   1.00.090   City seal



   1.00.095   Use of the city seal, emblems and logos



   1.00.100   Datum plane



   1.00.110   Bench mark



   1.00.120   Designated code enforcement officers are vested with
powers of arrest



Statutory reference:



   For constitutional provisions of state relative to cities generally,
see Cal. Const., Art. XI, §§ 1 et seq.



   For state laws as to power of city to codify ordinances, see Cal. Gov't
Code, §§ 50022.1 to 50022.10



§ 1.00.010  BREA CITY CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted and enacted the Brea City Code, consisting of
Part I, Titles 1 through 13, and Part II, Titles 14 through 20.



§ 1.00.020  DESIGNATION AND CONTENTS — CITATIONS TO THE CODE.



   This code shall be known and may be cited as the “Brea City Code.”
Part I of the Brea City Code shall consist of those codified ordinances of
general municipal regulations and laws, and may be referred to and cited as
the “Brea Municipal Code.” Part II of the Brea City Code shall consist of
those codified ordinances pertaining to the development of the city and its
environs and may be referred to and cited as the “Brea Development Code.”



§ 1.00.030  EXISTING LAW CONTINUED.



   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same
provisions of existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall
be continued as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new
enactments.



§ 1.00.040  EFFECT ON PAST ACTIONS AND RIGHTS PREVIOUSLY ACCRUED.



   Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal of any ordinance of
the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of any
ordinance, which violation was committed prior to the effective date hereof,
nor shall the same be construed as a waiver of any permit, license, fee,
charge or penalty at such effective date required or due and unpaid under
such ordinance, nor shall the same be construed as affecting any of the
provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such fee,
charge or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation
thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance,
and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full
force and effect.



§ 1.00.050  DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context
clearly requires otherwise:



   CITY.  Shall be construed as if followed by the words “of Brea.”



   CODE.  The Code of the City of Brea.



   COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time in which any act provided by law is to
be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Brea.



   COUNTY.  The County of Orange.



   DAY.  A day is the period of time between any midnight and the
midnight following.



   DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME.  “Daytime” is the period of time between
sunrise and sunset.  “Nighttime” is the period of time between sunset
and sunrise.



   GENDER.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.



   IN THE CITY.  All territory over which the city now has, or shall
hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other
regulatory powers.



   JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   NUMBER.  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.



   OATH.  Includes an affirmation.



   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, ETC.  Officers, departments, boards,
commissions and employees of the city, unless the context indicates otherwise.



   OFFICIAL TIME.  Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they
shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in
current use in the city.



   OR, AND.  “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be
“or,” if the sense requires it.



   OWNER.  Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business trust, corporation or company.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes every species of property, except real
property, as defined in this section.



   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING.  The words “preceding” and “following”
mean next before and next after, respectively.



   PROCESS.  Includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial
proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.



   PROPERTY.  This term shall include real and personal property.



   REAL PROPERTY.  This term shall include lands, tenements and
hereditaments.



   SHALL, MAY.  “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.



   SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK.  A mark when the signer or
subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written
near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer's
or subscriber's name; but, a signature or subscription by mark can be
acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement
only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.



   STATE.  The State of California.



   TENANT OR OCCUPANT.  Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.



   TENSES.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and
the future includes the present.



   WEEK.  A week consists of seven consecutive days.



   WRITING.  Any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means.  Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the
English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.



('61 Code, § 1.2)



Statutory reference:



   For similar state law, see Cal. Gov't Code, §§ 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 22, 6800, 6804, 6805, 6806, 6807 and Cal. Civ. Proc. § 17



   For state law definition of “year”, see Cal. Gov't Code, § 6803



§ 1.00.060  EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.



   A.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in
force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.



   B.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



('61 Code, § 1.4)



§ 1.00.070  CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in bold
face type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor
as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be
so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines are amended or
reenacted.



('61 Code, § 1.6)



§ 1.00.080  CITY JAIL.



   A.   Location designated.  The city jail shall be located in the
civic and cultural center or such other location as the Council may designate.



('61 Code, § 1.8)  (Ord. 116, passed  - - )



   B.   Certain prisoners to perform labor on public works.  All
persons confined in the city jail under a final judgment of imprisonment
rendered in a criminal action or proceeding, or as a condition of probation
after suspension of imposition of a sentence or suspension of execution of
sentence, hereby are ordered to perform labor on the public works and ways of
the city as assigned by the Police Chief of the city.



('61 Code, § 1.8-1) (Ord. 508, passed - - )



   C.   Definition.  As used in paragraph B. above, labor on the
public works includes, but is not limited to, clerical and menial labor in
the city.



('61 Code, § 1.8-2)  (Ord. 508, passed  - - )



   D.   Persons who may be imprisoned.  Any person sentenced to
imprisonment for violation of any provision of this code or other ordinance
of the city may be imprisoned in the city jail and such imprisonment may be
made in lieu of imprisonment in the county jail.



('61 Code, § 1.9)  (Ord. 116, passed  - - )



§ 1.00.090  CITY SEAL.



   A.   Adoption.  The seal described in this section is hereby
adopted as the common seal of the city.



('61 Code, § 1.10)



   B.   Description.  The common seal of the city shall be so
constructed as to make the following impression:



   An inside circle of one and one-fourth (1¼") inch in diameter, with
dotted border, to have a design showing orange trees in the foreground and
four oil derricks in the central portion, with a faint outline of mountains
in the background, surrounded by a second circle one-quarter (¼") inch
larger in radius, having a rope design inscribed on the outer margin thereof
within which and surrounding the inner circle shall be printed in larger
letters the words; City of Brea, Orange County, California, incorporated
February 23, 1917 A.D.



('61 Code, § 1.11)



   C.   Custodian.  The City Clerk shall have charge of the seal of
the city, and shall be held responsible for its care and proper use.



('61 Code, § 1.12)



(Ord. 14, passed  - - )



§ 1.00.095  USE OF THE CITY SEAL, EMBLEMS AND LOGOS.



   A.   Except as otherwise expressly provided by state or federal law,
or when done in the course of official city business, it shall be unlawful
for any person or entity to use the city seal, or any emblem or logo approved
for city use by the City Council, or which is otherwise created by or for the
city in connection with or to identify any official city program or activity,
by affixing or otherwise depicting the city seal, or any such official
emblem, or logo, or replica thereof, on any document, thing, item, or
material, or in or upon any internet website, without first having obtained
written permission from the city to do so as provided in this section.  Each
day of any unauthorized use of the city seal, or official emblem or logo,
shall constitute a separate offense.



   B.   The City Manager or his or her designee (City Manager) shall
authorize in writing the limited use of the city seal, or any official city
emblem or logo, for a specific purpose by any person or entity (applicant)
when all of the following criteria are met:



      1.   The use of the city seal, emblem, or logo, or any copy,
facsimile or reproduction thereof, is for a city, local civic, local
cultural, local charitable or other local non-profit, non-political purpose.



      2.   The applicant agrees not to use the city seal, emblem, or
logo for commercial or other purposes not otherwise allowed by this section.



      3.   The applicant submits a complete application and pays a
fee set by resolution of the city council for processing the application and
administering this code section.



      4.   A sample or image thereof satisfactory to the City
Manager of any document, item, material, or website page upon which the city
seal, emblem or logo is to be used is submitted, and objective evidence of
good quality and workmanship, or high production standards, as applicable, is
presented establishing that use of the city seal, emblem, or logo, as
requested, will not:



         a.   Discredit or impair the integrity of the seal,
emblem, or logo;



         b.   Cause discredit or ridicule to the city in any
manner;



         c.   Put the city in a false light; or



         d.   Falsely imply that the applicant is an employee,
officer, or agent of the city; or be used for any political purpose.



   C.   The city shall retain the right, at all reasonable times, to
inspect any document, item, material, or website upon which the city seal,
emblem, or logo is used in order to verify that the city seal, emblem, or
logo is being used truly and correctly as represented by the applicant and in
an unaltered form.



   D.   Permission to use the city seal, emblem, or logo shall not be
assignable.



   E.   The use of the seal, emblem, or logo may be subject to any
reasonable conditions imposed by the City Manager to carry out the purposes
of this section.



   F.   If, after receiving written permission, use of the seal, emblem
or logo by the applicant fails to satisfy any of the criteria set forth
above, the City Manager shall serve written notice of such violation upon the
applicant with a request to cure or take appropriate affirmative action to
cure the violation within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice.  In
the event the applicant fails to cure the violation to the satisfaction of
the City Manager, the City Manager shall serve written notice personally, or
by certified mail, to the applicant at the address on the application, that
permission to use the city seal, emblem, or logo is terminated, and any
further use shall be a violation of this section and a nuisance. 



   G.   A violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor and
the same may be enjoined through use of any and all available legal remedies.



(Ord. 1125, passed 8-4-09)



§ 1.00.100  DATUM PLANE.



   The sea level of the Pacific Ocean is hereby declared to be the datum
plane or base line of the city for the purpose of designating the official
grades of the streets, alleys, places, avenues, sidewalks, sewers and any
other public work for the city and for measuring all elevations and surface
points thereto.



('61 Code, § 1.13)  (Ord. 23, passed  - - )



§ 1.00.110  BENCH MARK.



   The official bench mark or datum monument within the city shall be a
brass screw set in cement in the curb return at the southwest corner of South
Brea Boulevard and West Ash Street. This datum monument is elevated 374.921
feet above the level of the Pacific Ocean, which is the city datum plane.



('61 Code, § 1.14)  (Ord. 23, passed  - - )



§ 1.00.120  DESIGNATED CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS ARE VESTED WITH POWERS OF
ARREST.



   Code enforcement officers of the city, as designated by the City
Manager, upon completion of special training as required by the City Manager
and in accordance with training provisions of the California Penal Code,
shall have the power to arrest those individuals which are reasonably
believed to have violated or to be in violation of any provision of the Brea
City Code, the Brea Zoning Ordinance and any uncodified ordinance of the city
now or hereafter in effect, in accordance with the terms and conditions of
Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, or its successor provisions.



('61 Code, § 1.15)  (Ord. 784, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 1.04:  PENALTIES, ADMINISTRATIVE AND CIVIL REMEDIES, AND GENERAL
PROVISIONS



Section



   1.04.010   Penalties and general provisions



   1.04.020   Mandatory appearance required



   1.04.030   Arrests and citations



   1.04.040   Administrative penalties



   1.04.050   Definitions



   1.04.060   Administrative citation



   1.04.070   Content of administrative citation



   1.04.080   Procedure for serving administrative citation or
compliance order



   1.04.090   Administrative fine



   1.04.100   Payment of administrative fine



   1.04.110   Request for administrative hearing



   1.04.120   Advance deposit hardship waiver



   1.04.130   Time for administrative hearing



   1.04.140   Request for continuance of hearing



   1.04.150   Appointment of Administrative Hearing Officer



   1.04.160   Procedures at administrative hearing



   1.04.170   Failure to attend administrative hearing



   1.04.180   Decision of Administrative Hearing Officer



   1.04.190   Late payment charges



   1.04.200   Collection of administrative fine



   1.04.210   Appeal of decision of Administrative Hearing Officer



   1.04.220   Appeal fee



   1.04.230   Failure to comply with administrative order or pay
administrative fine



   1.04.240   Remedies cumulative



   1.04.250   Administrative penalties: Continuing violations —
Compliance orders



   1.04.260   Compliance order



   1.04.270   Content of compliance order



   1.04.280   Compliance order satisfied



   1.04.290   Failure to comply — Administrative citation



   1.04.300   Decision of Administrative Hearing Officer following
appeal



   1.04.310   Administrative costs



   1.04.320   Collection of administrative fines and costs — Lien
procedure



§ 1.04.010  PENALTIES AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   A.     No person shall violate or fail to comply with any provision
or requirement of this code or any other city ordinance.  Any person who
shall violate or fail to comply with any provision or requirement of this
code or any other city ordinance, or a condition of any permit issued
pursuant to this code or any other city ordinance, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, unless (1) such a violation or failure is designated as an
infraction or is subsequently prosecuted as an infraction, in which case such
person shall be guilty of an infraction; or (2) such a violation or failure
is prosecuted as a civil administrative action pursuant to this chapter. 
Any person, business, organization, corporation or other entity that fails to
pay an administrative fine or to comply with an administrative order is
guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in this chapter.



   B.   Any violation of any provision of this code or any other city
ordinance may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided in the
code, as an infraction, or as a civil administrative action in the discretion
of the City Attorney or City Prosecutor.



   C.   Every day any violation of this code or any other city
ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.



   D.   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or by the
City Council, any person guilty of a misdemeanor for violation of a provision
of this code shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.



   E.   1.   Unless otherwise provided by law, any person who has
committed an infraction shall be punished for a first violation by a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100), and for committing the same offense a
second time within one (1) year by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars
($200), and for committing the same offense a third or any subsequent time
within one (1) year, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500).



      2.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person who has been
convicted of violating any provision of a Building and Safety Code of the
city, or failing to comply with any of the requirements thereof, where such
violation or failure is deemed to be an infraction, is punishable for a first
violation by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100), and for
committing the same offense a second time within one (1) year by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500), and for committing the same offense a
third or any subsequent time within one (1) year, by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000).



   F.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, when a person
under eighteen (18) years of age is charged with a violation of this code,
and such person is issued a notice to appear in a traffic court of competent
jurisdiction as a result thereof, the charge shall be deemed to be an
infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be filed pursuant to
Cal. Welf. and Inst. Code § 601 or 602.



   G.   The violation of any of the provisions of this code or any city
ordinance constitutes a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil
process by means of restraining order, preliminary of permanent injunction or
in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.



   H.   The City Council declares that, should any provision, section,
paragraph, sentence or word of this code or city ordinance be rendered or
declared invalid by any final court action by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining
provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences and words of this code and such
ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.



   I.   The provisions of this chapter are alternative and in addition
to any other provision of this code wherein a specific criminal, civil or
administrative penalty and/or procedure for enforcement, is provided.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.020  MANDATORY APPEARANCE REQUIRED.



   Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this code, the
arrested person shall be taken without unnecessary delay before a magistrate
who has jurisdiction over the offense and is nearest or most accessible with
reference to the place where the arrest is made, when the person arrested:



   (1)   Fails to present a driver’s license or other satisfactory
evidence of identity for examination.



   (2)   Refuses to give a written promise to appear in court.



   (3)   Demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.030  ARRESTS AND CITATIONS.



   A.   Pursuant to the provisions of state law, the city officers or
employees designated by the City Manager to make misdemeanor arrests may
issue citations and make arrests without a warrant whenever they have
reasonable cause to believe that the person who is either arrested or to whom
a citation is issued has committed an infraction or misdemeanor violation of
this code, or violation of any condition of any permit issued pursuant to
this code or violation of any other city ordinance or state statute which
such officers or employees have the duty to enforce, and the violation has
been committed in the presence of such officers or employees.



   B.   Arrests for misdemeanors and citations for infractions shall be
processed, issued and handled as provided by state law.



   C.   In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this
authority and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a
magistrate, the officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written
notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear, as
prescribed by Chapter 5C, commencing with § 853.5, of the Cal. Penal Code.



   D.   The officers and employees identified in subparagraph A. of
this section and any other persons designated to do so by the City Manager
shall have the concurrent authority to issue administrative citations.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.040  ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   In addition to, or in place of, any other remedy which is allowed by
law, whether administrative, criminal, civil, or equitable, there is hereby
established an administrative penalty that may be imposed in connection with
any violation of this code.  The City Attorney or City Prosecutor shall have
sole discretion to determine whether a violation will be prosecuted
criminally.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.050  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases, when used in the context of this
chapter, shall have the following meanings:



   CITING OFFICIAL. Any officer or employee authorized by the City Manager
to issue citations, and subject to § 1.04.030 of this code.



   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Brea, or the City
Manager’s designee.



   LEGAL INTEREST. Any ownership interest of any person in real property
as evidenced by title or ownership documents or instruments which have been
recorded with the Orange County Recorder’s Office or which are on file
with, or in possession of, any other governmental entity.  LEGAL INTEREST
shall also include the property interest of lessees or tenants of real
property, as well as all sublessors thereof.



   PERSON. Any natural person, business, organization, corporation or
other entity.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Any natural person, business, organization,
corporation, or other entity determined by a citing official to be
responsible for causing, maintaining, permitting, or allowing a violation of
this code.  RESPONSIBLE PERSON includes but is not limited to any person,
business, organization, corporation, or other entity having an ownership or
possessory interest in property, or any agent thereof with actual or apparent
authority, possession, or control of property, as well as any other person,
business, organization, corporation or other entity that creates, permits, or
allows a violation of this code to occur or be maintained.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.060  ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.



   Any person violating or who has violated any section of this code that
is subject to this chapter may be issued an administrative citation by a
citing official as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.070  CONTENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.



   An administrative citation shall contain all of the following
information:



   A.   The date and location of the violation and the approximate time
the violation occurred or was detected.



   B.   The code section violated and a description of the violation.



   C.   The amount of the fine imposed for the violation, and the time
within which and the place at which the fine shall be paid.



   D.   An order prohibiting another occurrence of the code violation.



   E.   A description of the administrative citation review process,
including the time within which to contest the administrative citation and
the place from which to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the
administrative citation.



   F.   The name and signature of the citing official.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.080  PROCEDURE FOR SERVING ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION OR COMPLIANCE
ORDER.



   Except as provided below, the citing official may issue an
administrative citation, on a form approved by the City Manager or, pursuant
to this chapter, serve a compliance order on a responsible person using
either of the following methods:



   A.   Personal service.  The citing official may issue the
administrative citation or serve a compliance order by personal delivery
thereof to a responsible person.  The citing official shall attempt to
obtain on the administrative citation or compliance order the signature of
the responsible person.  If the responsible person or person served refuses
or fails to sign the administrative citation or compliance order, the failure
or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation, the
compliance order or of subsequent proceedings.  Service shall be deemed
effective on the date of delivery.



   B.   Mail.  The citing official may mail the administrative
citation or compliance order to the responsible person by registered mail. 
Service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing.



   C.   Posting.  If the citing official does not succeed in serving
the responsible party personally or by registered mail, the citing official
shall post the administrative citation or compliance order on any real
property within the city in which the responsible person has a legal interest
and, when so posted, shall be deemed effective service as of that date.



   D.   Publication.  If the citing official does not succeed in
serving the responsible person personally, by registered mail or by posting,
the citing official shall cause the administrative citation to be published
once a week for four (4) successive weeks in a local newspaper published, in
English, at least once a week.  Service shall be deemed effective upon the
final date of publication.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.090  ADMINISTRATIVE FINE.



   A.   For any violation of this code for which there is no specific
administrative penalty established in this code or by the City Council, the
fine shall be in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100) for a first
violation; two hundred dollars ($200) for a second violation of the same
provision of this code within a twelve (12) month period; and five hundred
dollars ($500) for each additional violation of the same provision of this
code within a twelve (12) month period.



   B.   Administrative fines assessed pursuant to an administrative
citation are a debt owed to the city.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.100  PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINE.



   The fine imposed pursuant to this chapter for a particular violation
and for any subsequent violation of the same code section, shall be in the
amount set forth in the Bail Schedule established by resolution of the City
Council.  The administrative fine shall be paid to the City Clerk within
twenty (20) days from the date of service of the administrative citation. 
If, after a hearing requested pursuant to this chapter, the Hearing Officer
determines that the administrative citation should be cancelled, the
administrative fine shall be refunded in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.110  REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   A.   Any responsible person to whom an administrative citation is
issued may contest the citation by (1) completing a request for hearing form
and returning it to the City Clerk; and (2) either depositing the
administrative fine with the City Clerk or providing notice that a request
for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to this
chapter.  A request for hearing form may be obtained from the City Clerk.



   B.   Any responsible person desiring an administrative hearing shall
file with the City Clerk a completed request for hearing form and the
administrative fine or completed hardship waiver form pursuant to this
chapter within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the
administrative citation.  In the event of any dispute as to the date of
filing, the date indicated on a file stamped copy in the City Clerk’s
office or a City Clerk-file stamped copy in the possession of the responsible
party shall control.  The responsible person’s failure to file the request
for hearing form and the fine or hardship waiver form within twenty (20) days
of the date of service of the administrative citation shall constitute a
waiver of the right to a hearing.



   C.   The person requesting the hearing shall be notified by
registered mail of the time and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days
before the date of the hearing. Any documentation, other than the
administrative citation the citing official has submitted or will submit to
the Hearing Officer, shall be served on the person requesting the hearing by
registered mail at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.120  ADVANCE DEPOSIT HARDSHIP WAIVER.



   A.   Any responsible person who requests an administrative hearing
and who is financially unable to deposit the administrative fine as provided
in this chapter may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. 
The request shall be filed with the City Clerk on an advance deposit hardship
waiver application form, available from the City Clerk, no later than twenty
(20) days after service of the administrative citation. The responsible
person’s failure to file a completed form, with all supporting documents,
within twenty (20) days after service of the administrative citation shall
constitute a waiver of the right to receive a hardship waiver. In the event
of any dispute as to the date of filing, the date indicated on a file stamped
copy in the City Clerk’s office or a City Clerk-file stamped copy in
possession of the responsible party shall control.



   B.   The City Manager may issue an advance deposit hardship waiver
only if the person requesting the waiver submits a sworn affidavit, together
with any supporting documents, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the City
Manager, the person’s financial inability to deposit with the city the full
amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. The City Manager shall issue a
written decision specifying the reasons for issuing or not issuing the
waiver. The decision shall be served upon the person requesting the waiver by
registered mail.  The decision shall be deemed served on the date of
mailing.  If the City Manager determines that the waiver is not warranted,
the person shall remit the full amount of the fine to the City Clerk within
ten (10) days of service of the City Manager’s written decision.  The City
Manager’s decision whether to issue a hardship waiver shall be final.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.130  TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   Only after a request for hearing form is received by the City Clerk
within the required period, and the responsible person requesting the hearing
has either deposited the administrative fine in full or obtained an advance
deposit hardship waiver (hereinafter a “perfected appeal”), shall the
city set the date and time for the administrative hearing.  The hearing
shall be set for a date not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than sixty
(60) days after an appeal becomes a perfected appeal.  The city shall send
notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing to the person requesting
the hearing by registered mail at least ten (10) days before the date of the
hearing.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.140  REQUEST FOR CONTINUANCE OF HEARING.



   The responsible person requesting a hearing may request one
continuance, and the city may continue the hearing on its own initiative, but
in no event shall the hearing begin later than ninety (90) days after the
date the appeal becomes a perfected appeal.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.150  APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.



   The City Manager shall establish procedures for the selection of
Administrative Hearing Officers.  In no event, however, shall the same
person who issued the administrative citation or any person who has been
‘adverse’ to the recipient of the citation in any other legal or
administrative proceeding, be the Administrative Hearing Officer.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.160  PROCEDURES AT ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply.  Each party shall have the opportunity to present
evidence in support of that party’s case and to cross-examine witnesses. 
The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish
a violation of the Municipal Code.  Administrative citations, compliance
orders and any additional reports submitted by the citing official shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents.
The Administrative Hearing Officer must use preponderance of evidence as the
standard of review in deciding the issues.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.170  FAILURE TO ATTEND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   If the responsible person fails to attend the scheduled hearing, the
hearing will proceed without the responsible person, and the responsible
person will be deemed to have waived the right to an administrative hearing.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.180  DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.



   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision
entitled “administrative order” no  later than thirty (30) days  after
the date on which  the administrative hearing concludes.  The
administrative order shall include the Administrative Hearing Officer’s
written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation.  The
decision shall set forth the reasons for the decision.  If the
Administrative Hearing Officer upholds the administrative citation, the city
shall retain the fine deposited by the responsible person.  If the
Administrative Hearing Officer upholds the administrative citation and the
fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver,
the Administrative Hearing Officer shall specify in the decision a payment
schedule for the fine.  If the Administrative Hearing Officer cancels the
administrative citation, any fine deposited with the city shall be promptly
refunded.  The administrative order shall be served upon the responsible
person by registered mail.  Service shall be deemed effective on the date of
mailing.  The administrative order shall become final on the date of
service, and shall notify the responsible person of the right to appeal as
provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.190  LATE PAYMENT CHARGES.



   Any person who fails to pay to the city, on or before the due date, any
administrative fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall
be liable for the payment of the applicable late payment charges as follows:



   A.   For payments received within thirty (30) days after the due
date, a late fee in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of administrative fine
due;



   B.   For payments received more than thirty (30) days after the due
date, a late fee in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of administrative fine
due, plus an additional ten percent (10%) of the overdue administrative fine
for each month the payment is overdue.  The maximum late fee shall be one
hundred  percent (100%) of the overdue administrative fine.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.200  COLLECTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINE.



   The city may collect any past-due administrative fine or late payment
charges by use of any available legal means, including the lien procedure set
forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.210  APPEAL OF DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.



   Within twenty (20) days after service of the decision of the
Administrative Hearing Officer upon the responsible person, the responsible
person may seek de novo review of the decision by filing a notice of appeal
with the Superior Court of Orange County.  The responsible person shall
serve upon the City Clerk, either in person or by registered mail, a copy of
the notice of appeal.  If the responsible person fails to timely file a
notice of appeal, the Administrative Hearing Officer’s decision shall be
deemed confirmed.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.220  APPEAL FEE.



   The responsible person seeking review of an administrative order must
pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25), or such other fee as may be
established, to the Superior Court of Orange County.  In the event that the
court finds in favor of the responsible person, the city will refund this fee
to the responsible person.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.230  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER OR PAY
ADMINISTRATIVE FINE.



   Failure to comply with an administrative order after it becomes final,
or to pay an administrative fine or late payment charges, is a misdemeanor. 
Filing a criminal misdemeanor action does not preclude the city from using
any other legal remedy available to gain compliance with an administrative
order, or to collect any past-due administrative fine or late payment charges.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.240  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.



   The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to comply with
the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve such person from paying any
tax, fee, penalty, or interest due and unpaid at the time of such conviction,
nor shall payment prevent a criminal prosecution or a civil or administrative
penalty for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.  All
remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of any one (1) or more remedies by
the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.250  ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:  CONTINUING VIOLATIONS —
COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   The administrative remedy provided in this chapter for any continuing
violation of this code related to building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical
or other similar structural or zoning issues, that does not create an
immediate danger to health or safety, may be exercised in place of, or in
addition to, any other remedy which is allowed by law, whether
administrative, criminal, civil, or equitable.  The City Attorney or City
Prosecutor shall have sole discretion to determine whether a violation will
be prosecuted criminally.  If a violation is not prosecuted criminally, the
city may proceed with civil or administrative proceedings pursuant to this
chapter.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.260  COMPLIANCE ORDER.



   A.   Whenever the citing official determines that there exists a
continuing violation of any provision of this code related to building,
plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other similar structural or zoning
issues, that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the
citing official shall issue or cause to be issued a written compliance order
to any responsible person, and such order shall be served by the citing
official as provided in this chapter.



   B.   When any chapter of this code provides for issuance of a cease
and desist order, failure to immediately comply with such order shall be a
violation of this code and grounds for issuance of an administrative citation
in accordance with § 1.04.290 provided, however, that the violator shall
have all rights to a hearing and appeal as are provided in such other
chapter.  If such violator is determined by a hearing officer to not have
been in violation of the cease and desist order following such hearing and/or
appeal, the administrative citation shall be dismissed.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.270  CONTENT OF COMPLIANCE ORDER.



   A compliance order shall contain all of the following information:



   A.   The date and location of the violation and the approximate time
the violation occurred.



   B.   The Municipal Code section violated and a description of the
violation.



   C.   The action required to correct the violation and the date by
which such action must be completed.  Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the date for compliance shall not be less than thirty (30) days from
the date the compliance order is served.



   D.   The consequences of failing to correct the violation, including
a description of the administrative hearing procedure and appeal process.



   E.   The time period after which administrative fines will begin to
accrue if there is not full compliance with the order.



   F.   The amount of the fine that will be imposed if there is not
full compliance with the order.



   G.   The name and signature of the citing official.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.280  COMPLIANCE ORDER SATISFIED.



   A.   If the citing official determines that all violations specified
in the compliance order have been corrected within the time set forth in the
order, no further action shall be taken against the responsible person
regarding the violations.



   B.   When a compliance order is issued, if the responsible person
provides written notice that the violation has been corrected, and if the
citing official finds compliance, the citing official shall deem the date the
written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the city official to
be the date the violation was corrected.  If, however, a final inspection
confirms compliance before mailing or personal delivery of a written notice,
or if no written notice is provided, the date of final inspection shall be
the date the violation was corrected.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.290  FAILURE TO COMPLY - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.



   If the responsible person fails to fully comply with the compliance
order within the time specified therein, the citing official may issue an
administrative citation as provided in this chapter.  The issuance of the
administrative citation does not obviate the responsible person’s
obligation to fully comply with the compliance order.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.300  DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER FOLLOWING APPEAL.



   A.   If an administrative citation is appealed by the responsible
person and an administrative hearing is held as provided in this chapter, the
Administrative Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision entitled
“administrative order” no later than thirty (30) days  after the date on
which the administrative hearing  concludes. The Administrative Hearing
Officer shall make findings within the administrative order regarding the
existence of the violation(s) specified in the compliance order, and
regarding whether the responsible person took the required corrective action
within the time period set forth in the compliance order. If the
Administrative Hearing Officer concludes that the violation continues to
exist, the administrative order shall set forth a schedule for correction. 
If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the violation(s) set
forth in the compliance order did not exist, or that the violation(s) was
(were) timely corrected, all proceedings regarding the violation(s) shall
immediately cease and the administrative citations shall be canceled.  If
the Administrative Hearing Officer cancels the administrative citation, any
fine deposited with the city shall be promptly refunded.  The administrative
order shall be served upon the responsible person by registered mail. 
Service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing.



   B.   The administrative order shall impose administrative fines and
costs as provided in this chapter.



   C.    The administrative order shall become final on the date of
service, and shall notify the responsible person of the right to appeal as
provided in this chapter.  The administrative order shall set a deadline for
compliance with its terms in the event that the responsible person fails to
file an appeal.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.310  ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.



   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall assess against the responsible
person administrative costs for any violation found to exist, or for any
violation which was not timely corrected.  The administrative costs include
any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with prosecuting the
violation, including but not limited to costs of investigation, staffing
costs in preparation for the administrative hearing and for the hearing
itself, attorneys’ fees and costs for all inspections necessary to enforce
the compliance order and the administrative order. The administrative order
shall specify the date by which the costs must be paid to the city.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



§ 1.04.320  COLLECTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND COSTS — LIEN PROCEDURE.



   A.   If the responsible person fails to satisfy in full the assessed
administrative fines and costs by the time specified in the administrative
order, and no timely appeal of the administrative order has been filed with
the Superior Court of Orange County, the city may recover the outstanding
fines and costs by imposing a lien against the real property on which the
violation occurred.



   B.   Prior to recording the lien with the Orange County
Clerk/Recorder’s Office, the City Council shall conduct a hearing to hear
any protest or objection to the lien.  The citing official shall serve
notice of the hearing upon the owner of record of the real property, based on
the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is
more current.  The notice of hearing shall include the time, date, and place
of the hearing, and shall be served upon the owner of record by certified
mail return receipt and by first class mail at least ten (10) days before the
date of the hearing.  If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot
be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous
place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and by publication of
the notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation published in Orange County and distributed within the
city.



   C.   If the City Council determines that the lien should be imposed,
then the citing official shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report
stating the amount due and owing.



   D.   After the report is filed with the City Clerk, the citing
official may cause the lien to be recorded with the County Recorder.  Once
recorded, the lien shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment
lien.



   E.   The remedies set forth in this section are not exclusive and
may be used in addition to those set forth elsewhere in this code or in state
law.  The city may collect any past-due fines and costs by use of any
available legal means.



(Ord. 1151, passed 3-1-11)



CHAPTER 1.08:  NOTICES TO APPEAR



Section



   1.08.010   Written notice to appear required



   1.08.020   Time to appear



   1.08.030   Place to appear



   1.08.040   Delivery of notice — Promise to appear



   1.08.050   Notice filed with magistrate — Bail procedures



   1.08.060   Warrant issuance conditions



   1.08.070   Failure to appear — Deemed misdemeanor



   1.08.080   Failure to appear — Warrant for arrest issued when



   1.08.090   Violation — Misdemeanor



   1.08.100   Penal Code provisions applicable



§ 1.08.010  WRITTEN NOTICE TO APPEAR REQUIRED WHEN.



   If any person is arrested for the violation of any provision of this
code, or of any code adopted herein by reference, or of any ordinance of the
city, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, as is
more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer
shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing
the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and
place where and when such person shall appear in court.



§ 1.08.020  TIME TO APPEAR.



   The time specified in the notice to appear shall be not less than five
(5) days after such arrest.



§ 1.08.030  PLACE TO APPEAR.



   The place to appear shall be either:



   A.   Before a judge of the municipal court in the judicial district
in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or



   B.   Before an officer authorized to receive a deposit of bail



§ 1.08.040  DELIVERY OF NOTICE —  PROMISE TO APPEAR.



   The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the
arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure a release, must
give his or her written promise to appear in court by signing the duplicate
notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting
officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody.



§ 1.08.050  NOTICE FILED WITH  MAGISTRATE — BAIL PROCEDURES.



   The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a duplicate notice with
the magistrate specified in the notice. The defendant may, prior to the date
upon which he or she promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate
the amount of bail set by such magistrate. Thereafter, at the time when the
case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does
not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the
bail forfeited and may, at his or her discretion, order that no further
proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no
further proceedings be had, sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid
into the county treasury for distribution as provided by the Penal Code of
the state.



§ 1.08.060  WARRANT ISSUANCE  CONDITIONS.



   A warrant shall not be issued on such charge for the arrest of a person
who, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, has given such written
promise to appear in court unless and until he or she has violated such
promise, or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or
judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as
required by law.



§ 1.08.070  FAILURE TO APPEAR — DEEMED  MISDEMEANOR.



   Every person willfully violating his or her written promise to appear
in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the
charge upon which he or she was originally arrested.



§ 1.08.080  FAILURE TO APPEAR —  WARRANT FOR ARREST ISSUED WHEN.



   A.   When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and
place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as
provided in § 1.08.050, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for
execution a warrant for his or her arrest within twenty (20) days after his
or her failure to appear as promised.



   B.   If a person promises to appear before an officer authorized to
accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date
which he or she promised to appear, then within twenty (20) days after the
delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate
having jurisdiction over the offense, such magistrate shall issue and have
delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest.



   C.   When such person violates his or her promise to appear before
an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer
shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the
offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any,
filed by the arresting officer.



§ 1.08.090  VIOLATION — MISDEMEANOR.



   Every person violating any of the provisions as set forth in §§
1.08.010 to 1.08.070, inclusive, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



§ 1.08.100  PENAL CODE PROVISIONS  APPLICABLE.



   The provisions of §§ 1.08.010 to 1.08.070, inclusive, have been
enacted pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Penal Code §§ 853.1, 853.2,
853.3, and 853.4.



CHAPTER 1.12:  CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY



Section



   1.12.010   Claims presentation — Prerequisite for bringing suit



   1.12.020   Claims presentation — Statutory authority



   1.12.030   Action on claim required before filing of suit



   1.12.040   Six-month statute of limitations



   1.12.050   Suits prohibited where full payment or compromise effected



   1.12.060   Authority to compromise pending actions



§ 1.12.010  CLAIMS PRESENTATION — PREREQUISITE FOR BRINGING SUIT.



   There shall be presented in accordance with this chapter, and as a
prerequisite to suit against the city, all claims for money or damages not
governed and controlled by Cal. Gov't Code Part 3 (commencing with § 900),
Division 3.6 of Title 1, and which are more specifically listed as exceptions
in § 905 of Chapter 1, Part 3; provided that the claims covered by this
section are not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly
relating thereto.



§ 1.12.020  CLAIMS PRESENTATION — STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   Those claims required by § 1.12.010 of this chapter shall be presented
to the City Clerk in accordance with and in the manner provided in Cal. Gov't
Code Part 3 (commencing with § 900) of Division 3.6 of Title 1.



§ 1.12.030  ACTION ON CLAIM REQUIRED  BEFORE FILING OF SUIT.



   No suit for money or damages may be brought against the city on a cause
of action for which a claim is required to be presented under § 1.12.010 of
this chapter until a written claim therefor has been presented and has been
acted upon or has been deemed rejected, in accordance with procedures
prescribed by § 1.12.020 of this chapter.



§ 1.12.040  SIX-MONTH STATUTE OF  LIMITATIONS.



   Any suit brought against the city for which a claim is required to be
presented in accordance with § 1.12.010 of this chapter must be commenced
within six (6) months after the date the claim is acted upon or deemed
rejected by the city.



§ 1.12.050  SUITS PROHIBITED WHERE FULL PAYMENT OR COMPROMISE EFFECTED.



   Where a claim that is required to be presented to the city in
accordance with this chapter is so presented and action thereon is taken:



   A.   If the claim is allowable in full and the claimant accepts the
amount allowed, no suit may be maintained on any part of the cause of action
to which the claim relates;



   B.   If the claim is allowed in part and the claimant accepts the
amount allowed, no suit may be maintained on any portion of the cause of
action where, pursuant to a requirement to such effect, the claimant has
accepted the amount allowed in settlement of the entire claim.



§ 1.12.060  AUTHORITY TO COMPROMISE  PENDING ACTIONS.



   The City Council may compromise, or may delegate the authority to its
attorney or an employee to compromise any pending action.



TITLE 2:  ADMINISTRATION
AND PERSONNEL



   Chapter



      2.00   GENERAL REGULATIONS



      2.04   CITY MANAGER



      2.08   EMPLOYEE MERIT SYSTEM



      2.12   REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY



      2.16   COMMISSIONS GENERALLY



      2.20   CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION



      2.24   PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION



      2.28   PLANNING COMMISSION



CHAPTER 2.00:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



   2.00.010   Bonds of officials



   2.00.020   Time and place of Council meetings



   2.00.030   City Treasurer to file report with City Clerk



   2.00.040   Claims and demands against city



   2.00.050   Authority to draw warrant; form and contents



   2.00.060   Clerk's duties as to warrants



   2.00.070   Recruitment and training of peace officers



   2.00.080   Candidate filing fee



   2.00.090   Expiration of terms of office of city commission members



   2.00.100   Election date



   2.00.110   Disclosures from closed City Council session



   2.00.120   Appointment of City Clerk



   2.00.130   City Council salaries



§ 2.00.010  BONDS OF OFFICIALS.



   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the City
Clerk, the City Treasurer and such other officers and employees as the
Council may designate, shall each severally execute good and sufficient bond
in the penal sums specified by the Council which bonds shall be conditioned
for the faithful performance by the officer giving it, of all the duties of
the office and of all the offices of which he or she may be ex officio
incumbent.



('61 Code, § 2.1)  (Ord. 33, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 108, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 143, passed  - - )



§ 2.00.020  TIME AND PLACE OF COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The City Council shall hold two (2) regular meetings each calendar
month. Said meetings shall be held in the Council Chamber of the Brea
Civic/Cultural Center located at Number One Civic Center Circle, Brea,
California. Regular meetings shall be held on the dates and at times as may
be specified from time to time by resolution of the City Council.



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to Council meetings generally, see Cal. Gov't. Code,
§§ 54950 to 54958 and Cal. Gov't Code, §§ 36800 to 36814



   For state law requiring regular Council meetings to be held at least
once a month at times fixed by ordinance or resolution, see Cal. Gov't Code,
§ 36805



   As to a majority of the Council constituting a quorum, see Cal. Gov't
Code, § 36810



   For authority of less than a majority to adjourn  from time to time
and compel attendance of absent members in the manner and under the penalties
prescribed by ordinance, see Cal. Gov't Code, § 36810
   For state law as to special meetings of City Council, see Cal. Gov't
Code, § 54956



§ 2.00.030  CITY TREASURER TO FILE REPORT WITH CITY CLERK.



   It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to file with the Clerk on
the first Monday of each month a statement of all moneys in the various funds
in the City Treasury.



('61 Code, § 2.3)  (Ord. 8, passed  - - )



§ 2.00.040  CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST CITY.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the Financial
Services Director shall be authorized to pay any warrant or check which pays
a demand certified by the Financial Services Director as conforming to the
city's budget, prior to approval by the City Council. Any such warrants or
checks shall be presented to the City Council for information.



(Ord. 1039, passed 9-5-00)



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to how demands against city shall be prosecuted, see
Cal. Gov't Code § 37201



§ 2.00.050  AUTHORITY TO DRAW WARRANT; FORM AND CONTENTS.



   A.   No order or warrant upon the city treasury shall be drawn
unless pursuant to the provision of this code, an ordinance, resolution or
motion duly passed by the City Council and unless there is sufficient money
in the fund upon which it is drawn to meet the same.



('61 Code, § 2.5)  (Ord. 8, passed  - - )



   B.   All warrants, orders or checks upon the city treasury for the
payment of any money shall be signed by either the Mayor or one of such
members of the City Council as are authorized to so sign by minute motion of
the City Council, and shall be countersigned by the City Treasurer, or, in
his or her absence, by that person designated as the Assistant Treasurer by
minute motion of the City Council. In every warrant, order or check so drawn
shall be specified the name of the person to whom the same is payable, the
date and amount thereof, the services or indebtedness for which it is to be
issued and the fund out of which it is to be paid and shall be made payable
to the person named therein or to his or her order. Any person required or
authorized pursuant to this section to sign, or countersign, any warrant,
order or check upon the city treasury may execute such warrant, order or
check by means of a facsimile signature in lieu of his or her manual
signature upon the filing and certification of such person's manual signature
in accordance with the Uniform Facsimile Signature of Public Officials Act
(Cal. Gov't Code §§ 5500 et seq.) as the same now exists or as may be
amended from time to time. Whenever any warrant, order or check is for an
amount payable in excess of $10,000, the same shall, in addition to the
signatures required or permitted hereinabove, be countersigned by the City
Manager or Assistant City Manager, or such other official designated by
resolution of the City Council manually and not through the use of a
facsimile signature.



('61 Code, § 2.6)  (Ord. 8, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 539, passed  - - ; Am.
Ord. 733, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 798, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law requiring Mayor to sign all warrants drawn on the city
treasury, see Cal. Gov't Code § 40602(a)



§ 2.00.060  CLERK'S DUTIES AS TO WARRANTS.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to procure suitable
blank warrants upon the City Treasurer which shall be used in the payment of
all demands against the city.



('61 Code, § 2.7)



   B.   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep in a book
properly ruled and printed for that purpose a record or register of all
warrants drawn upon the treasury specifying therein the date, amount and
number of each warrant so drawn, in whose favor, for what purpose and upon
what fund the same is drawn.



('61 Code, § 2.8)



(Ord. 8, passed  - - )



§ 2.00.070  RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING OF PEACE OFFICERS.



   The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the
state under the provisions of Cal. Penal Code Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4. 
Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 13522, the city, while receiving aid from the
state pursuant to such Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for
recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace
Officers Standards and Training.



('61 Code, § 2.9)  (Ord. 316, passed  - - )



§ 2.00.080  CANDIDATE FILING FEE.



   A.   A filing fee of ten ($10) dollars is hereby established for a
candidate's nomination paper for elective office at municipal elections held
in the city.



   B.   The filing fee shall be paid to the City Clerk by each
candidate for an elective office at the time the candidate's nomination paper
is filed with the City Clerk.



   C.   The Clerk shall pay to the City Treasurer all fees received,
which shall be deposited in the general fund.



('61 Code, § 2.9-2)  (Ord. 527, passed  - - )



§ 2.00.090  EXPIRATION OF TERMS OF OFFICE OF CITY COMMISSION MEMBERS.



   Any Planning Commissioner, Recreation and Parks Commissioner, Human
Resource Commissioner, or Cultural Arts Commissioner of the city whose term
of office expires prior to the time when his or her successor is appointed
shall continue to serve as a commissioner until that successor is appointed
and the term of office of that commissioner shall be deemed to be extended
until the time when his or her successor is appointed.



('61 Code, § 2.9-4)  (Ord. 704, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 719, passed  - - )



§ 2.00.100  ELECTION DATE.



   The Council requires that general municipal elections of the city shall
be held on the date of statewide general elections, to wit, the first Tuesday
after the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year.



('61 Code, § 2.9-5)  (Ord. 721, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 722, passed  - - )



§ 2.00.110  DISCLOSURES FROM CLOSED CITY COUNCIL SESSION.



   It shall be unlawful for any member of the City Council or any officer
or employee of the city or any other person present during a closed session
of the City Council or the City Council sitting as the Brea Redevelopment
Agency, to disclose to any person the content or substance of any discussion
which took place during such closed session on any matter legally authorized
to be heard in closed session, unless the City Council has authorized the
disclosure of such information by a majority vote or unless the disclosure is
required by any provision of state law.



(Ord. 971, passed 7-5-95)



§ 2.00.120  APPOINTMENT OF CITY CLERK.



   The City Manager shall appoint a legally qualified and suitable person
to serve as City Clerk of the city upon expiration of the current term of
that office, and/or upon any vacancy of such office. Thereafter, such
appointed City Clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager.



(Ord. 1095, passed 8-15-06)



§ 2.00.130  CITY COUNCIL SALARIES.



   As allowed by Cal. Gov’t Code § 36516b, Brea electors may set the
salary (excluding benefits and reimbursements) for Brea City Council members.
Council salary shall be no more than stated in Cal. Gov’t Code § 36516a.
Salary and benefits changes shall go into effect immediately upon each new
council term. Actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
their official City duties may be reimbursed per Cal. Gov’t Code §
36514.5. Council service is a part time position and council may avail
themselves to the same benefits normally made available to regular part time
city employees such as medical insurance, life insurance and city
contributions to their pension plans. Council members are however prohibited
from receiving any other personal paid benefits including, but not limited to
gym and club memberships. Upon completion of council service, no further city
payments including pension contributions shall be made on their behalf. Any
expense reimbursement shall require a) full compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 36516; b) establishment of a resolution adopted by City Council for such
reimbursement; and c) submission of a request for reimbursement in accord
with the approved resolution.



(Initiative Measure T, passed 11-6-12)



CHAPTER 2.04:  CITY MANAGER



Section



   2.04.010   Office created



   2.04.020   Commonality with Brea voters; eligibility



   2.04.030   Bond



   2.04.040   Acting City Manager



   2.04.050   Compensation



   2.04.060   Powers and duties



   2.04.070   Internal relations



   2.04.080   Removal procedure



   2.04.090   Agreements on employment



   2.04.100   Conforming amendments



Cross-reference:



   City Manager as personnel officer, see § 2.08.020



§ 2.04.010  OFFICE CREATED.



   A.   The office of the City Manager is created and established. The
City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the basis of
administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office
for and during the pleasure of the City Council.



   B.   Manager’s term of employment. No new, modified or extended
City Manager employment/ services agreement shall be for a term of more than
three (3) years with options to extend exercisable at the discretion of
council majority. Effective November 6, 2012, this provision shall be
incorporated within any modification or renewal of any existing City Manager
agreement or incorporated into any new agreement. Any termination of the City
Manager prior to expiration of any three (3) year term shall be subject to
Brea Municipal Code §§ 2.04.050(C) and 2.04.080.



('61 Code, § 2.40)  (Ord. 427, passed  - - ; Am. Initiative Measure T,
passed 11-6-12)



§ 2.04.020  COMMONALITY WITH BREA VOTERS; ELIGIBILITY.



   A.   Unless waived by City Council on a one-time per person basis
with no waiver granted in excess of three (3) years, a City Manager hired
after passage of this measure shall be required to live within a four (4) 
mile radius of Brea City Hall. The City Manager should be readily available
for any emergency and reside near other Brea residents to better appreciate
their plight (per Cal. Constitution Article XI,§ 10b).



(Initiative Measure T, passed 11-6-12)



   B.   No member of the City Council shall be eligible for appointment
as City Manager until one (1) year has elapsed after such member shall have
ceased to be a member of the City Council.  ('61 Code, § 2.42)



(Ord. 427, passed  - - )



§ 2.04.030  BOND.



   The City Manager may be required to furnish a corporate surety bond to
be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by the City
Council and which shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties imposed upon the City Manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for
such bond shall be a proper charge against the city.



('61 Code, § 2.43)  (Ord. 427, passed  - - )



§ 2.04.040  ACTING CITY MANAGER.



   The Assistant City Manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during
any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager, unless the City
Manager, by a letter filed with the City Clerk,  designates a qualified city
administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of
Manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. This letter also
shall be filed with the City Council. The City Council may appoint an acting
City Manager.



('61 Code, § 2.44)  (Ord. 427, passed  - - )



§ 2.04.050  COMPENSATION.



   A.   The City Manager shall receive such compensation and expense
allowances as the City Council shall from time to time determine, and such
compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the
city as the City Council shall designate.



   B.   The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties, including
those incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city;
reimbursement shall be made pursuant to the then current reimbursement policy
and procedure.



   C.   Unless otherwise specified by an employment agreement,
termination of employment of the City Manager by reason of involuntary
removal from service other than for willful misconduct in office, the City
Manager shall receive cash severance pay in a lump sum, equal to one (1)
month of pay, such pay to be computed at the highest salary received by the
City Manager during his or her service with the city. Involuntary removal
from service shall include resignation because of reduction in pay not
applicable to all employees of the city.



   D.   Salaries of public safety personnel reporting to the City
Manager may exceed the salary of the City Manager.



('61 Code, § 2.45)  (Ord. 427, passed  - -; Am. Initiative Measure T,
passed 11-6-12)



§ 2.04.060  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of
the city under the direction and control of the City Council except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the
efficient administration of all affairs of the city which are under his or
her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head,
and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she
shall have the powers hereinafter set forth:



   A.   Enforcement of franchises, etc.  It shall be the duty of the
City Manager to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges
granted by the City Council are faithfully observed.



   B.   Authority over employees.  It shall be the duty of the City
Manager and he or she shall have the duty to control, order and give
direction to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and
employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department
heads, excepting the City Treasurer and City Attorney.



   C.   Power of appointment and removal.  It shall be the duty of the
City Manager to, and he or she shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any
and all officers and employees of the city, except the City Treasurer and
City Attorney, subject to all personnel ordinances, rules and regulations.
Appointments and removal of department directors will be made after
consulting with the City Council.



   D.   Administrative reorganization of offices.  It shall be the
duty and responsibility of the City Manager to conduct studies and effect
such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his
or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective
and economical conduct of the city's business.



   E.   Ordinances.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager and he
or she shall recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and
ordinances as he or she deems necessary.



   F.   Attendance at Council meetings.  It shall be the duty of the
City Manager to attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused.



   G.   Financial reports.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager
to keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial
condition and needs of the city.



   H.   Budget.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager to prepare
and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to
the City Council for its approval.



   I.   Purchasing.  No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended
to the City Council except on report and approval of the City Manager.



   J.   Investigations and complaints.  It shall be the duty of the
City Manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any
department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of
any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the City
Manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained
by public utilities in such city.



   K.   Public buildings.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager
and he or she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings,
public parks and all other public property which are under the control and
jurisdiction of the City Council.



   L.   Hours of employment.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager
to devote his or her entire time to the duties of the office and in
furthering the interests of the city, except as otherwise permitted by the
City Council.



   M.   Additional duties.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager
to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be
delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other
official action of the City Council.



   N.   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to evaluate methods
for the retention, development, and recruitment of key executives, including,
but not limited to, constructing and entering into agreements with individual
executives to prevent, delay or defer retirement or resignation when such
action is in the best interests of the city and the affected department.



('61 Code, § 2.46)  (Ord. 427, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1085, passed
10-18-05; Am. Ord. 1095, passed 8-15-06)



§ 2.04.070  INTERNAL RELATIONS.



   A.   Council-Manager relations.  The City Council and its members
do hereby express the desire to deal with the administrative services of the
city through the City Manager.



   B.   Departmental cooperation.  It shall be the duty of all
subordinate officers and the City Clerk, City Treasurer and City Attorney to
assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently,
economically and harmoniously.



   C.   Attendance at Commission meetings.  The City Manager or his or
her designee may attend any and all meetings of any commissions, boards or
committees created by the City Council, upon his or her own volition or upon
direction of the City Council. At such meetings which the City Manager
attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees
as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof,
and he or she shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being
considered by the City Council, and he or she shall cooperate to the fullest
extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by
the City Council.



('61 Code, § 2.47)  (Ord. 427, passed  - - )



§ 2.04.080  REMOVAL PROCEDURE.



   A.   Removal of Manager.  The removal of the City Manager shall be
effected only by a majority vote of the whole Council as then constituted,
convened in a regular Council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of
the next succeeding subsections. In case of intended removal by the City
Council, the City Manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating
the Council's intention to remove him or her and the reason therefor.



   B.   Discretion of Council.  In removing the City Manager, the City
Council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final
and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof nor does
any stated reason of the City Council for the intended removal or removal
need to be one which constitutes cause.



   C.   Limitation on removal.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, proceedings for removal of the City Manager shall not be instituted
other than for cause, during or within a period of ninety (90) days next
succeeding any municipal election held in the city at which election a member
of the City Council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any
newly elected member of the City Council or a reorganized City Council to
observe the actions and ability of the City Manager in the performance of the
powers and duties of the office. After the expiration of such ninety (90) day
period aforementioned, the provisions of this section as to the removal of
such City Manager shall apply and be effective.



('61 Code, § 2.48)  (Ord. 427, passed  - - )



§ 2.04.090  AGREEMENTS ON EMPLOYMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power
or authority of the City Council to enter into any supplemental agreement
with the City Manager delineating additional terms and conditions of
employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 2.49)  (Ord. 427, passed  - - )



§ 2.04.100  CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.



   Wherever in any ordinance, resolution or motion of the Council
heretofore enacted, adopted or passed, the words “City Administrator”
appears, there shall be deemed substituted the words “City Manager.” 
Wherever in any city contract, franchise or permit heretofore entered into or
granted, any duty, power, right or responsibility is vested in the City
Administrator, the City Manager shall exercise the same.



('61 Code, § 2.50)  (Ord. 427, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 2.08:  EMPLOYEE MERIT SYSTEM



Section



   2.08.010   Adoption of system



   2.08.020   Personnel officer



   2.08.030   Classified service



   2.08.040   Adoption and amendment of rules



   2.08.050   Appointments



   2.08.060   Probationary period



   2.08.070   Status of present employees



   2.08.080   Demotion; dismissal; reduction in pay; suspension



   2.08.090   Right to contract for special personnel service;
contracting for services generally



Statutory reference:



   For state law authorizing city to establish a personnel system, see
Cal. Gov't Code, § 45000 et seq.



§ 2.08.010  ADOPTION OF SYSTEM.



   In order to establish a justifiable and uniform procedure for dealing
with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the best and most
competent persons available, to assure that appointments and promotions of
employees will be based on merit and fitness and to provide a reasonable
degree of security for qualified employees, the following merit system is
hereby adopted.



('61 Code, § 9.1)  (Ord. 462, passed  - - )



§ 2.08.020  PERSONNEL OFFICER.



   The City Manager shall be the Personnel Officer. The City Manager may
delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as Personnel
Officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or
may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as
provided in § 2.08.090. The Personnel Officer shall:



   A.   Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the
personnel rules not specifically reserved to the City Council.



   B.   Prepare and recommend to the City Council personnel rules and
regulations and amendments thereto.



   C.   Administer the position classification plan, including
amendments and revisions to the plan. Any revisions and/or amendments to the
position classification plan which effect a change to the compensation plan
shall be subject to approval by the City Council pursuant to paragraph D.
below.



   D.   Prepare and administer the compensation plan, and revisions
thereof. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall be subject to approval of
the City Council.



   E.   Provide for the publishing or posting of test notices, the
receiving of applications therefor, the conducting and grading of tests and
the certification of lists of all persons eligible for appointment to the
appropriate positions in the classified service.



   F.   In December of each year the Personnel Officer shall obtain the
median household income (in inflation adjusted dollars) for Brea as published
and updated by the U.S. Census Bureau (or other successor organization which
offers very similar data that is published via the internet that is of equal
or higher quality). Effective November 6, 2012, with the exception of fire,
police, and other emergency public safety personnel, no personnel officer
shall present to council for authorization or approval a pay schedule for a
city manager, city administrative official, department director and hourly
contract labor, an annual salary excluding benefits (or a combined hourly
rate with overtime excluding benefits when annualized) that exceeds 2.0 times
the most current estimate of median household income. Further no benefits
package shall exceed 0.5 times the most current estimate of median household
income. In the alternative total staff compensation (salary and benefits)
shall be limited to 2.5 times the median income. Any modification to salary
or benefit schedules shall be effective and implemented immediately prior to
the effective date of modification or renewal of any existing agreement and
prior to any new agreement. Benefits shall include, but are not limited to:
car, gas, life insurance, gym membership, country club membership,
health/medical insurance, housing incentives and any other personal benefits.
However, benefits shall not include any mandated state or federal employer
contributions or expenses. No staff member shall be compensated for travel
time to any destination outside the country or "work" time that originates
outside the United States unless the trip and compensation are approved
during open council with the requirement that a staff report which clearly
documents the value received by the City shall be presented at an open City
Council Meeting.



('61 Code, § 9.2)  (Ord. 462, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 719, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 870, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 900, passed  - - ; Am. Initiative
Measure T, passed 11-6-12)



§ 2.08.030  CLASSIFIED SERVICE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions
and employments in the service of the city, except:



   A.   The City Manager, any Assistant City Manager or executive
assistants to the foregoing, and any executive management person reporting
directly to the City Manager;



   B.   Elective officers;



   C.   Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;



   D.   Crossing guards;



   E.   City Clerk and City Treasurer, at such time as the respective
positions may become appointive;



   F.   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional,
technical or other services;



   G.   Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firefighter;



   H.   City Attorney;



   I.   Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate
requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or
earthquake which threatens life or property; and



   J.   Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section,
who are employed less than one thousand forty (1,040) hours in any one (1)
fiscal year.



('61 Code, § 9.5)  (Ord. 462, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 566, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 567, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 627, passed  - - )



§ 2.08.040  ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF RULES.



   Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. The
rules shall establish regulations governing the merit system including:



   A.   Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of the
position classification plan covering all positions in the classified
service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;



   B.   Preparation, revision and administration of a plan of
compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan,
providing a rate or range of pay for each class;



   C.   Public announcement of tests and acceptance of applications for
employment;



   D.   Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use
of resulting eligibility lists containing names of persons eligible for
appointment;



   E.   Certification and appointment of persons from eligibility
lists, and the making of temporary and emergency appointments;



   F.   Evaluation of employee performance;



   G.   Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement and disciplinary
action involving employees in the classified service;



   H.   Separation of employees from the city service;



   I.   Standardization of hours of  work, attendance and leave
regulations, work conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare
and training;



   J.   The establishment and maintenance of personnel records;



   K.   Grievance and appeal procedures.



('61 Code, § 9.6)  (Ord. 462, passed  - - )



§ 2.08.050  APPOINTMENTS.



   A.   Appointments to vacant positions in the classified service
shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and
promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as
practicable by competitive examination. Promotion lists may be supplemented
through later examinations which may differ as to written content and oral
board members, if any. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the
selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques
which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates. Written tests,
personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of
daily work performance, work samples or any combinations of these or other
tests may be used. Physical and medical tests may be given as part of any
examination.



   B.   In any examination the Personnel Officer may include, in
addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum
standards therefor.



   C.   Appointments shall be made by the City Manager, except that the
department director shall be the appointing authority for subordinates within
his or her department; provided, that the City Manager shall be notified in
writing by the department director of any intended appointment at least two
(2) business days prior to the appointment being made, and the City Manager
may conclusively disapprove to the department director either orally or in
writing any intended appointment prior to the appointment being made.



   D.   When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the classified
services, any eligible applicants on the appropriate certified employment
list may be appointed.



   E.   In the absence of appropriate eligibility lists, a temporary
appointment may be made, not to exceed six (6) months, of a person meeting
the minimum training and experience qualifications for the position. A
temporary employee may be removed at any time without the right of appeal or
hearing. During the period of suspension of an employee or pending final
action on proceedings to review suspension, demotion or discharge of an
employee, such vacancy may be filled subject to the provisions of this
chapter and the personnel rules.



(Ord. 462, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 627, passed  - - )



§ 2.08.060  PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   A.   All employees appointed to regular positions shall serve a
probationary period of one (1) year. During the probationary period, the
employees may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.
If during the otherwise probationary period any employee is absent on account
of illness or injury for more than thirty (30) days in the aggregate, the
aggregate period of such absences shall be added to the otherwise
probationary period.



   B.   An employee rejected during the probationary period from a
position to which he or she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a
position in the class from which he or she was promoted unless he or she is
discharged from the city service as provided in this chapter and the rules.



   C.   An employee in the classified service promoted or transferred
to a position not included in the classified service shall be reinstated to a
position in the class from which he or she was promoted or transferred if
action is taken to reject him or her unless he or she is discharged in the
manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the
classified service.



('61 Code, § 9.8)  (Ord. 462, passed  - - )



§ 2.08.070  STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.



   A.   Any person holding a position included in the classified
service, who on the effective date of this chapter (see Ordinance No. 462 for
application) shall have served continuously in such position or in some other
position in the classified service for a period equal to the prescribed
probationary period, shall assume permanent status in the classified service
in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and
shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter
and the personnel rules.



   B.   All other persons holding positions in the classified services
shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their
probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining permanent
status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of
appointment.



('61 Code, § 9.9)  (Ord. 462, passed  - - )



§ 2.08.080  DEMOTION; DISMISSAL; REDUCTION IN PAY; SUSPENSION.



   A.   The department director shall have the right, for due cause, to
dismiss, demote, reduce in pay, suspend without pay for a maximum of thirty
(30) calendar days, or reprimand any employee. The City Manager shall have
the same right with respect to any executive management person reporting
directly to him. Except as otherwise provided by the personnel rules and
regulations, notice of such proposed action must be in writing and served
personally on such employee and shall contain a statement of the reasons for
the proposed action and shall include an unsigned copy of the charges being
considered. Due cause shall be set forth as to types of matters in the rules,
without limiting due cause to specific types that are therein set forth.



   B.   Where an emergency situation exists and it is determined that
it is necessary to relieve an employee of his or her duties immediately, for
the good of the city, such employee may be suspended for a period not to
exceed five (5) days to permit an investigation of the matter. Such emergency
suspension shall be implemented in accordance with the rules and regulations
as adopted by the City Council.



('61 Code, § 9.10)  (Ord. 462, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 628, passed  - - )



§ 2.08.090  RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL PERSONNEL SERVICE; CONTRACTING
FOR SERVICES GENERALLY.



   A.   The City Manager shall consider and make recommendations to the
City Council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the
performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or
operation of the merit system. The City Council may contract with any
qualified person or agency for the performance of all or any of the following
responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:



      1.   The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent
revisions and amendments thereto;



      2.   The preparation of a position classification plan, and
subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;



      3.   The preparation of a plan of compensation, and subsequent
revisions and amendments thereof;



      4.   The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;



      5.   Special and technical services of advisory or
informational character on matters relating to personnel administration.



('61 Code, § 9.13)



   B.   Nothing in this chapter contained shall be deemed to prevent
the city from contracting for any type or category of services.



('61 Code, § 9.15)



(Ord. 462, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 2.12:  REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY



Section



   2.12.010   Authority to function



§ 2.12.010  AUTHORITY TO FUNCTION.



   It is hereby found and declared, pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code
§ 33101, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency of the city
created by Cal. Health & Safety Code § 33100 to function in the city. Such
agency is hereby authorized to transact business and exercise its powers
under the state community redevelopment law.



('61 Code, § 2.51)  (Ord. 465, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 2.16:  COMMISSIONS GENERALLY



Section



   2.16.010   Purpose



   2.16.020   Definitions



   2.16.030   Application process



   2.16.040   Commissioner appointment



   2.16.050   Prohibition against nepotism



   2.16.060   Commissioner removal



   2.16.070   Terms of office



   2.16.080   Vacancies



§ 2.16.010  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter shall be to prescribe the procedures by
which the commissioners of the Planning Commission; Parks, Recreation and
Human Services Commission; and the Cultural Arts Commission of the city shall
be appointed and/or removed.



(‘61 Code, § 2.52)  (Ord. 930, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1205, passed
10-16-18)



§ 2.16.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   QUALIFYING APPLICANT.  A resident of the city who has completed and
timely returned the application form to the City Clerk.



   RELATIVE.  A spouse, child, step-child, parent, step-parent,
parent-in-law, legal guardian, brother, sister, brother-in-law,
sister-in-law, step-brother, step-sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew,
grandchild, grandparent, regardless of their place of residence, or any other
individual related by blood or marriage living within the same household as a
Council Member nominating or voting on such person's appointment to a
commission.



(Ord. 1205, passed 10-16-18)



§ 2.16.030  APPLICATION PROCESS.



   A.   Posting and publishing of vacancies.  The City Clerk shall
annually post and publish notice of present and pending vacancies, including
those arising from the expiration of a term, on the various commissions in a
manner consistent with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 54972 et seq., as
amended.



   B.   Application. The applicant shall be required to obtain,
complete and return to the City Clerk a written application for consideration
of appointment to the commission. The City Clerk shall utilize an application
form which has been approved by the City Council. The applications shall be
filed not less than forty-five (45) days before the date of the scheduled
vacancy; unscheduled vacancies shall be processed pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code
§ 54974.



   C.   Minimum content of application form.  The application form
shall, at minimum, request that the applicant provide the following
information:



      1.   Full name.



      2.   Address of residence.



      3.   Telephone number (daytime).



      4.   Commission to which appointment is sought.



      5.   Qualifications or experience believed to be relevant to
commission membership.



(‘61 Code, § 2.53)  (Ord. 930, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1205, passed
10-16-18)



§ 2.16.040  COMMISSIONER APPOINTMENT.



   A.   Planning Commission. The following procedure shall govern
appointments to the Planning Commission.



      1.   Qualifying applicants shall be interviewed by the City
Council at one (1) or more special meetings called for such purpose.



      2.   Each Council Member shall nominate for appointment one
(1) qualifying applicant and such nominee shall be appointed upon an
affirmative vote by not less than three (3) Council Members, one (1) of which
may be the vote of the nominating Council Member. An applicant's nomination
which fails to receive at least three (3) affirmative votes shall be deemed
denied and such applicant shall not be further considered for membership on
the Commission. However, such candidate may be considered, subject to the
same vote requirements and limitation, for other appointive commissions of
the city. In the event any Council Member does not nominate a qualified
applicant, or such Council Member's nominee is not appointed, within thirty
(30) days following the vacancy of such Commissioner's seat, the City Council
as a whole may, by majority vote to the Council, make such appointment.



   B.   Other commissions. The following procedure shall govern
appointments to commissions other than the Planning Commission.



      1.   Within ten (10) working days the City Clerk shall obtain
dates and times at which one (1) or more Council Members may be available to
interview the qualifying applicants. The City Clerk shall inform, in writing,
the qualifying applicants of the dates and times the Council Member(s) are
available for interviews and further shall schedule such appointments as the
qualifying applicants may request at times consistent with the Council
Members availability. Any Council Member shall not be required to disclose
the specific details of any interview conducted but shall be required to
confirm to the Council that an interview did or did not occur.



      2.   Each Council Member shall nominate for appointment one
(1) qualifying applicant and such nominee shall be appointed upon an
affirmative vote by not less than three (3) Council Members, one (1) of which
may be the vote of the nominating Council Member. An applicant's nomination
which fails to receive at least three (3) affirmative votes shall be deemed
denied and such applicant shall not be further considered for membership on
the Commission. However, such candidate may be considered, subject to the
same vote requirements and limitation, for other appointive commissions of
the city. In the event any Council Member does not nominate a qualified
applicant, or such Council Member's nominee is not appointed, within thirty
(30) days following the vacancy of such Commissioner's seat, the City Council
as a whole may, by majority vote to the Council, make such appointment.



(‘61 Code, § 2.54)  (Ord. 930, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1205, passed
10-16-18)



§ 2.16.050  PROHIBITION AGAINST NEPOTISM.



   No Council Member shall nominate or vote for a relative for membership
on any commission in the city.



(‘61 Code, § 2.55)  (Ord. 930, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1205, passed
10-16-18)



§ 2.16.060  COMMISSIONER REMOVAL.



   Any member of a commission may be removed by the City Council without
cause during such commissioner's term of office.  Removal may be made upon
an affirmative vote of not less than three (3) Council Members, one (1) of
which must be the Council Member who nominated such commissioner unless the
nominating Council Member is no longer on the Council.  Alternatively, if
the Council Member who nominated such commissioner is opposed, then removal
may be made upon an affirmative vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the City Council.



(‘61 Code, § 2.56)  (Ord. 930, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1205, passed
10-16-18)



§ 2.16.070  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   Other than as expressly provided herein, the term of office for each
commission position shall be four (4) years. The term of office of each
commission position shall commence on January 1 of the calendar year
following the last general municipal election prior to the initial
appointment of a commissioner to such position and shall terminate on
December 31 of the third calendar year following.



(‘61 Code, § 2.57)  (Ord. 930, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1205, passed
10-16-18)



§ 2.16.080  VACANCIES.



   If a Commission vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term of
office, it shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the
procedures provided in this chapter. If the vacancy is effected by the
removal process specified in this chapter, the person so removed may not be
appointed to fill the vacancy.



(‘61 Code, § 2.58)  (Ord. 930, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1205, passed
10-16-18)



CHAPTER 2.20:  CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION



Section



   2.20.010   Creation; composition



   2.20.020   Purpose



   2.20.030   Organization and terms of office



   2.20.040   Duties



§ 2.20.010  CREATION; COMPOSITION.



   A.   There is hereby created a Cultural Arts Commission to serve in
an advisory capacity to the Council.



('61 Code, § 26.1)



   B.   The Cultural Arts Commission shall consist of five (5) members.



('61 Code, § 26.2)



(Ord. 679, passed  - -  )



§ 2.20.020  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of the Commission shall be:



   A.   To coordinate all of the cultural arts activities of the city;



   B.   To provide for the establishment and maintenance of cultural
programs;



   C.   To insure the efficient operation of all cultural arts
facilities within the city;



   D.   To promote cultural arts activities within the community;



   E.   Fund raising.



('61 Code, § 26.3)  (Ord. 679, passed  - -  )



§ 2.20.030  ORGANIZATION AND TERMS OF OFFICE.



   A.   The terms and provisions for the appointment, removal from
office and filling of vacancies of Cultural Arts Commissioners shall be as
set forth in Chapter 2.16 of this code.



   B.   The Commission annually shall elect a chairperson and vice
chairperson from among its appointed members and such other officers as may
be considered necessary to serve for a one (1) year term.



   C.   The Commission shall hold regular meetings at least once a
month and other meetings at such additional times as are deemed necessary.



   D.   Compensation; travel expenses.



      1.   Each member of the Cultural Arts Commission may be paid a
fixed sum for each commission meeting such commissioner attends. The sum to
be paid to each such commissioner for each such meeting attended by such
commissioner shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



      2.   The City Council may, from time to time, provide such
sums as the City Council deems reasonable, in its sole discretion, for travel
expenses, meals, lodging and related expenses, meals, lodging and related
expenses necessarily incurred by Cultural Arts Commissioners incidental to
the performance of their official duties, including attendance at seminars,
conferences or training courses, approved by the City Council. Said expenses
may be advanced to Commissioners or otherwise paid to them in accordance with
policies established by the City Council.



('61 Code, § 26.4)  (Ord. 679, passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 728, passed  -
-  ; Am. Ord. 816, passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 930, passed  - -  )



§ 2.20.040  DUTIES.



   The duties of the Commission shall be:



   A.   To identify the cultural needs and interest of the community
and shall be responsible for analyzing methods of fulfilling these needs and
interests and to present alternative recommendations for action;



   B.   To promote cultural acts activities within the community and
recommend the establishment of policies for the development and
implementation of the cultural arts;



   C.   To recommend methods to broaden the opportunities for citizen
participation in the cultural arts;



   D.   To act as a sounding board for individuals and organizations
who have an interest in the cultural arts and to implement professional
evaluation and screening of potential activities to be conducted at the
civic/cultural center;



   E.   To advise in the preparation of the annual budget;



   F.   Fund raising.



('61 Code, § 26.5)  (Ord. 679, passed  - -  )



CHAPTER 2.24:  PARKS, RECREATION AND
HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION



Section



   2.24.010   Creation; composition



   2.24.020   Purposes



   2.24.030   Organization and terms of office



   2.24.040   Duties



   2.24.050   Users to defray city costs in making facilities available



   2.24.060   Recreation fund



   2.24.070   Other terms



   2.24.080   Compensation and travel expenses



§ 2.24.010  CREATION; COMPOSITION.



   A.   There is hereby created a Parks and Recreation and Human
Services Commission to serve in an advisory capacity to the Council.



('61 Code, § 2.22)



   B.   The Parks, Recreation and Human Services Commission shall
consist of five (5) members.



('61 Code, § 2.23)



(Ord. 437, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 668, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 748, passed 
- - ; Am. Ord. 930, passed  - -  )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to authority of city to acquire, maintain, etc.,
parks, see Cal. Gov't Code, § 39732



   As to “Park and Playground Act of 1909,” see Cal. Gov't Code, §§
3800 to 38011



   As to discontinuance and abandonment of parks, see Cal. Gov't Code,
§§ 38400 to 38510



§ 2.24.020  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of the Commission shall be:



   A.   To coordinate all of the recreation, leisure time and cultural
activities of the city.



   B.   To provide for the establishment and maintenance of sound
recreation and parks programs.



   C.   To insure the efficient operation of all recreation and park
facilities within the city.



   D.   To encourage a sound and well-rounded program of activities to
serve the recreational, park, cultural, leisure time and other needs of
people within the city.



('61 Code, § 2.24)  (Ord. 437, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 497, passed  - - )



§ 2.24.030  ORGANIZATION AND TERMS OF OFFICE.



   A.   The terms and provisions for the appointment, removal from
office and filling of vacancies for Parks, Recreation and Human Services
Commissioners shall be as set forth in Chapter 2.16 of this code.



   B.   The City Parks, Recreation and Human Services Commission
annually shall elect a Chairperson from among its appointed members for a
term of one (1) year, and may create and fill such other offices as it may
determine.



   C.   It shall hold regular meetings at least once a month and other
meetings at such additional times as are deemed necessary.



('61 Code, § 2.25)  (Ord. 437, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 728, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 748, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 930, passed  - - )



§ 2.24.040  DUTIES.



   The duties of the Commission shall be:



   A.   The Commission shall act to identify the cultural,
recreational, leisure time and other people-oriented needs and aspirations of
the community and shall be responsible for analyzing alternative methods of
fulfilling the needs and aspirations and to present alternate solutions or
recommendations for action.



   B.   To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City
Manager and Director of Community Services in all matters pertaining to
public recreation and people-related activities and to cooperate with all
governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound
recreational planning and programming.



   C.   To recommend joint recreational programming and to render
assistance regarding the terms of contractual agreements on financial aid and
recreational facilities.



   D.   To interpret the community park, recreational and leisure time
programs to public officials and to the general citizenship in order to
promote understanding and financial support from public and private sources.



   E.   To recommend the establishment of general policies with respect
to the Community Services Department.



   F.   To assist in the acquisition, development, beautification and
maintenance of recreation and park facilities in the city as part of a sound
master plan in keeping with community needs and future growth.



   G.   To advise in the preparation of the annual budget and the
long-range recreation and parks capital improvement budget.



('61 Code, § 2.26)  (Ord. 437, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 497, passed  - - )



§ 2.24.050  USERS TO DEFRAY CITY COSTS IN MAKING FACILITIES AVAILABLE.



   Any user of any park, athletic field, or other facility owned by the
city or any portion or portions thereof shall be required to pay to the city
for such use a sum of money equal to the city's costs incurred in making the
same available for such use.



('61 Code, § 2.26A)  (Ord. 705, passed  - - )



§ 2.24.060  RECREATION FUND.



   A.   There is hereby established a fund to be known as the
“Recreation Fund,” into which all funds levied, collected or derived for
recreation purposes by the city shall be deposited.



('61 Code, § 2.27)



   B.   In any jointly sponsored recreation program, the City Council
shall appropriate such moneys as are required to meet its contracted share of
the budget, as is determined by joint contractual agreement of the Council
and any other agency joining in the program.



('61 Code, § 2.28)



   C.   Expenditures may be made from the Recreation Fund by warrant in
accordance with the budget and appropriations approved by the Council in
accordance with legal requirements and rules established thereunder.



('61 Code, § 2.29)



(Ord. 437, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 497, passed  - - )



§ 2.24.070  OTHER TERMS.



   Wherever the term “Parks, Recreation and Human Services Commission”
or “Recreation Commission” is used in any ordinance, code resolution,
motion, rule or regulation adopted or in effect as of the date of enactment
of this amended chapter, the terms shall be deemed to mean one and the same
thing.



('61 Code, § 2.30)  (Ord. 437, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 497, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 748, passed  - - )



§ 2.24.080  COMPENSATION AND TRAVEL EXPENSES.



   A.   Each member of the Parks, Recreation and Human Services
Commission may be paid a fixed sum for each Commission meeting such
Commissioner attends. The sum to be paid to each such Commissioner for each
such meeting attended by such Commissioner shall be established by resolution
of the City Council.



   B.   The City Council may, from time to time, provide such sums as
the City Council deems reasonable, in its sole discretion, for travel
expenses, meals, lodging and related expenses necessarily incurred by Parks,
Recreation and Human Services Commissioners incidental to the performance of
their official duties, including attendance at seminars, conferences or
training courses approved by the City Council. Said expenses may be advanced
to Commissioners or otherwise paid to them in accordance with policies
established by the City Council.



('61 Code, § 2.31)  (Ord. 816, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 2.28:  PLANNING COMMISSION



Section



   2.28.010   Creation and composition



   2.28.020   Vacancies



   2.28.030   Compensation; travel expenses



   2.28.040   Terms of office



   2.28.050   Removal of appointed members



   2.28.060   Officers



   2.28.070   Regular meetings



   2.28.080   Records



   2.28.090   Officers and employees



   2.28.100   Working funds



   2.28.110   Powers and duties



Statutory reference:



   State law as to local planning, see Cal. Gov't Code, §§ 65000 et seq.



   Appointment of City Planning Commission, see Cal. Gov't Code, §§
65100 through 65102



§ 2.28.010  CREATION AND COMPOSITION.



   A.   A City Planning Commission is hereby created.



('61 Code, § 2.10)



   B.   The City Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members.
Planning Commission appointments shall be as set forth in Chapter 2.16 of
this code.



('61 Code, § 2.11)



   C.   In addition to the five (5) members comprising the City
Planning Commission, the Mayor, City Engineer and City Attorney shall be
advisory members. The term of each shall correspond to his or her official
tenure of office.



('61 Code, § 2.12)



(Ord. 119, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 239, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 700, passed 
- - ; Am. Ord. 930, passed - - )



§ 2.28.020  VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy on the Planning Commission shall be filled as set forth in
Chapter 2.16 of this Code.



('61 Code, § 2.13)  (Ord. 119, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 700, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 930, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.030  COMPENSATION; TRAVEL EXPENSES.



   A.   Each member of the Planning Commission may be paid a fixed sum
for each Planning Commission meeting such Commissioner attends. The sum to be
paid to each Planning Commissioner for each such meeting attended by such
Commissioner shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



   B.   The City Council may, from time to time, provide such sums as
the City Council deems reasonable, in its sole discretion, for travel
expenses, meals, lodging and related expenses necessarily incurred by
Planning Commissioners incidental to the performance of their official
duties, including attendance at seminars, conferences or training courses
approved by the City Council. Said expenses may be advanced to Planning
Commissioners or otherwise paid to them in accordance with policies
established by the City Council.



('61 Code, § 2.14)  (Ord. 119, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 370, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 476, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 816, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.040  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The terms of office of Planning Commissioners shall be as set forth in
Chapter 2.16 of this Code.



('61 Code, § 2.15)  (Ord. 375, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 700, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 728, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 930, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.050  REMOVAL OF APPOINTED MEMBERS.



   Removal of Planning Commissioners shall be as set forth in Chapter 2.16
of this code.



('61 Code, § 2.15-2)  (Ord. 375, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 700, passed  - -
; Am. Ord. 930, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.060  OFFICERS.



   The City Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its
appointed members for a term of one (1) year, and subject to other provisions
of law, may create and fill such other offices as it may determine.



('61 Code, § 2.16)  (Ord. 119, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.070  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The City Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular
meeting in each month.



('61 Code, § 2.17)  (Ord. 119, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.080  RECORDS.



   The City Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings
and determinations, which record shall, during all regular business office
hours, be open for public inspection.



('61 Code, § 2.18)  (Ord. 119, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.090  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   The City Planning Commission may appoint such officers and employees as
it may deem necessary for its work.



('61 Code, § 2.19)  (Ord. 119, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.100  WORKING FUNDS.



   The City Planning Commission shall not be authorized to expend any
moneys of the city without first having had and obtained the approval of the
City Council to do so, and provided that all expenditures made by the
Commission shall be audited, allowed and approved and paid in like manner as
the payment of any claims or demands upon the general fund of the city.



('61 Code, § 2.20)  (Ord. 119, passed  - - )



§ 2.28.110  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The City Planning Commission shall have power to do and perform such
acts and carry out and put into effect such plan and program as is provided
by and pursuant to the provisions of the certain statute of the state known
and designated as “The Planning and Zoning Law” (Cal. Gov't Code §§
65000 et seq.) and such other duties as delegated or granted thereto by the
City Council



('61 Code, § 2.21)  (Ord. 119, passed  - - )



TITLE 3:  REVENUE AND FINANCE



   Chapter



      3.00     FINANCIAL SERVICES DIRECTOR



      3.04     SPECIAL FUNDS



      3.08     TAXATION — GENERAL REGULATIONS



      3.12     UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX



      3.16     TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX



      3.20     REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX



      3.24     PURCHASING



      3.28     RECOVERY OF COSTS BY POLICE



      3.32     FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE



      3.36     RESERVED



CHAPTER 3.00:  FINANCIAL SERVICES DIRECTOR



Section



   3.00.010   Department, Director established



   3.00.020   Powers and duties of Director



   3.00.030   Director may be City Treasurer



   3.00.040   Deputies and other personnel



§ 3.00.010  DEPARTMENT, DIRECTOR ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established within the city a Department or Division of
Financial Services and the offices of Financial Services Director or
Administrative Services Director. The Director, as designated, shall be the
general manager of the Financial Services Department or Division and shall be
responsible for the duties hereinafter imposed.



(‘61 Code, § 10A.1)  (Ord. 419, passed  - -; Am. Ord. 1138, passed
5-4-10)



§ 3.00.020  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   The Director shall have all duties otherwise imposed upon the City
Clerk by the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code Article I, Chapter 4, Part 2,
Division 3, Title 4. In addition, the Director shall advise the City
Treasurer in connection with investments of funds to be made by the city and
shall be responsible for all accounting functions of the city other than
those imposed by law upon officers and which cannot be transferred. The
Director shall perform such other financing functions as may be hereafter
imposed upon the City Clerk pursuant to the later amendments to law, but
which are capable of being transferred to a Financial Services Director. The
Director shall have such other powers and duties not inconsistent with the
foregoing as may be assigned to him or her from time to time by the Council
by adoption of job specifications by motion or resolution. The department
shall have the functions hereinabove established as the powers and duties of
the Director.



('61 Code, § 10A.2)  (Ord. 419, passed  - - )



§ 3.00.030  DIRECTOR MAY BE CITY TREASURER.



   The Council may appoint, but need not do so, the same person who holds
the office of City Treasurer to serve as Financial Services Director, in
which event, such individual shall receive, in addition to the compensation
provided by ordinance for the City Treasurer, such amounts as may be provided
by ordinance or resolution for the position of Director. The compensation for
the two (2) offices may be provided in a lump sum amount, including steps of
pay, which shall be deemed to include the amount provided for the office of
City Treasurer.



('61 Code, § 10A.3)  (Ord. 419, passed  - - )



§ 3.00.040  DEPUTIES AND OTHER PERSONNEL.



   The Director may have such deputies and other personnel as may from
time to time be authorized by the Council. In the absence of the Director,
any employee designated as Assistant Director by job description or by motion
or resolution of the Council, shall, in the absence of the Director, have the
powers and duties and perform the functions hereinabove vested in the
Director.



('61 Code, § 10A.4)  (Ord. 419, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 3.04:  SPECIAL FUNDS



Section



   3.04.010   Special gas tax street improvement fund



§ 3.04.010  SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND.



   A.   There is hereby created in the city treasury a special fund to
be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” 



('61 Code, § 2.32)



   B.   All moneys received by the city from the state under the
provisions of the Cal. Sts. & High. Code, §§ 180 to 207, for the
acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction,
maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways
shall be paid into the fund created by paragraph A. above.



('61 Code, § 2.33)



   C.   All moneys in the fund created by paragraph A. above shall be
expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of
the provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code, §§ 180 to 207.



('61 Code, § 2.34)



(Ord. 154, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions, see Cal. Sts. & High. Code, §§ 180 to 207



CHAPTER 3.08:  TAXATION-GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



   3.08.010   Transfer of taxation functions to county



§ 3.08.010  TRANSFER OF TAXATION FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY.



   It appears for the best interest of the city that city taxes be
assessed and collected by county officials, therefore, the city elects that
the duties of assessing its property and collecting its taxes, provided by
law to be assessed by the assessor and tax collector of the city shall be
performed by the County Assessor and County Tax Collector.



('61 Code, § 23.1)  (Ord. 213, passed  - -  )



CHAPTER 3.12:  UNIFORM LOCAL SALES
AND USE TAX



Section



   3.12.010   Short title



   3.12.020   Rate



   3.12.030   Operative date



   3.12.040   Purpose



   3.12.050   Contract with state



   3.12.060   Sales tax; place of sale



   3.12.070   Use tax generally



   3.12.080   Adoption of state law; amendments and limitations



   3.12.090   When permit not required



   3.12.100   Exclusions and exemptions



   3.12.110   Enjoining collection forbidden



§ 3.12.010  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax
regulations of the city.



('61 Code, § 23.2)  (Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.020  RATE.



   The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one
percent (1%).



('61 Code, § 23.3)  (Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.030  OPERATIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974.



('61 Code, § 23.4)  (Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.040  PURPOSE.



   The City Council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to
achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions
hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:



   A.   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which comply with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part 1.5 of
division 2;



   B.   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which incorporate
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state,
insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and
limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part 1.5 of division 2;



   C.   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which impose a tax and
provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the
State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes;



   D.   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which can be
administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, consistent with
the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax Code, part 1.5 of division 2, minimize the
cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the
burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the
provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 23.5)  (Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.050  CONTRACT WITH STATE.



   Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State
Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration
and operation of this chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have
contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date,
it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case the operative date
shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution
of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter
following the adoption of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 23.6)  (Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.060  SALES TAX; PLACE OF SALE.



   A.   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at
retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate
stated in § 3.12.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of
all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the
operative date.



('61 Code, § 23.7)



   B.   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are
consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible
personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an
out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an
out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include
delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use
tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a
retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one
(1) place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated
shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted
by the State Board of Equalization.



('61 Code, § 23.8)



(Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.070  USE TAX GENERALLY.



   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer, on and after the operative date, for storage, use or other
consumption in this city at the rate stated in § 3.12.020 of the sales price
of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such
charges are subject to state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to
which delivery is made.



('61 Code, § 23.8-1)  (Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.080  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW; AMENDMENTS AND LIMITATIONS.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar
as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part
1.5 of division 2, all of the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part 1 of
division 2 are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully
set forth herein.



('61 Code, § 23.8-2)



   B.   All subsequent amendments of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code which
relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Cal. Rev.
& Tax. Code, part 1.5 of division 2 shall automatically become a part of this
chapter.



('61 Code, § 23.8-3)



   C.   In adopting the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part 1 of
division 2, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency,
the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution,
however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the
title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the State Board of
Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the
Constitution of the state; the substitution shall not be made when the result
of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city,
or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of
Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this article; the substitution shall not be made in those
sections including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the
exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would
be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would
not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other
consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code, part 1 of division 2, or to impose this tax with respect to
certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property which would not be subject to tax by the state under such provisions
of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code; the substitution shall not be made in Cal. Rev.
& Tax. Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711,
6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828; and the substitution shall not be made for the word
“state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in
§ 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in § 6203.



('61 Code, § 23.8-4)



(Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.090  WHEN PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by
this chapter.



('61 Code, § 23.8-5)  (Ord. 525, passed - - )



§ 3.12.100  EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   A.   Exclusions and exemptions generally.



      1.   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or
use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.



      2.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been
subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part 1.5 of division 2 by any city and county, county,
or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this ordinance.



      3.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of
the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property
to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city
in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the
laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.



      4.   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code, §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation
under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to
the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is
exempted from the use tax.



('61 Code, § 23.8-6)



   B.   Additional exclusions and exemptions.



      1.   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or
use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.



      2.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been
subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part 1.5 of division 2 by any city and county, county,
or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this ordinance.



      3.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of
the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property
to operators outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and
exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for
commercial purposes.



      4.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes exempted from the
use tax.



      5.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of
the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property
to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city
in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the
laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.



      6.   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code, §§ 6366 and 6366.1 the storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation
under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to
the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is
exempted from the use tax.



('61 Code, § 23.8-7)



   C.   Applicability of provisions relating to exclusions and
exemptions.



      1.   Paragraph A. of this section shall become operative on
January 1 of the year following the year in which the State Board of
Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state assessed property which is
identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code, § 401, at which time § 3.12.090 shall become inoperative.



      2.   In the event that paragraph A. above of this section
becomes operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an
assessment ratio for the state assessed property which is higher than the
ratio which is required for local assessments by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, §
401, § 3.12.090 shall become operative on the first day of the month next
following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time
paragraph A. of this section shall be inoperative until the first day of the
month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio
for state assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for
local assessments by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, § 401, at which time paragraph
A. of this section shall again become operative and § 3.12.090 shall become
inoperative.



('61 Code, § 23.8-8)



(Ord. 525, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 753, passed - - )



§ 3.12.110  ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.



   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process
shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state
or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or
enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part 1.5
of division 2, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.



('61 Code, § 23.8-9)  (Ord. 525, passed - - )



CHAPTER 3.16:  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX



Section



   3.16.010   Short title



   3.16.020   Definitions



   3.16.030   Imposition of tax



   3.16.040   Exemptions



   3.16.050   Collection



   3.16.060   Transient occupancy registration certificate



   3.16.070   Reports and remittances



   3.16.080   Delinquency penalties



   3.16.090   Determination of tax by City Treasurer



   3.16.100   Appeals



   3.16.110   Operator to retain records for three years



   3.16.120   Refunds



   3.16.130   Action by city to collect tax



   3.16.140   Penalty



§ 3.16.010  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax
Ordinance of the City of Brea.”



('61 Code, § 23.9)  (Ord. 363, passed - - )



§ 3.16.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOTEL.  Any structure or any portion of any structure which is
occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or
house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house,
apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house
trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof.



   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession of the right to the use or
possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes.



   OPERATOR.  The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or
any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through
a managing agent or any type of character other than an employee, the
managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this
chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her
principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the
principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be
compliance by both.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or
any other group or combination acting as a unit.



   RENT.  The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the
occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in
money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and
property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.



   TRANSIENT.  Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less,
counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying
space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty
(30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the
operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In
determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time
extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may
be considered.



('61 Code, § 23.10)  (Ord. 363, passed - - )



§ 3.16.030  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject
to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the rent charged
by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owned by the transient to the
city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city.
The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the
rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of
the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon
the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the
tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the City Treasurer may
require that such tax be paid directly to the City Treasurer.



('61 Code, § 23.11)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 650, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 755, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 871, passed - - )



§ 3.16.040  EXEMPTIONS.



   A.   No tax shall be imposed upon:



      1.   Any person as to whom or any occupancy as to which it is
beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided.



      2.   Any federal or state officer or employee when on official
business.



      3.   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is
exempt by reason of expression of federal law or international treaty.



   B.   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made
at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form
prescribed by the City Clerk-Finance Officer.



('61 Code, § 23.12)  (Ord. 363, passed - - )



§ 3.16.050  COLLECTION.



   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient.
The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent
charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the
operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be
assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rent
or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter
provided.



('61 Code, § 23.13)  (Ord. 363, passed - - )



§ 3.16.060  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.



   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter or
within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each
operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such
hotel with the City Treasurer and obtain from him or her a “transient
occupancy registration certificate” to be at all times posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other
things, state the following:



   A.   The name of the operator.



   B.   The address of the hotel:



   C.   The date upon which the certificate was issued;



   D.   “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies
that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of
the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the City
Treasurer for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient
Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the City Treasurer. This certificate
does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business to conduct any
lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without
strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited
to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office
of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.”



('61 Code, § 23.14)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 755, passed - - )



§ 3.16.070  REPORTS AND REMITTANCES.



   Each operator shall, on or before the tenth day of the month following
the close of each monthly reporting period or at the close of any longer
reporting period which may be established by the City Treasurer, make a
return to the City Treasurer on forms provided by him or her of the total
rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient
occupancies during that reporting period. At the time the return is filed,
the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City Treasurer.
The City Treasurer may establish longer reporting periods for any certificate
holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the
tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and
payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All
taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust
for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the City
Treasurer.



('61 Code, § 23.15)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 755, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 871, passed - - )



§ 3.16.080  DELINQUENCY PENALTIES.



   A.   Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax
imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten
percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.



   B.   Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the
date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second
delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition
to the amount of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.



   C.   Fraud. If the City Treasurer determines that the nonpayment of
any remittance due under this article is due to fraud, a penalty of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in
addition to the penalties stated in paragraphs A. and B. of this section.



   D.   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator
who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the
rate of one-half percent (0.5%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount
of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance
first became delinquent until paid.



   E.   Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such
interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part
of the tax herein required to be paid.



('61 Code, § 23.16)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 755, passed - - )



§ 3.16.090  DETERMINATION OF TAX BY CITY TREASURER.



   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make,
within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such
tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the City Treasurer shall
proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and
information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as
the City Treasurer procures such facts and information as he or she is able
to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this
chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the
same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to
determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties
provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the City
Treasurer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it
personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last-known place of
address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing
of such notice make application in writing to the City Treasurer for a
hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing
is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if
any, determined by the City Treasurer shall become final and conclusive and
immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the City Treasurer
shall give not less than five (5) days written notice in the manner
prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place
fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed
for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may
appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties
should not be so fixed. After such hearing the City Treasurer shall determine
the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the
person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount
of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be
payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in §
3.16.100.



('61 Code, § 23.17)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 755, passed - - )



§ 3.16.100  APPEALS.



   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the City Treasurer with
respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal
to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Treasurer within
fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due.
The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City
Treasurer shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her
last-known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and
conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed
above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be
immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.



('61 Code, § 23.18)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 755, passed - - )



§ 3.16.110  OPERATOR TO RETAIN RECORDS FOR THREE YEARS.



   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and
payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine
the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection
of and payment to the city, which records the City Treasurer shall have the
right to inspect at all reasonable times.



('61 Code, § 23.19)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 755, passed - - )



§ 3.16.120  REFUNDS.



   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been
overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as
provided in paragraphs B. and C. of this section; provided, a claim in
writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon
which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Treasurer within three (3)
years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the
City Treasurer.



   B.   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or
erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a
manner prescribed by the City Treasurer that the person from whom the tax has
been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund
nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has
either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently
payable by the transient to the operator.



   C.   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more
than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by
filing a claim in the manner provided in paragraph A. of this section but
only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the City Treasurer or
when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the
satisfaction of the City Treasurer that the transient has been unable to
obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.



   D.   No refund shall be paid under the pro-visions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records
showing entitlement thereto.



('61 Code, § 23.20)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 755, passed - - )



§ 3.16.130  ACTION BY CITY TO COLLECT TAX.



   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any
such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall
be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to
the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action
brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.



('61 Code, § 23.21)  (Ord. 363, passed - - )



§ 3.16.140  PENALTY.



   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   B.   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register
as required herein or to furnish any return required to be made or who fails
or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the
City Treasurer, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is
guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify
any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with
intent to defeat or evade the determination of aid amount due required by
this article to be made is guilty of a misdemeanor.



('61 Code, § 23.33)  (Ord. 363, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 755, passed - - )



CHAPTER 3.20:  REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX



Section



   3.20.010   Short title; authority



   3.20.020   Imposition



   3.20.030   Payment



   3.20.040   Exemptions



   3.20.050   Administration



   3.20.060   Refunds



   3.20.070   Operative date



§ 3.20.010  SHORT TITLE; AUTHORITY.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax
Ordinance of the City of Brea.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, part 6.7 (commencing with § 11901) of
Division 2.



('61 Code, § 23.23)  (Ord. 413, passed - - )



§ 3.20.020  IMPOSITION.



   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which
any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted,
assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser
or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her or their
direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property
conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining
thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred ($100) dollars, a tax at the
rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($.275) for each five hundred ($500)
dollars or fractional part thereof.



('61 Code, § 23.24)  (Ord. 413, passed - - )



§ 3.20.030  PAYMENT.



   Any tax imposed pursuant to § 3.20.020 shall be paid by any person who
makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for
whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.



('61 Code, § 23.25)  (Ord. 413, passed - - )



§ 3.20.040  EXEMPTIONS.



   A.   Instruments to secure debts.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this
chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.



('61 Code, § 23.26)



   B.   Public agencies.  Any deed, instrument or writing to which the
United States or any agency of instrumentality thereof, any state or
territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from
the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring
title.



('61 Code, § 23.27)



   C.   Plans of reorganization or adjustment.



      1.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply
to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan
of reorganization or adjustment;



      2.   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;



      3.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court
involving a railroad corporation as defined in subdivision (m) of § 205 of
Title II of the United States Code, as amended;



      4.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court
involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision 3. of § 506 of Title II
of the United States Code, as amended; or



      5.   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of
organization is effected.



   D.   Paragraphs A.1. to A.4., inclusive, of this section shall only
apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or
conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation,
approval or change.



('61 Code, § 23.28)



   E.   Orders of Securities and Exchange Commission.  Any tax imposed
pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of
conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange
Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of § 1083 of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954; but only if:



      1.   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in
obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of § 79k of Title 15
of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act
of 1935;



      2.   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be
conveyed;



      3.   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.



   F.   Partnerships.



      1.   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy
shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an
interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:



         a.   Such partnership (or another partnership) is
considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of § 708 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and



         b.   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the
realty concerned.



      2.   If there is a termination of any partnership within the
meaning of § 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this
chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument
whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of
any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such
partnership at the time of such termination.



      3.   Not more than one (1) tax shall be imposed pursuant to
this chapter by reason of a termination described in paragraph F.2., and any
transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such
partnership at the time of such termination.



   G.   The exemptions set forth in Cal. Rev. & Tax Code §§ 11921
through 11929 shall apply.



('61 Code, § 23.30)



(Ord. 413, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 457, passed - - )



§ 3.20.050  ADMINISTRATION.



   The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with
the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Part 6.7 of Division 2 and the
provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.



('61 Code, § 23.31)  (Ord. 413, passed - - )



§ 3.20.060  REFUNDS.



   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with § 5096) of Cal.
Rev. & Tax Code, Part 9 of Division 1.



('61 Code, § 23.32)  (Ord. 413, passed - - )



§ 3.20.070  OPERATIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any
ordinance adopted by the county pursuant to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Part 6.7
(commencing with § 11901) of Division 2, or upon the effective date of this
chapter, whichever is the later.



('61 Code, § 23.33)  (Ord. 413, passed - - )



CHAPTER 3.24:  PURCHASING



Section



   3.24.010   Adoption of purchasing system



   3.24.020   Definitions



   3.24.030   Centralized Purchasing Division; Purchasing Agent



   3.24.040   Exemptions from centralized purchasing



   3.24.050   Requisitions



   3.24.060   Use of purchasing cards, purchase orders, and written
contracts



   3.24.070   Open market purchases



   3.24.080   Informal solicitation purchases



   3.24.090   Formal solicitation purchases



   3.24.100   Professional service purchases



   3.24.110   Public works project purchases



   3.24.120   Special circumstances



   3.24.130   Bonds



   3.24.140   Change orders



   3.24.150   Surplus personal property disposal



§ 3.24.010  ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM.



   In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of
supplies, materials, equipment, and services at the lowest cost commensurate
with quality needed and with due consideration to disposability; to exercise
positive financial control over purchases; to clearly define authority for
the purchasing functions; and to buy without favor or prejudice, a purchasing
system is adopted and shall control the procedure for all purchases except as
otherwise provided by law.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COST-BASED SERVICES.  All services other than professional services.



   DEPARTMENT.  Any of the departments, offices, or other organization
units of the city, or of any special agency whose affairs and funds are under
the supervision and control of the City Council and for which the City
Council is ex-officio the governing body.



   DIRECTOR.  The person appointed by the City Manager to lead a
department.



   EMERGENCY.  A sudden, unexpected occurrence requiring immediate action
to maintain public safety, or to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment
of life, health, property, or essential public services.



   LOCAL VENDOR.  A vendor that satisfies all of the following criteria:



      1.   Regularly maintains a place of business and transacts
business in, or regularly maintains an inventory of merchandise for sale in,
the city;



      2.   Is current in the payment of business taxes to the city;
and



      3.   Possesses all necessary licenses and permits from the
city.



   LOCAL VENDOR PREFERENCE AMOUNT.  The amount by which an offer from a
local vendor in a formal solicitation pursuant to § 3.24.090 shall be
reduced for offer comparison purposes.



   OFFER.  A quote, bid, or proposal.



   OFFEROR.  The individual or entity providing a quote, bid, or proposal.



   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.  The services of architects, artists and
designers, attorneys, auditors, computer programmers, economic analysts,
engineers, environmental analysts, financial analysts, grant and
specification writers, insurance brokers, property analysts, real estate
agents, specialized trainers, or other individuals or entities possessing a
high degree of specialized skill or expertise that, in the determination of
the City Manager, do not readily fall within a cost-based competitive offer
process.



   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT.  A public project as defined by the UPCCAA.



   PURCHASE.  Purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, and services
shall include leases or rentals of such items as well as transactions by
which the city acquires ownership or services.



   PURCHASING POLICY.  The City Council resolution designating:



      1.   The limits for open market, informal solicitation, and
formal solicitation purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, services,
and public works projects; and



      2.   The local vendor preference amount.



   RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE OFFEROR. An offeror that both:



      1.   Has submitted an offer to furnish supplies, materials,
equipment, services, or a public works project in conformity with the
solicitation; and



      2.   Has demonstrated the attribute of trustworthiness, as
well as quality, fitness, capacity, and experience to satisfactorily provide
the supplies, materials, equipment, services, or public works project
specified in the solicitation (as determined from prior experience with the
city, references, and other available information).



   SERVICES.  Any and all cost-based services and professional services.



   SOLICITATION.  A request for quote, bid or proposal.



   SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, AND EQUIPMENT.  Any and all items that shall be
furnished to or used by any department.



   SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Any item that is obsolete, worn out, or no
longer used by the acquiring department.



   UPCCAA.  The Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Cal.
Pub. Cont. Code § 22000 et seq.).



   VENDOR.  A consultant, contractor, or provider of supplies, materials,
equipment, and services.



   VENDORS LIST.  A current file of vendors for supplies, materials,
equipment, and services.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.030  CENTRALIZED PURCHASING DIVISION; PURCHASING AGENT.



   A.   Centralized Purchasing Division. There is created a Centralized
Purchasing Division within the Administrative Services Department in which is
vested authority to purchase supplies, materials, equipment, and services.
The City Manager, acting for and on behalf of the City Council, shall have
the power to issue instructions as deemed necessary for the operation of the
Purchasing Division.



   B.   Purchasing Agent. There is created the position of Purchasing
Agent. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the City Manager to direct
and manage the city’s purchasing division. The Purchasing Agent shall have
the authority to purchase supplies, materials, equipment, and services in
accordance with this chapter. The Purchasing Agent shall establish methods
and procedures necessary for the efficient and economical functioning of the
purchasing division.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.040  EXEMPTIONS FROM CENTRALIZED PURCHASING.



   The Purchasing Agent may, and where legally required to do so shall,
authorize a department to independently purchase particular classes of
supplies, materials, equipment, or services in accordance with this chapter.
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Purchasing Agent also may rescind
such authorization to purchase independently.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.050  REQUISITIONS.



   All departments shall submit requests to the Purchasing Agent by
standard requisition forms for the supplies, materials, equipment, and
services required for their operations subject to available City
Council-adopted budget appropriations.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.060  USE OF PURCHASING CARDS, PURCHASE ORDERS, AND WRITTEN CONTRACTS.



   Purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and services shall be made
by purchasing card transaction, or by a purchase order, or by both a written
contract and a purchase order as specified below and within the limits
specified in the purchasing policy.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.070  OPEN MARKET PURCHASES.



   A.   Applicability. The Purchasing Agent, directors, and
directors’ designees may use the procedure set forth in this section for
purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and cost-based services of a
value within the open market purchase limit specified in the purchasing
policy.



   B.   Solicitation. The Purchasing Agent, directors, and directors’
designees shall make a reasonable effort to obtain the lowest cost
commensurate with quality needed by written, electronic, or other means
without the necessity of publishing notice of the solicitation or seeking
competitive offers.



   C.   Execution. Open market purchases may be executed by a
purchasing card transaction or by a purchase order as deemed appropriate by
the Purchasing Agent. Any such purchasing card transaction may be executed by
the Purchasing Agent, directors, and directors’ designees. Any such
purchase order may be executed by the Purchasing Agent.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.080  INFORMAL SOLICITATION PURCHASES.



   A.   Applicability. The Purchasing Agent may use the procedure set
forth in this section for purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and
cost-based services of a value within the informal solicitation limit
specified in the purchasing policy.



   B.   Solicitation. The Purchasing Agent shall make a reasonable
effort to obtain at least three (3) competitive offers by written,
electronic, or other means without the necessity of publishing notice of the
solicitation. In the event three (3) competitive offers are not obtained, the
Purchasing Agent shall document the reasons therefore in the files of the
Purchasing Division.



   C.   Offer submission. Offers shall be submitted to the Purchasing
Agent as specified in the solicitation.



   D.   Purchase award; offer rejection. The Purchasing Agent shall
award the purchase to the lowest responsive and responsible offeror or shall
reject all offers. If all offers are rejected, then the Purchasing Agent may
cancel the procurement or may reissue the solicitation.



   E.   Tie offers. If two (2) or more offers received are for the same
total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, then the
Purchasing Agent may either:



      1.   Select one (1) based on delivery date, scope of warranty,
local vendor status, or other benefit deemed to be in the city’s best
interests; or



      2.   Accept the offer made by negotiation with the tie
offerors.



   F.   Execution. Informal solicitation purchases may be executed by a
purchase order or by both a written contract and a purchase order as deemed
appropriate by the Purchasing Agent. Any such purchase order and written
contract may be executed by the Purchasing Agent or the Administrative
Services Director.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.090  FORMAL SOLICITATION PURCHASES.



   A.   Applicability. The Purchasing Agent shall use the procedure set
forth in this section for purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and
cost-based services of a value within the formal solicitation limit specified
in the purchasing policy.



   B.   Solicitation. The Purchasing Agent shall publish notice of the
solicitation. Such notice shall include a general description of the
supplies, materials, equipment, or services to be purchased; shall state
where the solicitation documents may be obtained; and shall state the time
and place for opening of offers. The Purchasing Agent shall also solicit
offers from vendors whose names are on the vendors list for the category of
purchase being solicited.



   C.   Offer submission. At the discretion of the Purchasing Agent,
sealed written offers may be received in paper copy or by secured electronic
means, as specified in the solicitation.



   D.   Offer opening. The Purchasing Agent shall publicly open offers
at the time and place stated in the solicitation. If an offer is submitted by
a local vendor, the Purchasing Agent shall, for the purpose of offer
comparison only, reduce the amount of such offer by the local vendor
preference amount. Offer results shall be posted publicly or otherwise made
available for public inspection.



   E.   Purchase award; offer rejection. The City Council shall award
the purchase to the lowest responsive and responsible offeror or shall reject
all offers. If all offers are rejected, then the City Council may cancel the
procurement or may order reissuance of the solicitation.



   F.   Tie offers. If two (2) or more low offers received are for the
same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, then the
City Council may either:



      1.   Select one (1) based on delivery date, scope of warranty,
local vendor status, or other benefit deemed to be in the city’s best
interests; or



      2.   Accept the lowest offer made by negotiation with the tie
offerors.



   G.   Execution. Formal solicitation purchases may be executed by a
purchase order or by both a written contract and a purchase order as deemed
appropriate by the Purchasing Agent. Any such purchase order may be executed
by the Administrative Services Director. Any such written contract may be
executed by the Mayor or the City Manager.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.100  PROFESSIONAL SERVICE PURCHASES.



   A.   Open market solicitation. The Purchasing Agent, directors, and
directors’ designees may use the procedure set forth in this paragraph for
purchases of professional services of a value within the open market purchase
limit specified in the purchasing policy.



      1.   The Purchasing Agent, directors, and directors’
designees shall make a reasonable effort to obtain offers by written,
electronic, or other means without the necessity of publishing notice of the
solicitation or seeking competitive offers.



      2.   Open market purchases may be executed by a purchasing
card transaction or by a purchase order as deemed appropriate by the
Purchasing Agent. Any such purchasing card transaction may be executed by the
Purchasing Agent, directors, and directors’ designees. Any such purchase
order may be executed by the Purchasing Agent.



   B.   Informal solicitation. The Purchasing Agent may use the
procedure set forth in this paragraph for purchases of professional services
of a value within the informal solicitation limit specified in the purchasing
policy.



      1.   The Purchasing Agent shall make a reasonable effort to
obtain at least three (3) competitive offers by written, electronic, or other
means without the necessity of publishing notice of the solicitation. In the
event three (3) competitive offers are not obtained, the Purchasing Agent
shall document the reasons therefor in the files of the Purchasing Division.



      2.   The Purchasing Agent shall either:



         a.   Award the purchase to a responsive and responsible
offeror on the basis of demonstrated competence, professional qualifications,
and a fair and reasonable price for the city; or



         b.   Reject all offers. If all offers are rejected, then
the Purchasing Agent may cancel the procurement or may reissue the
solicitation.



      3.   Informal solicitation purchases may be executed by a
purchase order or by both a written contract and a purchase order as deemed
appropriate by the Purchasing Agent. Any such purchase order and written
contract may be executed by the Purchasing Agent or the Administrative
Services Director.



   C.   Formal solicitation. The Purchasing Agent shall use the
procedure set forth in this paragraph for purchases of professional services
of a value within the formal solicitation limit specified in the purchasing
policy.



      1.   The Purchasing Agent shall publish a notice of the
solicitation.



      2.   The City Council shall either:



         a.   Award the purchase to a responsive and responsible
offeror on the basis of demonstrated competence, professional qualifications,
and a fair and reasonable price for the city; or



         b.   Reject all offers. If all offers are rejected, then
the City Council may cancel the procurement or may order reissuance of the
solicitation.



      3.   Formal solicitation purchases may be executed by a
purchase order or by both a written contract and a purchase order as deemed
appropriate by the Purchasing Agent. Any such purchase order may be executed
by the Administrative Services Director. Any such written contract may be
executed by the Mayor or the City Manager.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.110  PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT PURCHASES.



   A.   Open market purchases. The Public Works Director may execute
written contracts for public works projects of a value within the open market
purchase limit specified in the purchasing policy. Such purchases may be made
without competitive bidding.



   B.   Informal solicitation purchases. The Public Works Director may
use the procedure set forth in this paragraph for public works project
contract awards within the informal solicitation limit specified in the
purchasing policy.



      1.   The city shall maintain a list of all qualified
contractors, identified according to categories of work. The criteria for
development and maintenance of the contractors list shall be as determined by
the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission.



      2.   Not less than ten (10) calendar days before offers will
be due, the Public Works Director shall issue an offer invitation notice to
all qualified contractors on the list for the category of work being
solicited or to all trade journals specified pursuant to Cal. Pub. Cont. Code
§ 22036, or both, unless the product or service is proprietary. The notice
shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed
information about the project, and shall state the time and place for
submission of offers.



      3.   All received offers that are timely shall be evaluated by
the Public Works Department.



      4.   The Public Works Director shall award the contract to the
lowest responsive and responsible offeror or shall reject all offers. If all
offers are rejected, then the Public Works Director may cancel the
procurement or may reissue the solicitation.



      5.   If all offers received are in excess of the public works
project informal solicitation limit specified in the purchasing policy, then,
by adoption of a resolution by four-fifths vote, and upon determining that
the city’s cost estimate was reasonable, the City Council may award the
contract to the lowest responsive and responsible offeror in an amount up to
the limit specified in the purchasing policy for such circumstances.



   C.   Formal purchases. The Public Works Director shall use the
formal solicitation procedure set forth in the UPCCAA for public works
project contract awards within the formal solicitation limit specified in the
purchasing policy.



   D.   Execution. Public works project purchases shall be executed by
both a written contract and a purchase order. Any such purchase order may be
executed by the Purchasing Agent or the Administrative Services Director as
applicable. Written contracts for an open market purchase, and for an
informal solicitation purchase within the informal solicitation limit
specified in the purchasing policy, may be executed by the Public Works
Director. All other written contracts may be executed by the Mayor or City
Manager.



   E.   Administration. Public works project contract administration
will be the responsibility of the Public Works Department.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.120  SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.



   A.   Special government payments. This chapter does not apply to
payments made for Department of Justice background checks, U.S. Postal
Service postage, or permit fees imposed by other government agencies.



   B.   Legal notices. This chapter does not apply to contracts for
printing of legal notices in a newspaper of general circulation. The City
Council shall annually award such contracts in accordance with Cal. Pub.
Cont. Code § 20169 based on price, circulation, and any other matters deemed
to affect the value to the public.



   C.   Emergency procurements.



      1.   Public works projects. When repairs or replacements are
necessary in an emergency, the City Council, by a four-fifths vote, may
proceed at once to repair or replace any public facility without adopting
plans, specifications, or working details, or publishing a notice of the
solicitation, and without otherwise complying with the requirements of this
chapter. Prior to taking such action, the City Council shall make a finding,
based on substantial evidence set forth in the minutes of its meeting, that
the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a solicitation for
competitive offers, and that the action is necessary to respond to the
emergency. The work may be done by day labor, by contract, or by a
combination of the two. If a notice of the solicitation is not published, the
city shall comply with Cal. Pub. Cont. Code § 22050. The City Manager is
delegated the authority to declare the emergency in such circumstances when
it is not feasible for the City Council to meet to do so, and to take such
actions as the City Manager deems necessary, consistent with the provisions
of this paragraph. The City Manager’s actions shall be subject to prompt
review by the City Council as to the need to continue the emergency action,
in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Pub. Cont. Code § 22050.



      2.   Supplies, materials, equipment and services. In the event
of an emergency giving rise to the need to procure supplies, materials,
equipment or services without complying with this chapter, the City Council
may dispense with bidding or other requirements of this chapter, and may
expend any sum to make the procurement required due to the emergency. The
City Manager is delegated the authority to declare the emergency in such
circumstances when it is not feasible for the City Council to meet to do so,
and to take such actions as the City Manager deems necessary, consistent with
the provisions of this paragraph. The City Manager’s actions shall be
subject to prompt review by the City Council as to the need to continue the
emergency action.



   D.   Developer-funded professional services. This chapter does not
apply to purchases of professional services that both:



      1.   Relate to a private development project under review by
the city; and



      2.   Are solely funded by the project applicant or an
affiliate of the project applicant. Such purchases may be executed by a
purchasing card transaction, or by a purchase order, or by both a written
contract and a purchase order as deemed appropriate by the Purchasing Agent.
Any such purchasing card transaction, purchase order, or written contract may
be executed by the Purchasing Agent or the Administrative Services Director.



   E.   Public interest exemption. The competitive offer requirements
of this chapter shall not apply to purchases of supplies, materials,
equipment, or services when the Purchasing Agent, with the approval of the
City Manager, determines that the best interests of the city would be served
thereby and the amount of the contract does not exceed twice the formal
solicitation limit specified in the purchasing policy. This exemption may not
be used for public works projects. Whenever the City Manager approves the use
of this exemption, the City Manager may require that the Purchasing Agent
solicit informal offers under such conditions and limitations as the City
Manager may impose. If the value of a procurement made using this exemption
is within the open market limit specified by the purchasing policy, then the
purchase may be executed by purchasing card or purchase order as deemed
appropriate by the Purchasing Agent. If the value of a procurement made using
this exemption is within the informal solicitation limit specified by the
purchasing policy, then a purchase order and written contract shall be
executed by the Purchasing Agent. For all other procurements made using this
exemption, a written contract shall be executed by the City Manager and a
purchase order shall be executed by the Purchasing Agent or Administrative
Services Director.



   F.   Sole source procurements. The competitive offer requirements of
this chapter shall not apply to purchases of supplies, materials, equipment,
or services that are available from only one (1) source. The Purchasing Agent
may negotiate with such source to the end that the city receives the desired
supplies, materials, equipment, or service on fair terms. Such procurements
shall be executed in accordance with paragraph J. below.



   G.   Piggyback or cooperative purchase procurements. The competitive
offer requirements of this chapter shall not apply to purchases of supplies,
materials, equipment, or services available through:



      1.   A valid contract executed by another public agency; or



      2.   A cooperative purchasing program in which the city’s
participation is authorized by law and is deemed to be in the city’s best
interests in the determination of the Purchasing Agent. Such procurements
shall be executed in accordance with paragraph J. below.



   H.   Uniformity exemption. The competitive offer requirements of
this chapter shall not apply to purchases of supplies, materials, equipment,
or services that are required to maintain compatibility, functionality, or
conformity with existing designs, products, equipment, facilities, systems,
software, technologies, standardizations, and the like or to maintain current
warranties or contractual obligations deemed to be in the city’s best
interests in the determination of the Purchasing Agent. Such procurements
shall be executed in accordance with subparagraph J. below.



   I.   Best value purchases. If the Purchasing Agent determines that
it is not in the city’s best interests to obtain a particular cost-based
service using the competitive offer process of §§ 3.24.080 and 3.24.090,
then the Purchasing Agent may procure such service on a best value basis. For
such procurements, the Purchasing Agent shall determine the vendor that
offers the best overall value to the city based on qualifications,
experience, past performance, and price. Such procurements shall be executed
in accordance with subparagraph J. below.



   J.   Execution. If the value of a procurement made under
subparagraphs F. through I. above is within the open market limit specified
by the purchasing policy, then the purchase may be executed by purchasing
card or purchase order as deemed appropriate by the Purchasing Agent. If the
value of a procurement made under subparagraphs F. through I. above is within
the informal solicitation limit specified by the purchasing policy, then a
purchase order or both a purchase order and written contract shall be
executed by the Purchasing Agent. If the value of a procurement made under
subparagraphs F. through I. above is within the formal solicitation limit
specified by the purchasing policy, then the purchase shall be subject to
City Council approval, a written contract shall be executed by the Mayor or
the City Manager, and a purchase order shall be executed by Administrative
Services Director.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.130  BONDS.



   A.   Authority. The Public Works Director or the Purchasing Agent
shall have authority to require a bid, performance, payment, or other bond as
deemed necessary to protect the best interest of the city. The form and the
amount of any required bond shall be described in the solicitation.



   B.   Return or forfeiture of bid bond. Offerors shall be entitled to
return of bid security; provided that a successful offeror shall forfeit its
bid bond upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days
after the notice of award has been issued. If the purchase is awarded to
another offeror, then the amount of the lowest offeror’s bid bond shall be
applied by the city to the contract price differential between the lowest
offer and the awarded offer, and any surplus shall be returned to the lowest
offeror. If all offers are rejected and the solicitation is reissued, then
the amount of the lowest offeror’s bid bond may be used to offset the cost
of receiving new offers, and any surplus shall be returned to the lowest
offeror.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.140  CHANGE ORDERS.



   For any City Council-approved purchase, the Administrative Services
Director may execute change orders that cumulatively do not exceed the
contingency limit specified by the City Council. If no contingency limit has
been specified, then the Purchasing Agent and the Administrative Services
Director may execute change orders that cumulatively do not exceed five
percent (5%) of the original purchase amount or five thousand dollars
($5,000), whichever is less.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



§ 3.24.150  SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY DISPOSAL.



   A.   Reports. All departments shall submit to the Purchasing Agent,
at such times and in such form as the Purchasing Agent shall prescribe,
reports showing stocks of surplus personal property.



   B.   Interdepartmental transfers. The Purchasing Agent may transfer
any usable surplus personal property to another department in lieu of filling
requisitions for the purchase of new and additional stocks of the same or
similar articles.



   C.   Estimate of value. The Purchasing Agent shall make an estimate
of the value of all surplus personal property that is not usable by any
department.



   D.   Exchange, trade-in, or sale. The Purchasing Agent may exchange,
trade-in, or sell any surplus personal property that is not usable by any
department.



      1.   For items with an estimated value within the open market
limit specified in the purchasing policy, the Purchasing Agent shall make a
reasonable effort to obtain a fair price by written, electronic, or other
means without the necessity of publishing notice of the sale or seeking
competitive offers.



      2.   For items with an estimated value within the informal
solicitation limit specified in the purchasing policy, the Purchasing Agent
shall make a reasonable effort to obtain at least three (3) competitive
offers by written, electronic, or other means without the necessity of
publishing notice of the sale.



      3.   For items with an estimated value within the formal limit
specified in the purchasing policy, the Purchasing Agent shall publish notice
of the sale. Such notice shall include a general description of the supplies,
materials, or equipment to be sold; shall state where the solicitation
documents may be secured; and shall state the time and place for opening of
offers.



      4.   The Purchasing Agent shall also solicit offers from
responsible vendors whose names are on the vendor list or by means of a
contracted professional auction services.



   E.   Employee offers. Employee offers will be considered on all
publicly advertised sales; however, no employee whose job responsibility
includes the administration of such surplus personal property sales shall be
permitted to bid on or purchase such items.



   F.   Scrapping, donation, and destruction. If the Purchasing Agent
is unable to exchange, trade-in, or sell surplus personal property, then the
Purchasing Agent shall document the reasons therefore in the files of the
Purchasing Division and may dispose of such articles through scrap sale,
donation to another public agency, destruction, or any other disposition
thereof.



   G.   Retired police dogs. The Purchasing Agent, upon approval of the
City Manager and Police Chief, may sell a retired police dog to its handler
or another member of the Police Department without need for competitive
bidding.



   H.   Payments. Payments shall be made in full prior to transfer of
the property to the winning bidder. Deposits shall be made into the general
fund unless otherwise restricted by law.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-21-17)



CHAPTER 3.28:  RECOVERY OF COSTS BY POLICE



Section



   3.28.010   Recovery of costs authorized



   3.28.020   Payment of special law enforcement response service costs



§ 3.28.010  RECOVERY OF COSTS AUTHORIZED.



   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the city
shall be authorized to recover its costs incurred when any members of its
Police Department respond a second time within a twenty-four (24) consecutive
hour period to any party or other assemblage of persons within the city if:



      1.   The owner and/or other adult person in possession of the
premises has, at the time of the first response, been delivered a written
notice as hereinafter described or such written notice has been posted as
authorized herein; and



      2.   There is probable cause by police to believe that a
violation of Cal. Penal Code §§ 407, 415 or 416 has occurred on the
premises anytime after first responding.



   B.   The written notice required to be provided shall state words to
the effect that a warning is hereby given that if police are again requested,
or are otherwise required to respond to the same location within twenty-four
(24) hours thereafter, such second response may be deemed to be a special
security assignment over and above the law enforcement services normally
provided, and the owner and/or other adult person in possession of the
premises shall be liable for payment of all costs incurred by the city,
including administrative costs and overhead, in providing such law
enforcement services.



   C.   If no owner or adult person in charge of the premises can be
located or identified at the time of the first response, the written notice
required herein may simply be posted in any visible outdoor location near any
entrance to the premises. In such event, the owner and any other adult person
in possession of the premises at the time of the response by police may be
held jointly liable for the costs of such second response, as provided herein.



('61 Code, § 15A.1)  (Ord. 919, passed - - )



§ 3.28.020  PAYMENT OF SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE SERVICE COSTS.



   A.   Each owner and/or adult person in possession of a premises who
becomes liable for costs pursuant to this chapter shall pay all such costs as
computed and invoiced by the city, which shall not exceed the actual costs
incurred by the city, including administrative and overhead costs, in
providing the special law enforcement services provided for herein.  It is a
violation of this section to fail to pay any such costs when due.



   B.   Costs are due and payable upon receipt of an invoice therefore
from the city.  Any such invoice is delinquent if unpaid thirty (30) days
after the date of the invoice.  Any invoice that becomes delinquent shall be
subject to a monetary penalty as follows.



      1.   Thirty-one (31) days after the date of invoice, a penalty
of ten  percent (10%) of the cost shall  be  added,  plus,  commencing
each month thereafter, an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
original fee shall be added, up to a maximum penalty amount not to exceed the
original invoiced amount.



      2.   The city shall be authorized to utilize any and all legal
means available to collect a past due invoice, including accrued penalties,
and the same shall be deemed to be a debt on a written contract.  In the
event the city is required to institute any legal action to recover such
costs, it shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and
all other costs of collection.



(Ord. 1130, passed 11-17-09)



CHAPTER 3.32:  FEE AND SERVICE
CHARGE REVENUE



Section



   3.32.010   Intent



   3.32.020   Definition



   3.32.030   Establishment of fees and service charges by resolution
or ordinance



   3.32.035   Developer cost deposits



   3.32.040   Sewer service fees and charges



§ 3.32.010  INTENT.



   Pursuant to article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the
intent of the City Council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs
reasonably borne from fees and charges levied therefor with regard to
regulations, products or services provided by the city.



('61 Code, § 23C.1)  (Ord. 763, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 857, passed - - )



§ 3.32.020  DEFINITION.



   COSTS REASONABLY BORNE.  As used and ordered to be applied in this
chapter, are to consist of the following elements to the extent permitted by
law:



   A.   All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to
salaries, wages, fringe benefits, services and supplies, operation expenses,
contracted services, special supplies and any other direct expense incurred;



   B.   All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to,
building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance, communication,
printing and reproduction, and like expenses when distributed on a rational
proration system;



   C.   Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of
fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated
on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life
expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the
depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash also shall be
calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered
depreciation over the remaining life of the asset;



   D.   General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and
charging the expenses of the City Council, City Manager, Finance Department,
City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney's office, community promotion,
personnel, office, and all other staff and support service provided to the
entire city organization;



   E.   Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing
and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting
expenses as enumerated in paragraphs A., B., and C. of this section.



('61 Code, § 23C.3)  (Ord. 763, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 857, passed - - )



§ 3.32.030  ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES BY RESOLUTION OR
ORDINANCE.



   In accordance with the provisions of California Law, including, but not
limited to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66000 et seq., as same may be amended from
time to time hereafter, the City Council shall establish in the manner
prescribed by law fees and charges for regulations, products or services
including the percentage of recovery of costs reasonably borne necessary to
provide regulations, products or services.



('61 Code, § 23C.4)  (Ord. 763, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 825, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 826, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 857, passed - - )



§ 3.32.035  DEVELOPER COST DEPOSITS.



   A.   A developer-applicant shall be required as part of the project
application process to post and thereafter maintain on deposit with the city,
funds to cover application processing costs, developer fees and all other
established costs payable to the city in connection with a particular
development project (developer cost deposit), excepting those development
projects for which a flat rate fee has been established by the city.  The
Development Services Director or designee (Director) is hereby authorized to
determine the appropriate amount that must be maintained in such deposit
until all application processing and related city services for which fees are
charged have been completed.  In estimating the required amount of funds to
be deposited, the Director may utilize reasonable assumptions and shall
consider determination of approximate amount based upon the amount of time
historically spent on similar projects, and/or the likely expenditure
estimates of staff time for the pending application based upon reasonable
assumptions of the Director.



   B.   When a developer cost deposit is required as part of the
application process, the full deposit, in United States funds (cash or
check), shall be made by the developer-applicant.  The Director may
calculate the required deposit funds on a phased basis (e.g. Plan Review,
Planning Commission/City Council review, plan check, and the like) as may be
necessary for more complex projects where a full accounting estimate of
anticipated expenditures is deemed too speculative.  A failure to pay a
developer cost deposit in the required amount shall result in the application
being deemed incomplete.  The Director shall accurately account for all
charges made against developer cost deposits. 



   C.   When seventy-five percent (75%) of a deposit has been expended
and the Director determines that the estimated actual cost of the services
yet to be performed will exceed the remaining amount, the developer-applicant
shall make an additional deposit of the amount estimated to be necessary to
complete all required services, or such lesser portion as determined to be
appropriate by the Director.  Written notification of any additional deposit
required will be mailed by first class mail to the developer-applicant's
address on record, or delivered to the developer-applicant, who shall deposit
such additional amount by the date specified in the notice. Processing of
project applications will not be completed or finalized, unless the developer
cost deposit is fully funded as required herein. 



   D.   In the event the additional deposit notice due date identified
in division C. has passed, services of city staff shall be discontinued on
the project application(s) when ninety percent (90%) of the last deposit has
been expended and the Director determines that insufficient funds remain. 
Written notification of this discontinuation of services and need for
additional deposit shall be mailed by first class mail to the
developer-applicant's address on record, or delivered to the
developer-applicant, who shall deposit such additional amount by the date
specified in the notice.  A failure of a developer or applicant to fully
fund a developer cost deposit in the amount established by the Director for a
period of sixty (60) or more days following service by the city of notice of
additional deposit required, shall be an unreasonable delay, and shall be
deemed to be an abandonment of the application(s) with respect to any and all
entitlements for which the developer cost deposit applies, and upon such
abandonment, no further processing of any application or applications for the
project shall be performed.  Any application deemed to have been abandoned
may be resubmitted and shall be subject to all local, state, and federal
requirements applicable to new applications, including payment of any and all
application fees and developer cost deposit, as are in effect at the time of
reapplication. Funds remaining in the developer cost deposit for any such
project, if any, shall be returned.



   E.   In addition to any other remedy for failure to fund a developer
cost deposit set forth herein, a failure to fully fund and maintain funding
of a developer cost deposit  where  any portion of such deposit  is for
the purpose of complying with the California Environmental Quality Act, or
the Guidelines thereunder, including, but not limited to, processing of any
initial study, negative declaration, environmental impact report, or any
related action including payment for services of any environmental
consultant, may be deemed to constitute an unreasonable delay under the Cal.
Code of Regulations, Title 14, § 15109 (CEQA Guidelines) and shall suspend
the running of all time periods described in Cal. Code of Regulations, §§
15107 and/or 15108 for the period of the delay.  Alternatively, the city may
disapprove the project application where such unreasonable delay has
occurred, as provided by Cal. Code of Regulations, § 15109.



   F.   Developer fees and other application or project processing
costs in whatever form that are on account with the city as to any project,
as of the effective date of this section, shall be deemed to be held by the
city as a developer cost deposit for each such project and the same shall be
subject to all requirements in this section pertaining to the funding of
developer cost deposits.  A failure to maintain such funding in such amount
as determined by the Director following notice shall be subject to all
applicable remedies herein including discontinuance of application processing.



   G.   Following completion of all city services for which any funding
has been made to a developer cost deposit, any remaining funds shall be
promptly returned to the developer-applicant.



(Ord. 1126, passed 9-15-09)



§ 3.32.040  SEWER SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES.



   Fees and charges for sewer services shall be in such amounts as
established by resolution of the City Council. Sewer connection fees shall be
charged in accordance with Chapter 13.00 of this code.



('61 Code, § 23C.8)  (Ord. 828, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1093, passed 8-1-06)



CHAPTER 3.36:  RESERVED



TITLE 4:  RESERVED



TITLE 5:  BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS



   Chapter



   DIVISION I — BUSINESS LICENSE TAX



      5.00   GENERAL REGULATIONS



      5.04   LICENSE PROVISIONS



      5.08   EXEMPTIONS



      5.12   PENALTIES AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE



      5.16   POWERS OF LICNSE TAX COLLECTOR



      5.20   APPEALS



      5.24   LICENSE TAX



      5.28   MISCELLANEOUS



   DIVISION II — BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      5.200   SOUND TRUCKS



      5.204   BINGO GAMES 



      5.208   CABLE, VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS



      5.212   ESCORT BUREAUS



      5.216   FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS



      5.220   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS



      5.224   MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION



      5.228   PUBLIC DANCES AND ENTERTAINMENT



      5.232   UNLAWFUL EXPOSURE OF PRIVATE PARTS AND FEMALE BREASTS



      5.236   TAXICAB SERVICE



      5.240   OFFICIAL POLICE TOWING SERVICES



DIVISION I — BUSINESS LICENSE TAX



CHAPTER 5.00:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



   5.00.010   Short title; purpose



   5.00.020   Definitions



   5.00.030   Business classifications



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to authority of city to license for revenue and
regulation purposes, see Cal. Gov't Code, § 37101



   As to authority of city to license in exercise of police power and for
purpose of regulation, see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 16000



   As to licensing by cities generally, see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, §§
16000 to 16003



§ 5.00.010  SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE.



   A.   This division, as amended, shall be known as the “Business
License Tax Code.”  It is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal
purposes and is not intended for regulation.



   B.   Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and
carrying on any business under this division shall not be relieved from the
payment of any license or tax required under any other ordinance of the city,
and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances.



('61 Code, § 13.1)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.00.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  Any business, commercial enterprise, trade, calling,
vocation, profession, or any other means of livelihood, whether or not it is
carried on for gain or profit, engaged in by any person or company.



   CLASSIFICATION.  Identification of a person or company with a business
classification as provided by this division.  CLASSIFICATION is to be
determined by the City License Tax Collector or, in the event of appeal by
resolution of City Council.



   COMPANY.  A sole proprietorship, a partnership, company, corporation,
or any other group or association of persons, partnerships or corporations.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person engaged in the operation or conduct of any
business; whether as owner, any member of the owner's family, partner, agent,
manager, solicitor, and any and all other persons employed or working in
connection with such business.



   EXEMPT.  Not subject to the provisions of this division.



   EXTRASENSORY AND PALMISTRY.  The performance, exhibition, exercise, or
practice of astrology, augury, cartomancy, clair-audience, clairvoyance,
crystal gazing, fortunetelling, hypnotism, life reading, mediumship,
mineralogy, necromancy, palmistry, phrenology or prophecy.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  The total of amounts actually received or receivable
from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the
performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a
charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done
as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or
merchandise. Included in GROSS RECEIPTS shall be all receipts, cash, credits,
redemption stamps and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials
used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other
expenses whatsoever.  Excluded from GROSS RECEIPTS shall be the following:



      1.   Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales.



      2.   Any tax which is measured by the sales price or the gross
receipts from the sale or which is a stated sum per unit of such property
sold, included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the
consumer or purchaser.



      3.   Such part of the sale price of property returned by
purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in
cash or by credit.



      4.   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting
as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for
whom collected.



      5.   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable
deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be
excluded.



      6.   As to a real estate agency or broker, the sales price of
real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which
represents a commission or other income to the agency or broker including any
portion thereof to be remitted to any salesperson or salespersons. As to a
real estate agency or broker, the place of business of which or of whom is
located outside the city, the commissions or other income included as gross
receipts shall include only commissions or other income derived from the sale
of real estate located within the city.



      7.   As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his or her
receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuel equal to the motor vehicle fuel
license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Cal. Rev.
& Tax. Code, Part 2 of Division 2.



      8.   As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel
tax imposed by § 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the
dealer or collected by him or her from the consumer or purchaser.



      9.   Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the
purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser.



      10.   The difference between the balance owed and paid on a
defaulted purchase or finance contract upon repossession by seller and the
amount received from resale of the repossessed article by the repossessing
seller.



      11.   Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between
departments or units of the same business.



      12.   Sales for convenience where sales of new goods, wares or
merchandise are made by a person engaged in selling such articles to another
person engaged in selling like or similar articles:



         a.   Where the primary purpose of the particular
transaction of sale is to accommodate the purchaser rather than to make a
sale in the ordinary course of business.



         b.   Where, in the particular kind of business involved,
a similar manner of dealing is frequent or customary in the circumstances
under which the particular sale is made.



         c.   Where goods, wares or merchandise of like or
similar kind and of substantially equivalent value to that which was sold is
received in consideration.



      13.   With respect to professionals, gross receipts shall
include only such receipts derived from services performed by professionals
at locations within the city.



   NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED.  The average number of persons employed
daily in the applicant's business during the license tax period; and such
average number shall be ascertained by using the total number of hours of
service performed by all of the applicant's employees subject to the tax
during the previous tax period, and dividing the total number of hours of
service thus obtained by the number of hours of service constituting a tax
period's work of one (1) full-time employee according to the custom or laws
governing such employment.



   PERSON.  Any individual, male or female.



   PREMISES.  Includes all lands, buildings or structures erected or
modified, equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith, and any
personal property affixed to or otherwise used for the purpose of carrying on
any business on such premises.



   PRODUCT.  A tangible commodity or any physical substance produced,
processed, stored, distributed or sold.



   RENTAL UNIT.  The smallest accommodation for which a fee is charged or
received.



   SALE.  This term shall include the transfer, in any manner or by any
means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving,
supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a
transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller
retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be
deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any
transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the
contemplation of law.



('61 Code, § 13.2)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 582, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 651, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 671, passed  - - )



§ 5.00.030  BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS.



   A.   General business.  Every business of retailing, merchandising,
wholesaling, manufacturing, processing, distributing, warehousing, or any
other business activity involving a product not otherwise specifically
provided for herein nor exempt from the provisions of this division; and
which business is conducted from any premises within the city.



   B.   Professional.  Every person and company, wherever located,
engaged in or carrying on, within the city, any profession requiring
satisfactory compliance with written and/or oral examination standards
adopted by a branch of the state or federal government and/or requiring a
certain amount of tenure with such branch of government. Such professions to
include but not be limited to:



      Architect



      Attorney



      Certified public accountant



      Chiropodist or podiatrist



      Chiropractor



      Clinical laboratory technologist



      Dental hygienist



      Dentist



      Embalmer



      Engineer (all types)



      Land surveyor



      Mortician



      Nurse (registered)



      Optometrist



      Osteopathic physician and surgeon



      Pharmacist (registered)



      Physician and surgeon



      Psychiatrist



      Psychologist



      Veterinarian



      X-ray technician



   C.   Coin-operated machines.  Any machines that dispense a product,
or provide a service or amusement; resulting from insertion or use of a coin,
slug, token, plate, disc, plug, key, check or other device, or money, or
things of value (newsracks, money exchange and U.S. postage stamp machines,
whether or not coin operated are exempt under this title).



   D.   Services.  Every business of providing, transporting,
maintaining, or performing labor for the benefit of another within the city
of supplying some general demand for the benefit of another within the city
which does not produce a tangible commodity; as well as every business of
transporting, maintaining, storing, or repairing tangible commodities within
the city whether or not such business is conducted from a premise, vehicle,
or mobile location within or outside the city. Services do not include
performances, exhibitions and amusements nor do they include professional
within the terms of this division. Such services to include but not be
limited to:



      1.   Recreational.



         Bowling alleys



         Dance halls



         Driving ranges



         Golf courses (including miniature)



         Motion picture theaters (including drive-in)



         Pool halls (including billiards and snooker)



         Riding stables



         Skating rinks



         Social clubs



         Swimming pools



      2.   Pick-up and delivery.



         Junk and refuse collectors



         Retail and wholesale delivery



         Taxicabs, buses and U-drive cars



      3.   Business services.



         Answering service



         Appraising



         Assayer



         Auctioneering



         Banking



         Bookkeeping



         Broker—business opportunities



         Broker—real estate



         Broker—stocks and bonds



         Consulting and advising



         Credit and collection



         Designing and drafting



         Detective agency



         Employment bureau



         Escrow



         Insurance adjusting



         Interior decoration



         Landscaping and gardening



         Loan company



         Messenger



         Parking lot



         Property management



         Tabulating and machine accounting



         Typing and shorthand



      4.   Personal services.



         Ambulance



         Barber



         Baths



         Cosmetologist



         Interpreter



         Masseur or masseuse



         Physical culture



         Shoe shining



         Tutoring and instruction



      5.   Repair and maintenance (not building trade).



         Auto wash



         Drycleaning



         Janitorial



         Laundry



         Product repair and service



         Spraying and fumigating



         Tree surgery, trimming and removal



         Watch repairing



      6.   Advertising and publicity.



         Advertising council—agent



         Displays and posters



         Handbills



         Newspapers, magazines and radio stations



         Outdoor advertising



         Publicity agent



   E.   Contracting and building trades.  Any person or company,
wherever located, which is licensed as a contractor by the state; and who
undertakes to or offers to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to
or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others, construct,
alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any
building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project,
development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection
of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith within
the city, is defined as a contractor and comes under this classification. 
The term CONTRACTOR includes general engineering contractor, general building
contractor, subcontractor and specialty contractor.



      1.   A BUILDER-OWNER is a person or company employing
subcontractors, specialty contractors, general engineering contractors, or
workman under his or her supervision and direction by the hour or day, for
the purpose of constructing improvements on real property owned by it within
the city.  It shall be taxed herein the same as a general building
contractor unless its only building activity is constructing on its property
a single-family or two-family dwelling unit or addition thereto which will be
used in whole or in part for the purpose of its own occupancy for a period of
not less than one (1) year.



      2.   A BUILDING TRADESMAN, wherever located, is any person
engaged within the city, in any trade, art, calling, avocation or occupation
of the building trades not licensed as a contractor by the state.



   F.   Rental of property and accommodation.  Includes every person
or company engaged in, the business of renting, leasing, providing,
exchanging or trading, without loss of ownership, any land, dwelling,
building, structure or portion thereof for the purpose of occupancy,
sleeping, lodging, boarding, or other use and accommodation. The license tax
for the rental of properties is determined by ownership of the property.
Agents acting for property owners are responsible for payment of the license
tax on rentals, and in addition, are subject to the license tax under
business services. Such rental and accommodation to include but not be
limited to:



      1.   Business property (rental).



         a.   Buildings or portions thereof used for any
business, commercial or industrial purposes



         b.   Land (for any purpose)



      2.   Residential property (rental).



         a.   Apartments



         b.   Auto courts



      3.   Accommodations.



         Boarding house



         Hospital



         Hotel



         Inn



         Dwelling or portion thereof



         Trailer parks



         Lodging house



         Motel



         Rest home



         Rooming house



         Sanitarium



   G.   Performances, exhibitions and amusements.  Includes every
person or company engaged in the business of conducting, showing, exhibiting,
or propounding the appearance, skills, abilities or art of any human or
animal or thing, under any circumstances not covered by one (1) of the above
classifications. Such performances, exhibition and amusement to include but
not be limited to:



      Amusement parks



      Animal shows and zoos



      Athletic contests



      Carnival



      Circus or menagerie



      Concerts



      Exhibitions



      Extrasensory



      Lectures



      Moving pictures (taking of)



      Palmistry



      Parades



      Side shows



      Traveling show



   H.   Soliciting or peddling.



      1.    SOLICITING means any person who by phone or any other
means of communication or in person goes from house to house, or place to
place and who, by appointment, invitation, visitation or other means,
performs, or seeks to perform, consummates or seeks to consummate any element
of any sale or of any order for sale for any goods, wares, merchandise,
service, or other things of value for future delivery.



(See § 5.08.080)



      2.    PEDDLING means any person traveling by foot, wagon,
automobile, vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place,
from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, foods or services and exposing the
same for sale or making sales or delivering articles to purchasers.



   I.   Seasonal business.  Every business of retailing, wholesaling
or merchandising which is applicable to a holiday, season, event or
celebration officially recognized by the Council of the city; and which
business is conducted from any premises within the city for a period not to
exceed sixty (60) days.



('61 Code, § 13.3)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 671, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.04:  LICENSE PROVISIONS



Section



   5.04.010   License required



   5.04.020   Application; contents of license



   5.04.030   New license



   5.04.040   Renewal license



   5.04.050   Branch establishments



   5.04.060   Combination businesses



   5.04.070   Concessions



   5.04.080   Transferability



   5.04.090   Unexpired licenses heretofore issued



   5.04.100   Duplicate license



   5.04.110   Posting and keeping of licenses



§ 5.04.010  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   A.   There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades,
professions, callings, and occupations specified in this division, license
taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person or company to transact and
carry on any business in the city without first having procured the proper
license as prescribed in this division and without complying with any and all
of the provisions of this division.



   C.   This section shall not be construed to require any person or
company to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such
requirement conflicts with applicable statutes or constitutional provisions
of the United States or of the state.



   D.   Any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation which
requires a separate permit or license under this code shall obtain and
provide proof of such permit or license prior to the issuance of any business
license.



('61 Code, § 13.4) 



(Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.020  APPLICATION; CONTENTS OF LICENSE.



   Every person or company required to have a license under the provisions
of this division, shall make application for the same to the Tax Collector of
the city, and upon the payment of the prescribed license tax, the Tax
Collector shall issue to such person or company a license which shall
contain:  (1) the name of the person to whom the license is issued, (2) the
business licensed, (3) the place where such business is to be transacted and
carried on, (4) the date of the expiration of such license, and (5) such
other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions
of this division.



('61 Code, § 13.5)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.030  NEW LICENSE.



   A.   Every person or company making application for a license to be
issued hereunder for a newly established business, or for the first license
to be issued hereunder, shall furnish to the Tax Collector for his or her
guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the
applicant, a signed written statement, under oath, upon a form provided by
the Tax Collector, setting forth such information as may be required herein
and as may be necessary to estimate the amount of the license tax to be paid
by the applicant.



   B.   Such information, if accepted by the Tax Collector as
reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid
by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so
determined shall be tentative only if based upon an average number of
employees, or other variable; and such person or company shall within thirty
(30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was
issued, furnish to the Tax Collector accurate written information upon which
the license tax is to be determined. Upon receipt of this information, the
Tax Collector will ascertain the tax that should have been paid for the
period and either credit the excess amount against the renewal license or
request payment within thirty (30) days of the amount due.



   C.   The Tax Collector shall not issue to any such person or company
a license for business, until such person or company shall have furnished to
him or her the written statement and paid the license tax as herein required.



('61 Code, § 13.6)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.040  RENEWAL LICENSE.



   A.   Every person or company making application for the renewal of a
license shall furnish to the Tax Collector for his or her guidance in
ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a signed
written statement, under oath, upon a form provided by the Tax Collector,
setting forth such information pertaining to the preceding year as may be
required herein to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid.



   B.   The Tax Collector shall not issue to any such person or company
a license for the same business, until such person or company shall have
furnished to him or her the written statement and paid the license tax herein
required.



('61 Code, § 13.7)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.050  BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS.



   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate
type of business at the same location. Each license shall authorize the
licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the
location or in the manner designated in such license; provided that
warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to
a business license under the provisions of this division shall not be deemed
to be separate places of business or branch establishments.



('61 Code, § 13.8)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.060  COMBINATION BUSINESSES.



   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, every
person or company who owns or operates pool tables, bowling alleys, or
amusement, vending, music, game, or other machines, in connection with any
other business required to be licensed under this division, shall pay an
additional business license tax for each such device the rates prescribed for
the business operating such equipment.



   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, other
than this section every person or company who owns or operates more than one
(1) closely related business function at the same location, which fall into
different business classifications, and which are not operated as separate
businesses, shall be taxed in the classification requiring the highest
license tax.



('61 Code, § 13.9)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.070  CONCESSIONS.



   Every person or company who operates any business, whether upon a cost,
rental or commission basis as a concession or upon rented floor space in or
upon the premises of any person licensed under the provisions of this
division, shall be required to obtain a separate and independent license
pursuant to this division.



('61 Code, § 13.10)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.080  TRANSFERABILITY.



   A.   Licenses issued under this division to engage in a particular
business are not transferable from one (1) owner to another.



   B.   Licenses authorizing a person or company to transact or carry
on a business at a particular premise, may be amended to authorize the
transacting and carrying on of such business under such license at some other
location to which the business is or is to be moved; provided that
application has been made to the License Tax Collector and a fee of five ($5)
dollars paid to have the license amended.



('61 Code, § 13.11)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.090  UNEXPIRED LICENSES HERETOFORE ISSUED.



   Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by
the city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any business
license tax ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not
expired, then the license tax prescribed for such business by this division
shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired
license.



('61 Code, § 13.12)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.100  DUPLICATE LICENSE.



   A duplicate license may be issued by the License Tax Collector to
replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or
destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit of such fact, and paying to
the License Tax Collector a fee of two ($2) dollars.



('61 Code, § 13.13)  (Ord 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.04.110  POSTING AND KEEPING OF LICENSES.



   All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:



   A.   Any licensee engaged in business at a fixed place of business
in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises where such business is carried on.



   B.   Any licensee engaged in business but not operating at a fixed
place of business in the city, shall keep the license upon his or her person
at all times while engaged in business in the city, or if a vehicle or piece
of equipment is used as an integral part of the business the licensee shall
keep the license or a photocopy thereof, posted in a conspicuous place on the
vehicle or equipment so used.



('61 Code, § 13.14)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.08:  EXEMPTIONS



Section



   5.08.010   Constitutional rights



   5.08.020   Religious groups



   5.08.030   Publications



   5.08.040   Banks, insurance companies and public utilities



   5.08.050   Veterans



   5.08.060   Governmental agencies



   5.08.070   Charitable and nonprofit organizations



   5.08.080   Activity related to selling licensees



   5.08.090   Filing for exemption



§ 5.08.010  CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS.



   Nothing in this division shall be deemed or construed to apply to any
person engaged in business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable
statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to municipal
corporations of such taxes as are herein prescribed.



('61 Code, § 13.15)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.08.020  RELIGIOUS GROUPS.



   Any religious group, institution or organization, exempt from income
taxation under the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state is exempt from the
license tax, except for those activities which subject it to imposition of
the state sales tax.



('61 Code, § 13.16)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.08.030  PUBLICATIONS.



   Activities relating to the dissemination of news or circulation of
regularly published newspapers, magazines or periodicals containing news, are
exempt from the license tax. This exemption does not apply to places of
business or vehicles operating from premises within the city.



('61 Code, § 13.17)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.08.040  BANKS, INSURANCE COMPANIES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   A.   Headquarter and branch locations of banks, insurance companies
and public utilities and other companies exempted from municipal license
taxes pursuant to Article XIII of the California Constitution, are exempt
from the license tax.



   B.   Public utilities or privately owned public utilities which are
the holders of a franchise from the city and making franchise payments to the
city are exempt from the license tax.



('61 Code, § 13.18)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.08.050  VETERANS.



   Any war veteran physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual
labor, and who is a registered voter in the state, may conduct any business
that is limited to his or her sole personal services, without payment of the
license tax. This exemption does not apply to any businesses owned or
operated by war veterans, employing other than disabled war veterans.



('61 Code, § 13.19)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.08.060  GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES.



   Any governmental agency or subdivision and the employees thereof, to
the extent they are engaged in the business of such governmental agencies or
subdivisions, are exempt from the license tax.



('61 Code, § 13.20)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.08.070  CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.



   Any institution or organization, exempt from income taxation under the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, which carries on any business,
occupation or activity wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes, or from
which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly by any individual,
is exempt from the license tax; provided that such business, occupation, or
activity so carried on is exempt from income taxation under the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the state.



('61 Code, § 13.21)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.08.080  ACTIVITY RELATED TO SELLING TO LICENSEES.



   Salesmen and agents representing vendors which have, do, or would
normally supply goods for resale to a licensee of the city are exempt from
classification as solicitors and the tax pertaining thereto.



('61 Code, § 13.22)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.08.090  FILING FOR EXEMPTION.



   A.   Any person or organization claiming an exemption pursuant to
this article shall file a verified statement with the License Tax Collector
stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed.



   B.   The License Tax Collector shall, based upon the statement
submitted, issue a license to such person or organization claiming exemption
under this article without payment to the city of the license tax.



   C.   The License Tax Collector, after giving notice and a reasonable
opportunity for hearing to a licensee may revoke any license granted pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter upon information that the licensee is not
entitled to the exemption as provided herein.



('61 Code, § 13.23)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.12:  PENALTIES AND REVOCATION
OF LICENSE



Section



   5.12.010   Failure to pay tax when due; violation of division



   5.12.020   Revocation or suspension of license



   5.12.030   Remedies cumulative



§ 5.12.010  FAILURE TO PAY TAX WHEN DUE; VIOLATION OF DIVISION.



   A.   For failure to pay a license tax when due, the License Tax
Collector shall add a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the original license
tax on the last day of each month after the due date; provided, that the
total penalty to be added shall in no event exceed one hundred percent (100%)
of the amount of the original license tax due.



('61 Code, § 13.24)



   B.   Any person or company violating any of the provisions of this
division, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or
employee of the city any material fact in procuring the license or permit
herein provided for, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one
thousand ($1,000) dollars or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a
period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.



('61 Code, § 13.25)



(Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.12.020  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   Any license granted or issued under the pro-visions of this division
may be revoked or suspended at any time for a material false statement
contained in the application for the license granted or issued, or in any
affidavit or statement required to be filed under the provisions of this
division. Any person or company transacting or carrying on any business
during any period of license revocation or suspension shall be subject to the
penalties under § 5.12.010. The procedure for such revocation or suspension
is covered in § 5.16.020.



('61 Code, § 13.26)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.12.030  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.



   The conviction and punishment of any person or company for engaging in
business without first obtaining a license to engage in such business without
first obtaining a license to engage in such business shall not relieve such
person or company from paving the license tax and penalties due and unpaid at
the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent
a criminal prosecution for the violation of any provision of this division.
All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of any one
(1) or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy
for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division.



('61 Code, § 13.27)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.16:  POWERS OF LICENSE
TAX COLLECTOR



Section



   5.16.010   Determining type or class of business for tax computation



   5.16.020   Procedure for revocation or suspension of license



   5.16.030   Enforcement; right of entry



   5.16.040   Extension of filing time and waiver of penalties



§ 5.16.010  DETERMINING TYPE OR CLASS OF BUSINESS FOR TAX COMPUTATION.



   The determination of which business or type or class of business a
licensee or applicant is engaged in, and the determination of the applicable
variables for computation of the tax to be paid hereunder, shall be an
administrative function of the License Tax Collector.



('61 Code, § 13.28)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.16.020  PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   The License Tax Collector may revoke or suspend any license held by a
licensee after notice and hearing. The only basis for such suspension or
revocation shall be the grounds set forth herein, § 5.12.020, or the
determination that the licensee has not paid the tax required to be paid as a
condition for the issuance of the license. The licensee shall be given at
least five (5) days notice, which notice shall specify the grounds for
revocation or suspension, the time and place of the hearing, and shall
require the licensee to show cause why his or her license should not be
revoked. Within three (3) days after the decision, the License Tax Collector
shall notify the licensee thereof.



('61 Code, § 13.29)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.16.030  ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the License Tax Collector to enforce
each and all of the provisions of this division, and the Chief of Police and
other department heads shall render such assistance in the enforcement
thereof as may from time to time be required by the City Manager or the City
Council.



   B.   The License Tax Collector in the exercise of his or her duties
hereunder, and acting through any authorized deputies or assistants, as may
be designated from time to time by the City Manager, may examine all places
of business in the city to ascertain compliance with this division. If an
audit is required, such audit shall be undertaken within thirty (30) days at
a time and place convenient to the licensee.



   C.   The License Tax Collector, his or her authorized deputies and
assistants, and any police officer shall have the power and authority to
enter, free of charge, at any reasonable time, any place of business required
to be licensed hereunder; provided, that such place of business was open to
the public at the time of entry, and demand an exhibition of its license. Any
person having such license in his or her possession or under his control who
willfully fails to exhibit the same on demand shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of
Chapter 5.12. It shall be the duty of the License Tax Collector and each of
his or her assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all
persons found to be violating this division.



('61 Code, § 13.30)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.16.040  EXTENSION OF FILING TIME AND WAIVER OF PENALTIES.



   In addition to all other power conferred upon him, the License Tax
Collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for
filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30)
days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have
accrued; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the Council,
to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due.



('61 Code, § 13.31)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.20:  APPEALS



Section



   5.20.010   Right to appeal



   5.20.020   Procedure for appeals



   5.20.030   Failure to appeal



§ 5.20.010  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the License Tax Collector or of
any other officer of the city made pursuant to the provisions of this
division may appeal therefrom to the City Council within thirty (30) days
after notice of such decision.



('61 Code, § 13.32)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.20.020  PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS.



   Written notices of appeals are to be filed with the City Clerk, briefly
stating in such notice the grounds relied upon for appeal. If such appeal is
made within the time prescribed under § 5.20.010, the City Clerk shall cause
the matter to be set for hearing before the City Council within thirty (30)
days from the date of receipt of such notice of appeal, giving the appellant,
the License Tax Collector and any other interested person not less than ten
(10) days written notice of the time and place of hearing. The findings and
determination of the City Council at such hearing shall be final and
conclusive, and within three (3) days after such findings and determination
are made, the City Clerk shall give notice thereof to the appellant and the
License Tax Collector.



('61 Code, § 13.33)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.20.030  FAILURE TO APPEAL.



   In the event no appeal is filed within the time prescribed under §
5.20.010, the decision of the License Tax Collector shall become final and
conclusive on expiration of the time herein fixed for appeal.



('61 Code, § 13.34)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.24:  LICENSE TAX



Section



   5.24.010   Tax period



   5.24.020   How and when payable



   5.24.030   General business



   5.24.040   Professionals



   5.24.050   Coin-operated machines



   5.24.060   Services



   5.24.070   Contracting and building trades



   5.24.080   Rental of property and accommodations



   5.24.090   Performances, exhibitions and amusements



   5.24.100   Soliciting or peddling



   5.24.110   Seasonal business



§ 5.24.010  TAX PERIOD.



   A.   Every person or company engaged in business as herein defined,
within the city, shall pay the license tax for the period stated and in the
amounts prescribed in this chapter.



   B.   Unless otherwise indicated, the license tax period shall be for
one (1) year. The license tax year shall commence on January 1. An authorized
monthly, quarterly or six (6) month license tax period shall commence on the
first day of the month in which the tax is first due.



('61 Code, § 13.35)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 582, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.020  HOW AND WHEN PAYABLE.



   A.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license
taxes, under the provisions of this division, shall be due and payable in
advance on the first day of January of each year; except that license taxes
covering new operations, commenced after the first day of January, shall be
due and payable within the calendar month in which the person or company
first began operation.



   B.   Annual license tax covering new operations commenced after the
first day of January may be prorated for the balance of the license period.
The basis for prorating for the balance of the license tax period is the
unexpired quarter year, using the first day of April, July and October as the
beginning quarter dates.



   C.   Six (6) month license tax, on the first day of the first month
in which the license is effective.



   D.   Three (3) months license tax, on the first day of the first
month in which the license is effective.



   E.   One (1) month license tax, on the first day of the month in
which the license is effective.



   F.   Daily license tax, each day in advance.



('61 Code, § 13.36)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 582, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.030  GENERAL BUSINESS.



   A.   Retail, each place of business.




Gross receipts   Tax per $1 of gross receipts





$1 to $50,000   $30 (Minimum)





$50,001 to $500,000   0.0002





$500,001 and above   0.0001 (Maximum $500)




   B.   Wholesale, each place of business.




Gross receipts   Tax per $1 of gross receipts





$1 to $50,000   $30 (Minimum)





$50,001 to $500,000   0.0001





$500,001 and above   0.00005 (Maximum $750)




   C.   Manufacturers.




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $500,000   $75.00 (Minimum)





$500,001 to $5,000,000   0.00005





$5,000,001 and above   0.00002 (Maximum $1,000)




('61 Code, § 13.37)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 582, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.040  PROFESSIONALS.



   A.   Each place of business.




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $50,000   $50 (Minimum)





$50,001 to $500,000   0.0003





$500,001 and above   0.0002




   B.   Place of business outside city.




Each professional   $25




('61 Code, § 13.38)  (Ord. 582, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.050  COIN-OPERATED MACHINES.



   A.   Vending (dispensing a product).




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $20,000   $25 (Minimum)





$20,001 and above   0.0005




   B.   Amusement.




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $10,000   $25 (Minimum)





$10,001 and above   0.0009




   C.   Self-service (laundry, dry cleaning, and the like).




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $20,000   $25 (Minimum)





$20,001 and above   0.0005




('61 Code, § 13.39)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 582, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.060  SERVICES.



   A.   Recreational.




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $50,000   $30 (Minimum)





$50,001 and above   0.0005




   B.   Pick-up and delivery.



      1.   Vehicles operated as an incidental part of a business,
licensed and taxed under any other provision of this division or other
ordinance of the city, shall not be separately licensed and taxed.



      2.   Every person or company, except as provided for above,
conducting a pick-up and/or delivery service by means of a motor vehicle,
wagon or any other conveyance, shall pay a license tax as follows:



         a.   Place of business inside city.




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $50,000   $30 (Minimum)





$50,001 and above   0.0002 (Maximum $500)




         b.   Place of business outside city.  Where place of
business is outside of the city, the license tax is for the average number of
vehicles regularly used in the city (includes retail and wholesale delivery
vehicle, taxicab, bus, junk and refuse collecting vehicles, and each
trucking, hauling or draying vehicle).




Each vehicle   $20




   C.   Business and personal services.




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $50,000   $30 (Minimum)





$50,001 and above   0.0003 (Maximum $500)




   D.   Repair and maintenance.



      1.   Place of business inside city.




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $50,000   $30 (Minimum)





$50,001 and above   0.0002 (Maximum $500)




      2.   Place of business outside city.  Where the place of
business is outside of the city, the license tax is for the average number of
vehicles or persons, whichever is applicable regularly used in the city.




Each vehicle or person   $20




   E.   Advertising or publicity.



      1.   Place of business inside city.




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $50,000   $30 (Minimum)





$50,001 and above   0.0003 (Maximum $500)




      2.   Place of business outside city.  Where the place of
business is outside of the city, the license tax is for the average number of
persons regularly used in the city if not specifically noted otherwise below.




Each person   $20





Billboard or signboard   10 ea.





Kleigh light   10 ea.





Advertising bench   10 ea.





Loudspeaker (for each day used)   20 ea.





Permit for distributing advertising   25 (¼ yr.)




('61 Code, § 13.40)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 582, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 651, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.070  CONTRACTING AND BUILDING TRADES.



         3-Mo.         6-Mo.         Annual



General    engineering
contractor      $50         $90         $150



General    building



contractor       40          60          100



Specialist and
subcontractor      20          36           60



Other building
tradesmen        4           8           12



('61 Code, § 13.41)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 582, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.080  RENTAL OF PROPERTY AND ACCOMMODATIONS.




One rental unit   No fee




Two rental units and above:




Gross Receipts   Tax per $1 of Gross Receipts





$1 to $10,000   $20 (Minimum)





$10,001 and above   0.0009




('61 Code, § 13.42)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 582, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.090  PERFORMANCES, EXHIBITIONS AND AMUSEMENTS.



   An annual license tax for regularly established places of business
within the city.  A daily license tax for transient or traveling business.



               Daily*            Annual*



Amusement parks, animal
shows and zoos         $10            $100



Athletic contests           50              500
Carnival, circus or menagerie        50



Extrasensory and palmistry        50



Moving pictures (taking of)        50



Other                   7.50



Rides, mechanical and animal          5



Side shows (each)           10



Traveling shows and
amusements              10



* The tax is for each item for which a separate admission is charged.



('61 Code, § 13.43)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.100  SOLICITING OR PEDDLING.



   Any person or company who occupies a premises in the city is subject to
the annual business license tax. All other persons or companies are subject
to the daily business license tax.



                     Daily              Annual



                     Tax         Tax



   A.   Soliciting.



Each company                           $50



Each solicitor                  $10           50



   B.   Peddling.



Each company                           $50



Each peddler                    5           25



('61 Code, § 13.44)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.24.110  SEASONAL BUSINESS.



   Monthly Tax



Christmas trees, sale of   $20



   Any person or company otherwise licensed hereunder,
and engaged in the selling of Christmas trees from the same
premises is exempt from the seasonal business license



Other   20



('61 Code, § 13.45)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 794, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.28:  MISCELLANEOUS



Section



   5.28.010   License tax a debt



   5.28.020   Information confidential



   5.28.030   Decisions on amounts imposed



   5.28.040   Statements not conclusive



§ 5.28.010  LICENSE TAX A DEBT.



   The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of
this division shall be deemed a debt to city. An action on the debt may be
commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.



('61 Code, § 13.46)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.28.020  INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.



   The financial information furnished or secured pursuant to this
division shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to
public inspection; and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not
be known except to persons charged with the administration of this division.



('61 Code, § 13.47)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.28.030  DECISIONS ON AMOUNTS IMPOSED.



   If any license tax imposed by this division is for any reason held to
be discriminatory or invalid in amount, by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of a
lesser amount imposed by the License Tax Collector.  The City Council hereby
declares that it would have imposed a license tax of some amount on the
business, occupation, calling, trade, vocation or other enterprise in
question, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more of the license
taxes imposed herein may be declared discriminatory or invalid in amount.



('61 Code, § 13.49)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



§ 5.28.040  STATEMENTS NOT CONCLUSIVE.



   No statements submitted by the licensee shall be conclusive as to the
matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city
from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable
hereunder.



('61 Code, § 13.50)  (Ord. 402, passed  - - )



DIVISION II — BUSINESS REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 5.200:  SOUND TRUCKS



Section



   5.200.010   Definitions



   5.200.020   Noncommercial use of sound truck



   5.200.030   License to use sound truck for commercial advertising



Statutory reference:



   For state law authorizing cities to regulate exhibition, etc., of
signs, advertisements, etc., see Cal. Gov't Code, § 38774



§ 5.200.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON.  This term shall include the singular and the plural and shall
also mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association, club,
partnership, society or any other form of association or organization.



   SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT.  Any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. This term shall
not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard
only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on
authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other
vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.



   SOUND TRUCK.  Any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle having mounted
thereon or attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment.



('61 Code, § 3.33)  (Ord. 369, passed  - - )



§ 5.200.020  NONCOMMERCIAL USE OF SOUND TRUCK.



   A.   Registration required.  No person shall use or cause to be
used a sound truck with its sound-amplifying equipment in operation for
noncommercial purposes in the city before filing a registration statement
with the City Clerk in writing.



   B.   Filing and contents of statement; amendment of statement.



      1.   This registration statement shall be filed in duplicate
and state the following:



         a.   Name and home address of the applicant.



         b.   Address of place of business of the applicant.



         c.   License number and motor number of the sound truck
to be used by the applicant.



         d.   Name and address of the person who owns the sound
truck.



         e.   Name and address of the person having direct charge
of the sound truck.



         f.   Names and addresses of all persons who will use or
operate the sound truck.



         g.   The purpose for which the sound truck will be used.



         h.   A general statement as to the section or sections
of the city in which the sound truck will be used.



         i.   The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck.



         j.   A general description of the sound-amplifying
equipment which is to be used.



         k.   The number of days of proposed operation of the
sound truck.



         l.   The maximum sound-producing power of the
sound-amplifying equipment to be used in or on the sound truck.  State the
following:



            (1)   The wattage to be used.



            (2)   The volume in decibels of the sound which
will be produced.



            (3)   The approximate maximum distance for which
sound will be thrown from the sound truck.



      2.   All persons using or causing to be used sound trucks for
non-commercial purposes shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant
to this section within forty-eighty (48) hours after any change in the
information therein furnished.



('61 Code, § 3.35)



   C.   Certified copy of statement to be carried by sound truck
operator; exhibition upon request.  The city shall return to each applicant
under paragraph A. above, one (1) copy of the registration statement duly
certified by the city as a correct copy of the application. Such certified
copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person operating
the sound truck at all times while the sound truck's sound-amplifying
equipment is in operation, and such copy shall be promptly displayed and
shown to any police officer of the city upon request.



('61 Code, § 3.36)



   D.   Regulations generally.  Noncommercial use of sound trucks in
the city with sound-amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the
following regulations:



      1.   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.



      2.   Operations are permitted for four (4) hours each day,
except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized.
The permitted four (4) hours of operation shall be between the hours of 11:30
a.m. and 1:30 p.m. and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m.



      3.   Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless
the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed
of at least ten (10) miles per hour except when such truck is stopped or
impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, such sound-amplifying equipment
shall not be operated for longer than one (1) minute at each such stop.



      4.   Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards
of hospitals, schools, churches or courthouses.



      5.   No sound truck shall remain standing in one (1) place for
more than one (1) minute with its sound-amplifying device in operation.



      6.   The human speech and music amplified shall not be
profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous.



      7.   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will
not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the
sound truck and so that such volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous,
jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.



      8.   No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated with an
excess of fifteen (15) watts of power in the last stage of amplification.



('61 Code, § 3.37)  (Ord. 369, passed  - - )



§ 5.200.030  LICENSE TO USE SOUND TRUCK FOR COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING.



   A.   Required.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any
sound truck in the city primarily for commercial advertising purposes with
sound-amplifying equipment in operation unless a license has been obtained
from the city.



('61 Code, § 3.38)



   B.   Application.  Persons applying for the license required under
paragraph A. above shall file with the city an application in writing giving
in such application the information required in the registration statement
under § 5.200.020.B.



('61 Code, § 3.39)



   C.   Fee.  The fee for a license shall be twenty-five ($25) per day
per vehicle.



('61 Code, § 3.40)



   D.   Issuance.  The city shall issue a license under paragraph A.
above upon payment of the required license fee unless the application
required in paragraph B. above reveals that the applicant would violate the
regulations prescribed in § 5.200.020.D. or the provisions of some other
ordinance of the city.



('61 Code, § 3.41)



   E.   Carrying by licensee; exhibition upon request.  A licensee
shall keep such license in his or her possession in the sound truck during
the time the sound truck's sound-amplifying equipment is in operation.  The
license shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer of the
city upon request.



('61 Code, § 3.42)



(Ord. 369, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.204:  BINGO GAMES



Section



   5.204.010   Definitions



   5.204.020   Organizations authorized to conduct bingo games



   5.204.030   Participation by minors prohibited



   5.204.040   Property upon which bingo game may be conducted



   5.204.050   Alcoholic beverages prohibited during conduct of bingo
game



   5.204.060   Bingo game to be open to the public



   5.204.070   Persons allowed to operate bingo game



   5.204.080   Records; use of proceeds



   5.204.090   Physical presence required



   5.204.100   Amount of prizes restricted



   5.204.110   Application requirements



   5.204.120   Investigation of applicant



   5.204.130   Contents and duration of license; restrictions of number
and length of bingo games



   5.204.140   Inspection



   5.204.150   Remote caller bingo authorized



§ 5.204.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BINGO.  A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
designated numbers or symbols that are marked or covered by the player on a
tangible card in the player's possession and that conform to numbers or
symbols, selected at random and announced by a live caller.  Notwithstanding
Cal. Penal Code § 330(c), as used in this section, the game of bingo
includes tangible cards having numbers or symbols that are concealed and
pre-printed in a manner providing for distribution of prizes.  The winning
cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the
playing or operation of the bingo game.  All pre-printed cards shall bear
the legend, 'for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California
law and pursuant to local ordinance.'  Only a covered or marked tangible
card possessed by a player and presented to an attendant may be used to claim
a prize.



   BINGO GAME.  Any one (1) game occurring as a portion of all bingo
activities during a given day during which bingo is permitted to be conducted
by a licensed organization pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   REMOTE CALLER BINGO GAME.  A game of bingo, as defined in this
chapter, in which the numbers or symbols on randomly drawn plastic balls are
announced by a natural person present at the site at which the live game is
conducted, and the organization conducting the bingo game uses audio and
video technology to link any of its in-state facilities for the purpose of
transmitting the remote calling of a live bingo game from a single location
to multiple locations owned, leased, or rented by that organization, or as
conducted by multiple organizations in accordance with Cal. Penal Code §
326.3(o).  The audio or video technology used to link the facilities may
include cable, internet, satellite, broadband, telephone technology, or any
other means of electronic transmission that ensures the secure, accurate, and
simultaneous transmission of the announcement of numbers or symbols in the
game from the location at which the game is called by a natural person to the
remote location or locations at which players may participate in the game. 
The drawing of each ball bearing a number or symbol by the natural person
calling the game shall be visible to all players as the ball is drawn,
including through a simultaneous live video feed at remote locations at which
players may participate in the game.



('61 Code, § 18B.1)  (Ord. 601, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 644, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 692, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 8-16-11)



§ 5.204.020  ORGANIZATIONS AUTHORIZED TO CONDUCT BINGO GAMES.



   A bingo game may be conducted within the city for the benefit of, and
only by, an organization exempted from the payment of taxes imposed under the
Corporation Tax Law by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, §§ 23701(a), 23701(b),
23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g), 23701(k), 23701(l), or 23701(w), and
by mobile home park associations, senior citizens' organizations, and
charitable organizations associated with a school district, provided the
receipts are used only for charitable purposes, the principle purpose of the
organization is not to conduct bingo, and all bingo games are conducted
strictly in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 18B.2)  (Ord. 601, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 644, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 778, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 8-16-11)



§ 5.204.030  PARTICIPATION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.



   No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game which is
conducted pursuant to this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, a minor
is a person under 18 years of age.



('61 Code, § 18B.3)  (Ord. 601, passed - - )



§ 5.204.040  PROPERTY UPON WHICH BINGO GAME MAY BE CONDUCTED.



   An organization conducting a bingo game pursuant to this chapter may
conduct such game only on property owned or leased by it, which property is
used by it for an office or for the performance of purposes for which the
organization is organized.



('61 Code, § 18B.4)  (Ord. 601, passed - - )



§ 5.204.050  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED DURING CONDUCT OF BINGO GAME.



   No person may serve, sell or consume any alcoholic beverage during the
conduct of a bingo game, pursuant to this chapter, on the property upon which
such game is being conducted.



('61 Code, § 18B.5)  (Ord. 601, passed - - )



§ 5.204.060  BINGO GAME TO BE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.



   Any bingo game conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be open to the
public and not restricted to the members of the organization conducting the
game.



('61 Code, § 18B.6)  (Ord. 601, passed - - )



§ 5.204.070  PERSONS ALLOWED TO OPERATE BINGO GAME.



   A.   Any bingo game authorized to be conducted by this chapter shall
be operated and staffed only by members of the organization which organized
the game and no such member shall receive a profit, wage or salary from any
such game.



   B.   Only the organization authorized to conduct the bingo game
pursuant to this chapter shall operate such game or participate in the
promotion, supervision or any other phase thereof.



   C.   No individual corporation, partnership, or other legal entity
except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game pursuant to this
chapter shall hold any financial interest in the conduct of such game.



   D.   Nothing in this section precludes the employment of security
personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at any such
bingo game by the organization conducting such bingo game.



('61 Code, § 18B.7)  (Ord. 601, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 778, passed - - )



§ 5.204.080  RECORDS; USE OF PROCEEDS.



   A.   All profits from any bingo game conducted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter by an organization exempt from the payment of
the bank and corporation tax by the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701d, shall be
kept in a special fund or account, shall not be commingled with any other
fund or account and shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect
to any other organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this
chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special
fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account.
Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes except that such
proceeds may be used for prizes and a portion of such proceeds, not to exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one
thousand ($1,000) dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for
rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, and
administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel.



   B.   All records related to the operation of any bingo game
authorized pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained separately  from any
other books or records of the conducting organization.



('61 Code, § 18B.8)  (Ord. 601, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 644, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 692, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 778, passed - - )



§ 5.204.090  PHYSICAL PRESENCE REQUIRED.



   No person shall be allowed to or shall participate in a bingo game
conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless that person is
physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being
conducted.



('61 Code, § 18B.9)  (Ord. 601, passed - - )



§ 5.204.100  AMOUNT OF PRIZES RESTRICTED.



   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game
authorized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not exceed five
hundred dollars ($500) in cash or kind, or both.



('61 Code, § 18B.10)  (Ord. 601, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 8-16-11)



§ 5.204.110  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Any organization which desires to conduct a bingo game pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall make application therefor with the Finance
Director of the city, which application shall contain sufficient information
for the Director or his or her designee to determine that such game will be
con- ducted in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and
will otherwise comply with the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the
city. Such application shall include at least the following items of
information:



   A.   The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the
applicant organization is an eligible organization under § 5.204.020 of this
code;



   B.   The name and signature of at least two (2) officers, including
the presiding officer, of the applicant organization;



   C.   The particular property within the city, including the street
number, owned or leased by the applicant organization on which property bingo
games are proposed to be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of
the property;



   D.   The proposed day during a given calendar week during which the
applicant desires to conduct bingo games;



   E.   A statement that the applicant organization agrees to conduct
bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Cal. Penal Code, §§
326.5 and 326.3 if remote caller bingo is to be conducted, and with all
provisions of this chapter, and other ordinances, resolutions and regulations
of the city;



   F.   Each application from an organization to conduct bingo shall be
submitted with evidence satisfactory to the city's Administrative Services
Director establishing that the applicant organization is an organization
authorized to conduct bingo pursuant to § 5.204.020 of this chapter;



   G.   Each application shall include a filing fee in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50) to, in part, reimburse the city for its costs incurred in
reviewing and investigating facts set forth in the application and issuing a
license for the conduct of bingo games.  One-half of the fee shall be
refunded if the application is denied.  The applicant shall pay an
additional monthly fee, or annual fee if preferred by the applicant, in such
amount as established by resolution of the City Council, to reimburse, in
part, the city's cost in providing law enforcements and related public safety
services necessary to ensure the safe and lawful conduct of bingo games by
the applicant.



   H.   Each application shall be signed by the representatives of the
applicant under penalty of perjury;



   I.   Any change in any item of information required to be included
in the application during the duration of any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall be reported forthwith to the Finance
Director.



('61 Code, § 18B.11)  (Ord. 601, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 644, passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 691, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 8-16-11)



§ 5.204.120  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the Finance
Director shall refer such to interested departments of the city, including,
but not limited to, the City Manager, the City Attorney, the Police
Department and the Fire Department, or investigation as to whether or not all
the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of
the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies as property upon
which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy and other
applicable restrictions.



('61 Code, § 18B.12)  (Ord. 601, passed - - )



§ 5.204.130  CONTENTS AND DURATION OF LICENSE; RESTRICTIONS OF NUMBER AND
LENGTH OF BINGO GAMES.



   If an application to conduct bingo games shows that the proposed bingo
games will be conducted in accordance with each and every provision of this
chapter and with other ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city, a
license shall be issued to the applicant organization. The license shall be
effective for a designated calendar year and shall specify the dates upon
which bingo activities may be conducted by the licensee during that calendar
year; provided, that bingo activities may be permitted only on one (1) day
during any calendar week during that calendar year. Any bingo activities
permitted shall commence no earlier than 5:30 p.m. and shall be terminated no
later than 11:00 p.m. Total value of prizes awarded during any one (1) day's
activities shall not exceed five thousand ($5,000) in cash or kind or both.



('61 Code, § 18B.13)  (Ord. 601, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 644, passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 692, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 788, passed - - )



§ 5.204.140  INSPECTION.



   Each licensee shall permit representatives of the city access to any
premises used in the conduct of the licensed bingo operation at all
reasonable times, and to any records required to be maintained separately
from other records of the organization, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. The City Manager shall cause such inspections to occur as he or she
deems necessary from time to time.



('61 Code, § 18B.14)  (Ord. 601, passed - - )



§ 5.204.150  REMOTE CALLER BINGO AUTHORIZED.



   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, remote caller
bingo games may be lawfully conducted and played in the city pursuant to the
provisions of Cal. Penal Code §§ 326.3, 326.4 and 326.5, and this chapter,
subject to the additional requirements and restrictions set forth in this
section. 



   B.   Only those organizations specified in § 5.204.020 of this
chapter are eligible and authorized to apply for a license or license
endorsement to conduct remote caller bingo games.  It is unlawful to conduct
any remote caller bingo game in the city without such license or license
endorsement.



   C.   The following are license and operating requirements:



      1.   In order to conduct remote caller bingo games, any
eligible organization may apply for a license, or license endorsement if such
organization already possesses a current, valid license issued pursuant to §
5.204.130.  Each applicant for a license or endorsement shall comply with
and be subject to the licensing procedures set forth in this chapter
provided, however, that the Administrative Services Director may require such
additional information be provided as deemed necessary to ensure that the
applicant complies with all requirements of Cal. Penal Code § 326.3.



      Each license endorsement shall expire upon the expiration of the
underlying license, and any license or license endorsement may be renewed
pursuant to the procedures in § 5.240.110.  Each remote caller bingo
license or license endorsement issued pursuant to this chapter is subject to
all applicable local, state and federal laws including the provisions
contained in Cal. Penal Code §§ 326.3, 326.4, and 326.5, and each licensee
shall comply with the requirements of those provisions.



      2.   Each organization issued a remote caller bingo license or
license endorsement pursuant to this chapter ('licensee') shall comply with
the following additional conditions:



         a.   Subject to § 5.204.040, remote caller bingo games
may only be conducted on property owned or leased by, or donated for use by,
the licensee.



         b.   The operation of all remote caller bingo games are
subject to the provisions of this chapter, excluding § 5.204.090.



         c.   Every licensee shall provide the California
Gambling Commission not less than thirty (30) days prior written notice of
its intent to conduct remote caller bingo, which shall include all
information described in Cal. Penal Code § 326.3(j)(4).



         d.   The licensee is responsible for ensuring that the
provisions of this chapter and Cal. Penal Code §§ 326.3, 326.4, and 326.5
are complied with by the licensee and its officers, employees, volunteers and
members, and any violation of any of said provisions by any of the foregoing
shall be imputed to the licensee.  In addition to criminal penalties imposed
by law, substantial evidence of a violation of any provision of this chapter,
any provision of the forgoing Cal. Penal Code sections, or of any other law
involving illegal gambling, fraud or theft in connection with conducting or
sponsoring a bingo game, shall constitute cause for the suspension and/or
revocation of the licensee's license.



   D.   The provisions of this § 5.204.150 shall govern over any
inconsistent provisions of any other section of this chapter.



(Ord. 1156, passed 8-16-11)



CHAPTER 5.208:  CABLE, VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS



Section



Article I.  General Provisions



   5.208.010   Title



   5.208.020   Purpose and intent



   5.208.030   Defined terms and phrases



   5.208.040   Suspension and waiver of application fee deposits



Article II.  Cable Television Systems



   5.208.050   Authority and findings



   5.208.060   Franchise terms and conditions



   5.208.070   Franchise applications and renewal



   5.208.080   Contents of cable television franchise agreements



   5.208.090   Consumer protection and service standards



   5.208.092   Fee for support of local cable usage



   5.208.094   Special provisions applicable to holders of state video
franchises



Article III.  Open Video Systems



   5.208.100   Applicability



   5.208.110   Application required



   5.208.120   Review of the application



   5.208.130   Agreement required



Article IV.  Other Video and Telecommunications Services and Systems



   5.208.140   Other multichannel video programming distributors



   5.208.150   Video providers – registration; customer service
standards



   5.208.160   Telecommunications service provided by telephone
corporations



Article V.  Use of Public Rights-of-Way



   5.208.170   Findings; policies and procedures



Article VI.  Definitions



   5.208.180   Defined terms and phrases



Article VII.  Violations; Severability



   5.208.190   Violations; enforcement



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 5.208.010  TITLE.



   This chapter is known and may be cited as the “Cable, Video, and
Telecommunications Service Providers Chapter” of the city.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.020  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   A.   The City Council finds and determines as follows:



      1.   The development of cable, video, and telecommunications
services and systems may provide significant benefits for, and have
substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city.



      2.   Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology
associated with cable, video, and telecommunications services and systems,
the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by the
city’s exercise of its regulatory powers.



      3.   This chapter adopts provisions that authorize the city to
regulate cable, video, and telecommunications service providers to the extent
authorized by federal and state law, including but not limited to the federal
Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the federal Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission, and applicable California statutes and regulations.



      4.   The cable, video, and tele- communications services that
are addressed in this chapter include services provided by cable television
systems, open video systems, master antenna television systems, satellite
master antenna television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems,
multichannel multipoint distribution systems, local multipoint distribution
systems, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology,
as well as voice and data services provided by telephone corporations.



   B.   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the
attainment of the following objectives:



      1.   To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a
manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory
policies, industry competition, and technological development.



      2.   To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the
city’s public rights-of-way and public property for cable, video, and
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory
basis, and in a  manner consistent with all applicable federal and state
statutes and regulations.



      3.   To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city
and its residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way
and public property.



      4.   To promote competition in cable, video, and
telecommunications services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable,
video, and telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery
of advanced and competitive cable, video, and telecommunications services on
the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses,
institutions, and residents of the city.



      5.   To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time
frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
cable, video, and telecommunications service providers.



      6.   To encourage the deployment of advanced cable, video, and
telecommunications infrastructure that satisfies local needs, delivers
enhanced services, and provides informed consumer choices in an evolving
cable, video, and telecommunications marketplace.



      7.   To maintain and to enhance public, educational, and
governmental programming opportunities that will enable local government to
communicate with its residents and to provide them with alternate means of
disseminating information.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.030  DEFINED TERMS AND PHRASES.



   Various terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined in §
5.208.180.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.040  SUSPENSION AND WAIVER OF APPLICATION FEE DEPOSITS.



   A.   With regard to any application fee deposit for an initial
franchise, or for the renewal of a franchise, or for the transfer or change
in control of a franchise that is authorized by this chapter, the City
Manager may suspend that application fee deposit in accordance with this
section.



   B.    The City Manager, in consultation with the City Attorney, will
review all written information submitted by the applicant or franchisee in
support of its contention that applicable law prohibits imposition of the
application fee deposit provided for by this chapter.  If a determination is
made that applicable law supports the contention of the applicant or
franchisee, then the City Manager may suspend the imposition of the
application fee deposit; provided, however, that such suspension must be
ratified by the City Council within thirty (30) days after the City
Manager’s determination and, if ratified, the application fee deposit will
be deemed to have been waived.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



ARTICLE II.  CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS



§ 5.208.050  AUTHORITY AND FINDINGS.



   A.   In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the city
is authorized to grant one (1) or more nonexclusive franchises to construct,
reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the city
limits.



   B.   The City Council finds that the development of cable television
services may provide significant benefits for, and substantial impacts upon,
the residents of the city.  Because of the complex and rapidly changing
technology associated with cable television, the City Council further finds
that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served
by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city.  This Article
II is intended to specify the means for providing to the public the best
possible cable television services, and every franchise issued in accordance
with this Article II is intended to achieve this primary objective.  It is
the further intent of this Article II to adopt regulatory provisions that
will enable the city to regulate cable television services to the maximum
extent authorized by federal and state law.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.060  FRANCHISE TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   A.   Franchise purposes.  A franchise granted by the city under the
provisions of this Article II may authorize the grantee to do the following:



      1.   To engage in the business of providing cable television
services that are authorized by law and that the grantee elects to provide to
its subscribers within the designated franchise service area;



      2.   To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild,
reconstruct, replace, maintain and retain cable lines, related electronic
equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in
connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon,
along and across streets and public rights-of-way within the designated
franchise service area; and



      3.   To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the
origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of
television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such
other services as may be authorized by law.



   B.   Franchise required.  It is unlawful for any person to
construct, install, or operate a cable television system within any street or
public way in the city without first obtaining a franchise under the
provisions of this Article II.



   C.   Term of the franchise.



      1.   A franchise granted under this Article II will be for the
term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date
of the resolution adopted by the City Council that authorizes the franchise.



      2.   A franchise granted under this Article II may be renewed
upon application by the grantee in accordance with the then-applicable
provisions of state and federal law and this Article II.



   D.   Franchise service area.  A franchise is effective within the
territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during
the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the resolution
granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement.



   E.   Federal or state jurisdiction.  This Article II will be
construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws,
and it applies to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date
of this chapter, to the extent authorized by applicable law.



   F.   Franchise non-transferable.



      1.   Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or
dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by
ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of
the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent
of the City Council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or
delayed.  Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose
of the franchise without the written consent of the City Council is null and
void.  The granting of a security interest in any assets of the grantee, or
any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the
purposes of this paragraph F.  A transfer to a person or entity owned or
controlled by or under common  ownership or control of grantee shall not be
deemed a transfer for the purposes of this subparagraph F.1.



      2.   The requirements of subparagraph F.1. apply to any change
in control of grantee.  The word “control” as used herein is not limited
to the ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes
actual working control in whatever manner exercised.  If grantee is a
partnership or a corporation, prior authorization of the City Council is
required where ownership or control of twenty-five percent (25%) or more of
the partnership interests or of the voting stock of grantee, or any company
in the tier of companies controlling the grantee, whether directly or
indirectly, is acquired by a person or a group of persons acting in concert,
none of whom, individually or collectively, owns or controls those
partnership interests or that voting stock of the grantee, or grantee’s
upper tier of controlling companies, as of the effective date of the
franchise.



      3.   Unless precluded by federal law, grantee must give prior
written notice to the city of any proposed foreclosure or judicial sale of
all or a substantial part of the grantee’s franchise property.  That
notification will be considered by the city as notice that a change in
control of ownership of the franchise will take place, and the provisions of
this paragraph that require the prior written consent of the City Council to
that change in control of ownership will apply.



      4.   For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to
an acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the city may inquire about
the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and
grantee must assist the city in that inquiry.  In seeking the city’s
consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee or the proposed
transferee, or both, must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394
or its equivalent.  This application must be submitted to the city not less
than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer. 
The transferee must establish that it possesses the legal, financial, and
technical capability to remedy all then-existing defaults and deficiencies,
and, during the remaining term of the franchise, to operate and maintain the
cable system and to comply with all franchise requirements.  If the legal,
financial, and technical qualifications of the proposed transferee are
determined to be satisfactory, then the city will consent to the transfer of
the franchise.



      5.   Any financial institution holding a pledge of the
grantee’s assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or
operation of the franchise property has the right to notify the city that it,
or a designee satisfactory to the city, will take control of and operate the
cable television system upon grantee’s default in its financial
obligations.  Further, that financial institution must also submit a plan
for such operation within ninety (90) days after assuming control.  The plan
must ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements
during the period that the financial institution will exercise control over
the system.  The financial institution may not exercise control over the
system for a period exceeding one (1) year unless authorized by the city, in
its sole discretion, and during that period of time it will have the right to
petition the city to transfer the franchise to another grantee.



      6.   Unless prohibited by applicable law, grantee must
reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable review and processing expenses
incurred in connection with any transfer or change in control of the
franchise.  These expenses may include, without limitation, costs of
administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the
proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and
all costs incurred by these experts), notice and publication costs, and
document preparation expenses.  The total amount of these reimbursable
expenses may be subject to maximum limits that are specified in the franchise
agreement between the city and the grantee.  No reimbursement may be offset
against any franchise fee payable to the city during the term of the
franchise.



   G.   Geographical coverage.



      1.   Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement,
grantee must design, construct, and maintain the cable television system to
have the capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial building in
the franchise service area, subject to any service-area line extension
requirements or territorial restrictions set forth in the franchise agreement.



      2.   After service has been established by activating trunk or
distribution cables for any service area, grantee must provide standard
installations to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the
service area within seven (7) days from the date of request, or such longer
time as may be requested by the subscriber, provided that the grantee is able
to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights- of-way and permits
necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that period.  Standard
installations are defined as installations that are located up to one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system and do not
require trenching to serve.



   H.   Nonexclusive franchise.  Every franchise granted is
nonexclusive.  The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any
time, such additional franchises for a cable television system that it deems
appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law.  If an additional
franchise is proposed to be granted to a subsequent grantee, a noticed public
hearing must first be held if required by the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 53066.3.



   I.   Multiple franchises.



      1.   The city may grant any number of franchises, subject to
applicable state and federal law.  The city may limit the number of
franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the
requirements of applicable law and the following specific local
considerations:



         a.   The capacity of the public rights- of-way to
accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of
the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and
sewerage.



         b.   The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a
result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.



         c.   The disadvantages that may result from cable system
competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’
property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations within the
public rights-of-way.



      2.   The city may require that any new grantee be responsible
for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the
city’s opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably
accommodate additional cables.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.070  FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS AND RENEWAL.



   A.   Filing of applications.  Any person desiring an initial
franchise for a cable television system must file an application with the
city.  An application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of
the City Council must accompany the application.  That application fee
deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and
processing the application, including without limitation costs of
administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the
applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs
incurred by those experts), notice and publication requirements, and document
preparation expenses.  If actual costs exceed the application fee deposit,
the applicant must pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days
following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs.  If actual costs
are less than the application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be
refunded to the applicant.



   B.   Applications; contents.  An application for an initial
franchise for a cable television system must contain, as applicable:



      1.   A statement describing the proposed franchise service
area and an explanation whether this proposed service area is, or will be,
part of a larger regional cluster of franchise service areas.



      2.   A resume of the applicant’s prior history, including
the applicant’s experience and expertise in the cable television industry.



      3.   A list of the partners, general and limited, of the
applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled
by each stockholder, if a closely-held corporation.  If the applicant is a
publicly-owned partnership or corporation, each owner of ten percent (10%) or
more of the partnership interests, or of the issued and outstanding capital
stock, must be identified.  If the applicant is a limited liability company,
the following information must be provided:  the address of its principal
executive office; the name and business or residence address of each member
and of each holder of an economic interest in the limited liability company,
together with the contribution and the share in profits and losses of each
member and holder of an economic interest; the name and business or residence
address of any manager or managers and the chief executive officer, if any,
appointed or elected in accordance with the articles of organization or
operating agreement.



      4.   A list of officers, directors, and managing employees of
the applicant, and a description of the background and qualifications of each
such person.



      5.   A statement specifying the number of people employed by
the applicant, whether on a full-time or part-time basis.



      6.   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of
the applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant
in whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by
the applicant.



      7.   Financial statements prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant’s
financial ability to:



         a.   Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new
physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city;



         b.   Comply with the city’s public, educational, and
governmental access requirements; and



         c.   Comply with the city’s requirement that franchise
fees be paid on the applicant’s gross revenues derived from the operation
of the cable system to provide cable services.



      8.   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use,
to purchase, or to lease.



      9.   A description of the cable services and any other
services that will be offered by the applicant using existing or proposed
facilities.



      10.   The proposed construction and service schedule, the
proposed rate structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to
provide public, educational, and governmental access capacity, services,
facilities, and equipment.



      11.   Any additional information that the city deems to be
reasonably necessary to evaluate the applicant’s qualifications.



   C.   Consideration of initial applications.



      1.   Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise,
the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee must prepare a report and
make recommendations to the City Council concerning that application.



      2.   A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial
franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the City Council.  Within
thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the City Council will make a
decision, based upon the documents and testimony received at the hearing,
whether the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what
conditions.  The City Council may grant one (1) or more franchises, or may
decline to grant any franchise.



   D.   Franchise renewal.  Franchise renewals will be processed in
accordance with then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of
the franchise agreement.  The city and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter
into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
Unless prohibited by applicable law, a renewal application fee deposit in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council must accompany the
renewal application or the renewal request.  That renewal application fee
deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and
processing the renewal application, including the review of grantee’s prior
compliance with the franchise, the ascertainment of the community’s
cable-related needs and interests, the engagement of technical and legal
consultants, and expenses related to negotiations and document preparation. 
If actual costs exceed the renewal application fee deposit, the grantee must
pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt of
an itemized statement of those costs.  If actual costs are less than the
renewal application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be refunded to
the grantee.  No renewal application fee may be offset against any franchise
fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise.  The City Council
may authorize the renewal of a cable television franchise agreement by
resolution.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.080  CONTENTS OF CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS.



   A.   The provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a
cable television system may relate to or include, without limitation, the
following subject matters:



      1.   The geographical area, duration, and nonexclusive nature
of the franchise.



      2.   The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city,
including the percentage amount, the method of computation, and the time for
payment.



      3.   Requirements relating to compliance with and
implementation of state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the
operation of the cable television system.



      4.   Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or
rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special
services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability,
and parental control devices.



      5.   Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance
bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure
the performance of the grantee’s obligations under the franchise agreement.



      6.   Requirements relating to comprehensive liability
insurance, workers’ compensation insurance, and indemnification.



      7.   Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer
service standards, which requirements may include, without limitation,
compliance with the statutes, rules and regulations set forth in § 5.208.090.



      8.   Requirements relating to the grantee’s support of local
cable usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental
access channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and
financial support for the required access channels.



      9.   Requirements relating to the grantee’s obligation to
provide an institutional network, and channel capacity on that institutional
network for educational or governmental use, subject to the city’s rules
and procedures for the use of such channel capacity and for compatibility
with any telecommunications network that has been or may be developed by the
city.



      10.   Requirements relating to construction, operation, and
maintenance of the cable television system within the city’s streets and
public rights-of-way, including compliance with all applicable building codes
and permit requirements of the city, the abandonment, removal, or relocation
of facilities, and compliance with FCC technical standards.



      11.   Requirements relating to recordkeeping, accounting
procedures, reporting, periodic audits, performance reviews, the inspection
of grantee’s books and records, and reimbursement for technical audits and
franchise fee audits under specified circumstances.



      12.   Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or
defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or
remedies for such breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties,
liquidated damages, suspension, revocation, and termination.



      13.   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other
transfer or change in control of the franchise.



      14.   The grantee’s obligation to maintain continuity of
service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city’s
operation and management of the cable system.



      15.   Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and
procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise
agreement and that will, in the judgment of city staff and the City Council,
best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and
safety.



   B.   If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the
provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the City Council and
provisions of this Article II, the provisions of the franchise agreement will
control.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.090  CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS.



   A.   Operational standards.



      1.   Grantee must maintain the necessary facilities,
equipment, and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and
service standards under normal operating conditions:



         a.   Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during
normal business hours to ensure that telephone calls are answered promptly. 
Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait
time, may not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made.  If
the call needs to be transferred, transfer time must not exceed thirty (30)
seconds.



         b.   A caller must receive a busy signal less than three
percent (3%) of the time, measured quarterly.



         c.   Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a
twenty-four (24)-hour basis, including weekends and holidays.  After normal
business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an
automated response system, including an answering machine.  Calls received
after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company
representative on the next business day.



         d.   A conveniently-located local business and service
or payment office open during normal business hours at least eight (8) hours
daily on weekdays, and at least four (4) hours weekly on evenings or
weekends, and adequately staffed with trained customer service
representatives to accept subscriber payments and to respond to service
requests, inquiries, and complaints.



         e.   An emergency system maintenance and repair staff,
capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a
twenty-four (24)-hour per day basis.



         f.   A trained installation staff must provide service
to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven (7) days
after receipt of a request, or such longer time as may be requested by the
subscriber, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated.



         g.   The grantee must schedule, within a specified four
(4)-hour time period Monday through Saturday (legal holidays excluded), all
appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls, and
other activities at the subscriber’s location.  The grantee may schedule
installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the
convenience of the subscriber.  The grantee may not cancel an appointment
with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to
the scheduled appointment.  If a grantee representative is delayed in
keeping an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to honor the
scheduled appointment, the subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of
the scheduled appointment, and the appointment must be rescheduled, as
necessary, at a time that is convenient for the subscriber.  The grantee
must undertake appropriate quality control measures to ensure that the
customer is satisfied with the work.



         h.   Subscribers who have experienced a late or a missed
appointment due to the fault of the grantee will receive either a free
installation or a twenty dollar ($20) credit.



         i.   Upon a subscriber’s request, the grantee will
arrange for pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment provided
by the grantee at the subscriber’s address within fourteen (14) days after
the request is made if the subscriber is mobility-limited.



      2.   Under normal operating conditions, the standards of
subparagraphs  A.1.a., c., f. and g. above must be met not less than ninety
percent (90%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis, and the grantee
must submit to the city quarterly reports setting forth its compliance with
those standards.



   B.   Service standards.



      1.   The grantee will render efficient service, make repairs
promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible.  Except in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions will
occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between
midnight and 6:00 a.m.  Unless the scheduled interruption lasts for no more
than two (2) hours and occurs between midnight and 6:00 a.m., in which event
twenty-four (24) hours’ prior notice must be given to the city, forty-eight
(48) hours’ prior notice must be given to subscribers.



      2.   The grantee will maintain a repair force of technicians
who will respond to subscriber requests for service within the following time
frames:



         a.   For a system outage:  Within two (2) hours,
including weekends, after receiving subscriber calls or requests for service
that by number identify a system outage of sound or picture on one (1) or
more channels, affecting five (5) or more subscribers to the system.



         b.   For an isolated outage:  Within twenty-four (24)
hours, including weekends, after receiving requests for service identifying
an isolated outage of sound or picture on one (1) or more channels.



         c.   For inferior signal quality:  No later than the
following business day, excluding Sundays and holidays, after a request for
service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.



      3.   The grantee will be deemed to have responded to a request
for service under the provisions of this paragraph B. when a technician
arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem if the problem
cannot be corrected remotely.  If a subscriber is not home when the
technician arrives, the technician must leave written notification of arrival.



      4.   The grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement
of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the grantee to
subscribers, unless the defect or malfunction was caused by the subscriber.



      5.   The grantee must determine the nature of the problem
within twenty-four (24) hours after commencing work and resolve all cable
system related problems within three (3) business days, unless technically
infeasible.



   C.   Billing and information standards.



      1.   Subscriber bills must be clear, concise, and
understandable.  Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including,
but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment
charges.  Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing
period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits.



      2.   The first billing to a subscriber after a new
installation or service change must be prorated based upon when the new or
changed service commenced.  Subscribers must not be charged a late fee or
otherwise penalized for any failure attributable to the grantee, including
the failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber.



      3.   In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond in
writing to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days
after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing
statement for receiving that complaint.



      4.   Upon request by a subscriber, credits or refunds must be
provided by grantee to subscribers who experience an outage, interruption, or
disconnection of service of four (4) or more consecutive hours, provided that
such loss of service is neither caused by the subscriber nor attributable to
scheduled repairs, maintenance, or construction in circumstances where
grantee has provided advance written notice to subscriber, and the loss of
service does not exceed the time period specified by grantee.  For
subscribers terminating service, credits or refunds must be issued promptly,
but no later than thirty (30) days after the return of any grantee-supplied
equipment.



      5.   The grantee must provide written information on each of
the following matters at the time of the installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:



         a.   Products and services offered;



         b.   Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other services;



         c.   Installation and service maintenance policies;



         d.   Instructions on the use of the cable service;



         e.   Channel positions of programming carried on the
system;



         f.   Billing and complaint procedures; and



         g.   Consumer protection and service standards and
penalties for noncompliance.



      6.   Subscribers must be notified in writing of any changes in
rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible. 
Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance
of those changes if the change is within the control of the grantee.  In
addition, grantee will endeavor to notify grantor of those changes at least
five (5) working days before subscribers are notified.



      7.   The grantee must maintain a public file containing all
written notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection and
service standards and all published promotional offers made by grantee to
subscribers.  These documents must be maintained for a minimum period of two
(2) years.



   D.   Verification of compliance with standards.



      1.   Upon thirty (30) days’ prior written notice, the city
may require the grantee to provide a written report demonstrating its
compliance with any of the consumer service standards specified in this
section.  The grantee must provide sufficient documentation to enable the
city to verify compliance.



      2.   A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with
the consumer protection and service standards of this section, after the
grantee’s receipt of written notice and an opportunity to cure, may be
deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.



   E.   Subscriber complaints and disputes.



      1.   The grantee must establish written procedures for
receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints without
intervention by the city.  The written procedures must prescribe the manner
in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing,
specifying the subscriber’s grounds for dissatisfaction.  The grantee must
file a copy of these procedures with the city.  These procedures must
include a requirement consistent with § 5.208.090.C.3.



      2.   Upon request, and subject to applicable law protecting
subscriber privacy rights, the city has the right to review the grantee’s
response to subscriber complaints.



      3.   All subscribers have the right to continue receiving
service so long as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are
honored.  If the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or
if the city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the
franchise, the grantee must act to ensure that all subscribers receive
service while the franchise remains in force.



      4.   Upon a change of control of the grantee, or if a new
operator acquires the cable system, the original grantee must cooperate with
the city, the new grantee, or the new operator in maintaining continuity of
service to all subscribers.  During that transition period, the grantee is
entitled to the revenues derived from its operation of the cable system.



   F.   Disconnection and downgrades.



      1.   A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any
time, and the grantee must promptly comply with the subscriber’s request
within seven (7) days or at any later time requested by the subscriber.  No
period of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of service may
be required of subscribers.  Grantee will impose no charges for the
voluntary termination of all services unless a visit to the subscriber’s
premises is required to remove a converter box or other equipment or property
owned by grantee.  Grantee may, in accordance with applicable law, charge a
fee to downgrade service if a service call is required.



      2.   The grantee may disconnect a subscriber’s service in
compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 53088.2(i), (j) and (k).  If service is
disconnected for nonpayment of past due fees or charges, the grantee must
promptly reinstate service upon payment in full by the subscriber of all such
fees and charges, including late charges.



      3.   Notwithstanding the requirements of subparagraph F.2.
above, the grantee may immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the
subscriber is damaging or destroying the grantee’s cable system or
equipment.



      4.   The grantee may also disconnect service to a subscriber
when service causes signal leakage exceeding federal limits.  If service is
disconnected, the grantee will immediately resume service without charge upon
the satisfactory correction of the signal leakage problem if the signal
leakage problem is attributable to the grantee.



      5.   The grantee may also disconnect service in cases where
customers are stealing service or have made threats of physical violence upon
grantee’s personnel.



      6.   Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the grantee
will endeavor to remove its equipment from the subscriber’s premises within
thirty (30) days.



   G.   Negative option bill prohibited.  No charge may be imposed for
any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively
selected.  Payment of the regular monthly bill will not by itself constitute
an affirmative selection.



   H.   Deposits.  Grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory
deposit on equipment provided to subscribers.  Such deposits must be placed
in an interest-bearing account.  The deposit must be returned, with interest
earned to the date of repayment, within thirty (30) days after the equipment
is returned to the grantee.



   I.   Parental control option.  Grantee must provide parental
control devices at no charge to all subscribers who desire to block the video
or audio portion of any pay channels providing adult programming that the
subscriber finds objectionable.  For other programming, such devices will be
provided at a reasonable charge to the subscriber.



   J.   Additional requirements.



 



      1.   All officers, agents, and employees of the grantee, or of
its contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work come
into contact with members of the public, or who require entry onto
subscribers’ premises, must display a photo  identification card.  The
grantee must account for all identification cards at all times.  All
vehicles of the grantee or its subcontractors must be clearly identified as
vehicles engaged in providing services for the grantee.



      2.   In addition to the consumer protection and service
standards specified in this section, the grantee must comply with all
applicable consumer protection and service standards that are imposed upon
cable operators by the following:



         a.   Federal statutes, and the rules, regulations, and
orders of the Federal Communications Commission, including the following:



            (1)   The provisions of 47 C.F.R.76.630, as it now
exists or may later be amended, which relate to compatibility with consumer
electronics equipment; and



            (2)   The provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 551, as it
now exists or may later be amended, which relate to the protection of
subscriber privacy;



         b.   The provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 53054, et
seq., entitled the “Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service
and Information Act;”



         c.   The provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code § 53088, et
seq., entitled the “Video Customer Service Act;”



         d.   The provisions of Cal. Civ. Code § 1722(b)(1)-(6),
which relate to service or repair transactions between cable television
companies and their subscribers; and



         e.   The provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 637.5, which
relate to subscribers’ rights to privacy protection.



      3.   If there is any conflict or inconsistency between a
consumer protection and service standard specified in this section, and a
standard set forth in the statutes, rules, regulations, and orders that are
referenced above in subsection J.2., then the standard that is specified in
this section will apply to the extent authorized by applicable law.



   K.   Penalties for noncompliance.



      1.   Purpose.  The purpose of this paragraph K. is to
authorize monetary penalties for the violation of the customer service
standards established by this section in a manner consistent with the Video
Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 53088 et seq.) and pursuant to
the city’s inherent police powers.  The imposition of penalties authorized
by this paragraph K. will not prevent the city or any other affected party
from exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted by law.



      2.   Administration and appeals.



         a.   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee
is authorized to administer this paragraph K.  Decisions by the City Manager
to assess monetary penalties against the grantee must be in writing and must
contain findings supporting the decisions.  Decisions by the City Manager
are final, unless appealed to the City Council.



         b.   If the grantee or any interested person is
aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager, the aggrieved party may, within
ten (10) days of the written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the
City Council.  The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established
by the City Council for processing the appeal.  The City Council may affirm,
modify, or reverse the decision of the City Manager.



      3.   Schedule of penalties.  The following schedule of
monetary penalties may be assessed against the grantee for the material
breach of the provisions of the customer service standards set forth in this
section, provided that the breach is within the reasonable control of the
grantee:



         a.   For a first material breach:  the maximum penalty
is two hundred dollars ($200) for each day of material breach, but not to
exceed a cumulative total of six hundred dollars ($600) for each occurrence
of the material breach.



         b.   For a second material breach of the same nature
within a twelve (12)-month period for which the city has provided notice and
a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is four hundred dollars
($400) for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed a cumulative
total of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200) for each occurrence of the
material breach.



         c.   For a third or further material breach of the same
nature within a twelve (12)-month period for which the city has provided
notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is one thousand
dollars ($1,000) for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed a
cumulative total of three thousand dollars ($3,000) for each occurrence of
the material breach.



         d.   The maximum penalties referenced above may be
increased by any additional amount authorized by state law.



      4.   Judicial remedy.  This paragraph does not preclude any
affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to that party
without regard to this paragraph K.



      5.   Notification of breach.  The city must give the grantee
written notice of any alleged breach of the consumer service standards and
allow the grantee at least thirty (30) days, or such longer time as may be
reasonably necessary to cure, from receipt of the notice to remedy the
specified breach.  For the purpose of assessing penalties, a material breach
is deemed to have occurred for each day, following the expiration of the
period for cure specified herein, that any breach has not been remedied by
the grantee, irrespective of the number of subscribers affected.



      6.   Limitations.  With respect to any grantee that operates
under a franchise or license agreement with the city, any monetary penalties
assessed under this paragraph K. must be reduced dollar for dollar to the
extent that any liquidated damage or penalty provision of the franchise or
license agreement imposes a monetary obligation on the grantee for the same
customer service failure, and no other monetary damages may be assessed for
that customer service failure.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.092  FEE FOR SUPPORT OF LOCAL CABLE USAGE.



   A.   A fee paid to the city is hereby established for the support of
public, educational, and governmental access facilities and activities within
the city. Unless a higher percentage is authorized by applicable state or
federal law, this fee shall be one percent (1%) of a grantee's gross
revenues, as that term is defined in the grantee's franchise agreement, or in
applicable provisions of state or federal law. This fee is also applicable to
a state video franchise holder operating within the city, which shall pay to
the city one percent (1%) of its gross revenue, as defined in Cal. Pub. Util.
Code § 5860.



   B.   The City Council hereby reauthorizes and readopts the fee on
state- franchised video service providers to support public, educational, and
governmental channel facilities codified in this section, which shall remain
unchanged and in full effect as to all state-franchised video service
providers.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-17-07; Am. Ord. 1192, passed 2-21-17; Am. Ord. 1193,
passed 3-7-17; Am. Ord. 1199, passed 11-21-17)



§ 5.208.094  SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO HOLDERS OF STATE VIDEO
FRANCHISES.



   A.   Franchise fee.  A state video franchise holder operating in
the city shall pay to the city a franchise fee that is equal to five percent
(5%) of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term
"gross revenues" shall be defined as set forth in Cal. Pub. Util. Code §
5860.



   B.   Audit authority. Not more than once annually, the city may
examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state
video franchise to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and
regulations related to the computation and payment of franchise fees.



 



   C.   Customer service penalties under state video franchises.



      1.   The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with
all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards
pertaining to the provision of video service.



      2.   The city shall monitor a state video franchise holder's
compliance with state and federal customer service and protection standards.
The city will provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of
any material breaches of applicable customer service and protection
standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty (30) days
from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material
breaches not remedied within the thirty (30)-day time period will be subject
to the following monetary penalties to be imposed by the city in accordance
with state law:



         a.   For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary
penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) shall be imposed for each day the
violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500) for each violation.



         b.   For a second violation of the same nature within
twelve (12) months, a monetary penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000) shall
be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three
thousand dollars ($3,000) for each violation.



         c.   For a third or further violation of the same nature
within twelve (12) months, a monetary penalty of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in
effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) for each
violation.



      3.   A state video franchise holder may appeal a monetary
penalty assessed by the city within sixty (60) days. After relevant evidence
and testimony is received, and staff reports are submitted, the City Council
will vote to either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The City Council's
decision on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final.



   D.   City response to state video franchise applications.



      1.   Applicants for state video franchises within the
boundaries of the city must concurrently provide to the city complete copies
of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California
Public Utilities Commission. One completed copy must be provided to the City
Clerk.



      2.   The city will provide any appropriate comments to the
California Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an
amendment to an application for a state video franchise.



   E.   PEG channel capacity.  A state video franchise holder that
uses the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its
network to enable the carriage of at least three (3) public, educational, or
governmental (PEG) access channels.



      1.   PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the
city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental
programming.



      2.   Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may
be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG- related
activities.



      3.   The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic
service tier.



      4.   To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not
be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service
tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same
channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by
federal law.



      5.   After the initial designation of PEG access channel
numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written
consent of the city, unless the change is required by federal law.



      6.   Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a
National Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal.



   F.   Interconnection.  Where technically feasible, a state video
franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith
to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access
channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable,
microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State
video franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide
interconnection of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions
and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder
and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable
interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator
to allow the state video franchise holder to interconnect its network with
the incumbent's network at a technically feasible point on the holder's
network as identified by the holder. If no technically-feasible point for
interconnection is available, the state video franchise holder shall make an
interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the
facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection
shall be borne by the state video franchise holder requesting the
interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.



   G.   Emergency Alert System and emergency overrides.  A state video
franchise holder must comply with the Emergency Alert System requirements of
the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be
distributed over the holder's network. Provisions in city-issued franchises
authorizing the city to provide local emergency notifications shall remain in
effect, and shall apply to all state video franchise holders in the city for
the duration of the city-issued franchise, or until the term of the franchise
would have expired had it not been terminated pursuant to Cal. Pub. Util.
Code § 5840(m), or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later.



   H.   Use of public rights-of-way. A state video franchise holder is
subject to the provisions of § 5.208.170 as set forth in Article V of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-17-07)



ARTICLE III.  OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS



§ 5.208.100  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this Article III apply to an open video system
operator, as defined in § 5.208.180, that intends to deliver video
programming to consumers in the city over an open video system.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.110  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   A.   Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to
consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system
operator must file an application with the city.  That application must
include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable:



      1.   The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates
of the applicant.



      2.   Copies of FCC Form 1275, all “Notices of Intent”
filed under 47 C.F.R. 76.1503(b)(1), and the order of the FCC, all of which
relate to certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in
the city in accordance with the Communications Act § 653(a)(1) and the
FCC’s rules.



      3.   The area or areas of the city that the applicant desires
to serve.



      4.   A description of the open video system services that will
be offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.



      5.   A description of the transmission medium that will be
used by the applicant to deliver the open video system services.



      6.   Information in sufficient detail to establish the
applicant’s technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding
the ownership and operation of the open video system described in the
application.



      7.   Financial statements prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant’s
financial ability to:



         a.   Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new
physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city;



         b.   Comply with the city’s public, educational, and
governmental access requirements as specified in § 5.208.130.B.4.; and



         c.   Comply with the city’s requirement that gross
revenue fees be paid in the maximum amount authorized under federal law, as
specified in § 5.208.130.B.2.



      8.   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use,
to purchase, or to lease.



      9.   If the applicant’s operation of the open video system
will require the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the
city, the following additional information must be provided:



         a.   A preliminary construction schedule and completion
dates.



         b.   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and
a network map of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in
sufficient detail to identify:



            (1)   The location and route requested for the
applicant’s proposed facilities.



            (2)   The locations, if any, for interconnection
with the facilities of other telecommunications service providers.



            (3)   The specific structures, improvements,
facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to add,
remove, or relocate on a temporary or permanent basis.



         c.   The applicant’s statement that, in constructing
any new physical plant, the applicant will comply with all applicable
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, including the payment of all
required permit and processing fees.



      10.   The information and documentation that is required to be
submitted to the city by a video provider, as specified below in §
5.208.150.B.



      11.   Such additional information as may be requested by the
City Manager.



      12.   An application fee deposit in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council.



   B.   If any item of information specified above in paragraph A. is
determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, the City
Manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such information be
included in the application.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.120  REVIEW OF THE APPLICATION.



   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application filed under §
5.208.110 that is deemed to be complete, the City Manager will give written
notice to the applicant of the city’s intent to negotiate an agreement
setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the
proposed open video system will be authorized by the city.  The commencement
of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the
city and to the applicant.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.130  AGREEMENT REQUIRED.



   A.   No video programming services may be provided in the city by an
open video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed a
written agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting forth the
terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video
system will be authorized by the city.  That agreement may be authorized and
approved by resolution of the City Council.



   B.   The agreement between the city and the open video system
operator may contain provisions that relate to the following subject matters,
to the extent that such provisions and subject matters are not preempted by
federal law or regulations:



      1.   The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement,
including provisions for its renewal or extension.



      2.   The obligation of the open video system operator to pay
to the city, at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted
under the Communications Act § 622, fees on the gross revenue received by
the operator, as authorized by 47 C.F.R. 76.1511, in accordance with the
following standards and procedures:



         a.   The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be
the maximum amount authorized by § 653(c)(2)(B) of the Communications Act,
which is the rate imposed by the city on the existing franchised cable
operator.



         b.   The term “gross revenue” means:



            (1)   All gross revenue received by an open video
system operator or its affiliates, including all revenue received from
subscribers and all carriage revenue received from unaffiliated video
programming providers; and



            (2)   All advertising revenue received by the
operator or its affiliates in connection with the provision of video
programming, where such revenue is included in the calculation of the cable
franchise fee paid to the city by the incumbent franchised cable operator.



            (3)   The term “gross revenue” does not
include revenue, such as subscriber or advertising revenue, collected by
unaffiliated video programming providers.



      3.   The obligation of the open video system operator to
comply with requirements relating to information collection and
recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and
inspection of records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on the
gross revenue that are required to be paid as specified in subparagraph B.2.
of this section.



      4.   The obligation of the open video system operator to meet
the city’s requirements with respect to public, educational, and
governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment, as
provided for in 47 C.F.R. 76.1505.  In this regard, the following standards
and procedures are applicable:



         a.   The open video system operator is subject to the
same public, educational, and governmental access requirements that apply
within the cable television franchise service area with which its system
overlaps.



         b.   The open video system operator must ensure that all
subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental access channels
within the franchise service area in which the city’s subscribers are
located.



         c.   The open video system operator may negotiate with
the city to establish the operator’s obligations with respect to public,
educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities,
and equipment.  These negotiations may include the city’s franchised cable
operator if the city, the open video system operator, and the franchised
cable operator so desire.



         d.   If the open video system operator and the city are
unable to reach an agreement regarding the operator’s obligations with
respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity,
services, facilities, and equipment within the city’s jurisdiction, then
the following obligations will be imposed:



            (1)   The open video system operator must satisfy
the same public, educational, and governmental access obligations as the
city’s franchised cable operator by providing the same amount of channel
capacity for public, educational, and governmental access and by matching the
city’s franchised cable operator’s annual financial contributions in
support of public, educational, and governmental access services, facilities,
and equipment that are actually used by the city.  For in-kind
contributions, such as cameras or production studios, the open video system
operator may satisfy its statutory obligation by negotiating mutually
agreeable terms with the city’s franchised cable operator, so that public,
educational, and governmental access services to the city are improved or
increased.  If such terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system
operator must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised cable
operator’s depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of facilities,
the annual amortization value.  Any matching contributions provided by the
open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under the
Communications Act § 611.



            (2)   The city will impose upon the open video
system operator the same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the
franchised cable operator with regard to the open video system operator’s
use of channel capacity designated for public, educational, and governmental
access use when that capacity is not being used for such purposes.



         e.   The city’s franchised cable operator is required
under federal law to permit the open video system operator to connect with
its public, educational, and governmental access channel feeds.  The open
video system operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to
accomplish this connection, taking into consideration the physical and
technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. 
If the franchised cable operator and the open video system operator cannot
agree on how to accomplish the connection, the city has the right to
decide.  The city may require that the connection occur on city-owned
property or on public rights-of-way.



         f.   All costs of connection to the franchised cable
operator’s public, educational, and governmental access channel feed must
be borne by the open video system operator.  These costs will be counted
towards the open video system operator’s matching financial contributions
set forth above in subparagraph B.4.d.(1).



         g.   The city will not impose upon the open video system
operator any public, educational, or governmental access obligations that are
greater than those imposed upon the incumbent franchised cable operator.



         h.   If there is no incumbent franchised cable operator,
the provisions of 47 C.F.R. 76.1505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining
the obligations of the open video system operator.



         i.   The open video system operator must adjust its
system to comply with new public, educational, and access obligations imposed
on the city’s incumbent franchised cable operator following a renewal of
the cable television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system
operator will not be required to displace other programmers using its open
video system to accommodate public, educational, and governmental access
channels.  The open video system operator must comply with such new public,
educational, and governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity
is or becomes available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or
to decreased demand for channel capacity.



      5.   If the city and the open video system operator cannot
agree on the application of the FCC’s rules regarding the open video system
operator’s obligations to provide public, educational, and governmental
access under the provisions of subparagraph B.4. set forth above, then either
party may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute
resolution procedures set forth in 47 C.F.R. 76.1514.  No agreement will be
executed by the city until the dispute has been finally resolved.



      6.   If the open video system operator intends to maintain an
institutional network, as defined in the Communications Act § 611(f), the
city will require that educational and governmental access channels be
designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those
channels are designated on the institutional network of the city’s
franchised cable operator.



      7.   The authority of an open video system operator to
exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use
of channel capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of
47 C.F.R. 76.1505(f).



      8.   The obligation of the open video system operator to
comply with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances,
and regulations relating to customer service standards, including those
specified in § 5.208.090.



      9.   If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed
within the city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply
with the following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are
also imposed by the city upon other cable television and telecommunications
service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner:



         a.   Compliance with all applicable state statutes and
city codes, including applications for excavation, encroachment, and
construction permits and the payment of all required permit and inspection
fees.



         b.   The coordination of construction activities.



         c.   Compliance with established standards and
procedures for constructing lines across private property.



         d.   Compliance with all applicable insurance and
indemnification requirements.



         e.   The repair and resurfacing of construction-damaged
streets.



         f.   Compliance with all public safety requirements that
are applicable to cable television and telecommunications service providers
using public property or public rights-of-way.



      10.   Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of
the agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other
remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation, or termination of
the agreement.



      11.   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or
transfer of the open video system.



      12.   Requirements relating to the open video system
operator’s compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws,
rules, and regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system.



      13.   Such additional requirements, conditions, terms,
policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the
open video system operator and that will, in the judgment of the City
Council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health,
welfare, and safety.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



ARTICLE IV.  OTHER VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES AND SYSTEMS



§ 5.208.140  OTHER MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTORS.



   The term “cable system,” as defined in federal law and as set forth
in § 5.208.180, does not include a facility that serves subscribers without
using any public rights-of-way.  Consequently, the categories of
multichannel video programming identified below are not deemed to be “cable
systems” and are therefore exempt from the city’s franchise requirements
and from certain other local regulatory provisions authorized by federal law,
provided that their distribution or transmission facilities do not involve
the use of the city’s public rights-of-way.



   A.   Multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS), also known
as wireless cable, which typically involves the transmission by an
FCC-licensed operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location
using line-of-sight technology.



   B.   Local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), another form of
over-the-air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the
FCC, and which offers video programming, telephony, and data networking
services.



   C.   Direct broadcast satellite (DBS), also referred to as
“direct-to-home satellite services,” which involves the distribution or
broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the
subscriber’s premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution
equipment, except at the subscriber’s premises or in the uplink process to
the satellite.  Local regulation of direct-to-home satellite services is
further proscribed by the following federal statutory provisions:



      1.   47 U.S.C. § 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive
jurisdiction to regulate the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.



      2.   The Telecommunications Act of 1996, § 602, states that a
provider of direct-to-home satellite service is exempt from the collection or
remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local taxing
jurisdiction on direct-to-home satellite service.  The terms “tax” and
“fee” are defined by federal statute to mean any local sales tax, local
use tax, local intangible tax, local income tax, business license tax,
utility tax, privilege tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees,
local telecommunications tax, or any other tax, license, or fee that is
imposed for the privilege of doing business, regulating, or raising revenue
for a local taxing jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.150  VIDEO PROVIDERS – REGISTRATION; CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.



   A.   Notwithstanding the definition of the term “video provider”
in § 5.208.180, the provisions of this section do not apply to providers of
direct-to-home satellite services, also known as direct broadcast satellite
(DBS).



   B.   Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations
of a video provider, as that term is defined in § 5.208.180 (but excluding
DBS), are specified in a franchise, license, lease, or similar written
agreement with the city, a video provider must comply with all applicable
provisions of the following state statutes:



      1.   The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and
Information Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 53054, et seq.)



      2.   The Video Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§
53088, et seq.)



   C.   All video providers that are operating in the city on the
effective date of this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after
its effective date, must register with the city; provided, however, that this
registration requirement is not applicable to any video



provider that has executed a franchise, license, lease or similar written
agreement with the city.  The registration form must include or be
accompanied by the following:



      1.   The video provider’s name, address, and local telephone
numbers.



      2.   The names of the officers of the video provider.



      3.   A copy of the video provider’s written policies and
procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of
customer complaints, as required by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 53054, et seq. 
These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards
regarding the following:



         a.   Installation, disconnection, service and repair
obligations, employee identification, and service call response time and
scheduling.



         b.   Customer service telephone and office hours.



         c.   Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and
credits.



         d.   Procedures for termination of service.



         e.   Notice of the deletion of a programming service,
the changing of channel assignments, or an increase in rates.



         f.   Complaint procedures and procedures for bill
dispute resolution.



         g.   The video provider’s written acknowledgment of
its obligation under Cal. Gov’t Code § 53055.1 to provide to new customers
a notice describing the customer service standards specified above in
subparagraphs C.3.a. through f. at the time of installation or when service
is initiated.  The notice must also include, in addition to all of the
information described above in subparagraphs C.3.a. through f., all of the
following:



            (1)   A listing of the services offered by the
video provider that clearly describes all levels of service and the rates for
each level of service.



            (2)   The telephone number or numbers through
which customers may subscribe to, change, or terminate service, request
customer service, or seek general or billing information.



            (3)   A description of the rights and remedies
that the video provider may make available to its customers if the video
provider does not materially meet its customer service standards.



         h.   The video provider’s written commitment to
distribute annually to its employees and customers, and to the city, a notice
describing the customer service standards specified above in subparagraphs
C.3.a. through f.  This annual notice must include the report of the video
provider on its performance in meeting its customer service standards, as
required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53055.2.  Subject to the written notice and
cure provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code § 53056(b), a video provider that fails
to distribute the annual notice required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53055.1 will
be assessed a monetary penalty in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500) for
each year in which the annual notice is not distributed to all of its
customers.



      4.   Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from
its payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing
and processing the registration form.



      5.   In addition to the registration fee specified above in
subsection C.4., the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the
city, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in
resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which
dispute resolution is mandated by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53088.2(o).



   D.   The customer service obligations imposed upon video providers
by the Video Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code § 53088 et seq.)
consist of the following:



      1.   Every video provider must render reasonably efficient
service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only as necessary.



      2.   All video provider personnel contacting subscribers or
potential subscribers outside the office of the provider must be clearly
identified as associated with the video provider.



      3.   At the time of installation, and annually thereafter, all
video providers must provide to all customers a written notice of the
programming offered, the prices for that programming, the provider’s
installation and customer service policies, and the name, address, and
telephone number of the city’s office that is designated for receiving
complaints.



      4.   All video providers must have knowledgeable, qualified
company representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries
Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, during normal business hours.



      5.   All video providers must provide to customers a toll-free
or local telephone number for installation, service, and complaint calls. 
These calls must be answered promptly by the video providers.



      6.   All video providers must render bills that are accurate
and understandable.



      7.   All video providers must respond promptly to a complete
outage in a customer’s service.  The response must occur within
twenty-four (24) hours of the reporting of that outage to the provider,
except in those situations beyond the reasonable control of the video
provider.  A video provider will be deemed to respond to a complete outage
when a company representative arrives at the outage location within
twenty-four (24) hours and begins to resolve the problem.



      8.   All video providers must provide a minimum of thirty (30)
days’ written notice before increasing rates or deleting channels.  All
video providers must make every reasonable effort to submit the notice to the
city in advance of its distribution to customers.  The thirty (30)-day
notice is waived if the increases in rates or deletion of channels are
outside the control of the video provider.  In those cases, the video
provider must make reasonable efforts to provide customers with as much
notice as possible.



      9.   All video providers must allow every residential customer
who pays his or her bill directly to the video provider at least fifteen (15)
days from the date the bill for services is mailed to the customer, to pay
the listed charges unless otherwise agreed to pursuant to a residential
rental agreement establishing tenancy.  Customer payments must be posted
promptly.  No video provider may terminate residential service for
nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the video provider furnishes notice
of the delinquency and impending termination at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the proposed termination.  The notice must be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the customer to whom the service is billed.  Notice must not be mailed until
the sixteenth day after the date the bill for services was mailed to the
customer.  The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part
of a billing statement.  No video provider may assess a late fee any earlier
than the twenty-second day after the bill for service has been mailed.



      10.   Every notice of termination of service pursuant to the
preceding subparagraph D.9. must include all of the following information:



         a.   The name and address of the customer whose account
is delinquent.



         b.   The amount of the delinquency.



         c.   The date by which payment is required in order to
avoid termination of service.



         d.   The telephone number of a representative of the
video provider who can provide additional information and handle complaints
or initiate an investigation concerning the service and charges in
question.  Service may only be terminated on days in which the customer can
reach a representative of the video provider either in person or by telephone.



      11.   Any service terminated without good cause must be
restored without charge for the service restoration.  Good cause includes,
but is not limited to, failure to pay, payment by check for which there are
insufficient funds, theft of service, abuse of equipment or system personnel,
or other similar subscriber actions.



      12.   All video providers must issue requested refund checks
promptly, but no later than forty-five (45) days following the resolution of
any dispute, and following the return of the equipment supplied by the video
provider, if service is terminated.



      13.   All video providers must issue security or customer
deposit refund checks promptly, but no later than forty-five (45) days
following the termination of service, less any deductions permitted by law.



      14.   Video providers must not disclose the name and address
of a subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists or for other
commercial purposes not reasonably related to the conduct of the businesses
of the video providers or their affiliates, unless the video providers have
provided to the subscriber a notice, separate or included in any other
customer notice, that clearly and conspicuously describes the subscriber’s
ability to prohibit that disclosure.  Video providers must provide an
address and telephone number for a local subscriber to use without toll
charge to prevent disclosure of the subscriber’s name and address.



   E.   As authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53088(q), the following
schedule of penalties is adopted.  These penalties may be imposed for the
material breach by a video provider of the consumer protection and service
standards that are set forth above in paragraph D., provided that the breach
is within the reasonable control of the video provider.  These penalties are
in addition to any other remedies authorized by this article or by any other
law, and the city has discretion to elect the remedy that it will apply. The
imposition of penalties authorized by this paragraph E. will not prevent the
city or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the
extent permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial remedy as
provided below in subparagraph E.2.



      1.   Schedule of penalties.



         a.   For a first material breach: the maximum penalty is
two hundred dollars ($200) for each day of material breach, but not to exceed
a cumulative total of six hundred dollars ($600) for each occurrence of
material breach, irrespective of the number of customers affected.



         b.   For a second material breach of the same nature for
which a monetary penalty was previously assessed within the preceding twelve
(12)- month period: the maximum penalty is four hundred dollars ($400) per
day, not to exceed a cumulative total of one thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200) for each occurrence of the material breach, irrespective of the
number of customers affected.



         c.   For a third or further material breach of the same
nature for which a monetary penalty was previously assessed within the
preceding twelve (12)-month period: the maximum penalty is one thousand
dollars ($1,000) per day, not to exceed a cumulative total of three thousand
dollars ($3,000) for each occurrence of the material breach, irrespective of
the number of customers affected.



         d.   The maximum penalties referenced above may be
increased by any additional amount authorized by state law.



      2.   Judicial remedies not affected.  The imposition of
penalties in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph E.1. above does
not preclude any affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy that is
available to that party.



      3.   Administration, notice, and appeal.



         a.   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee
is authorized to administer this paragraph E.  Decisions by the City Manager
to assess penalties against a video provider must be in writing and must
contain findings supporting the decisions.  Decisions by the City Manager
are final, unless appealed to the City Council.



         b.   If the video provider or any interested person is
aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager, the aggrieved party may, within
ten (10) days of the written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the
City Council.  The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established
by the City Council for processing the appeal.  The City Council may affirm,
modify, or reverse the decision of the City Manager.



         c.   The imposition of monetary penalties under
subparagraph E.1. above is subject to the following requirements and
limitations:



            (1)   The city must give the video provider
written notice of any alleged material breach and must allow the video
provider at least thirty (30) days from receipt of that notice to remedy the
breach.



            (2)   For the purpose of assessing monetary
penalties, a material breach will be deemed to have occurred for each day
following the expiration of the period for cure specified in subparagraph
E.3.c.(1) above that the material breach has not been remedied by the video
provider, irrespective of the number of customers affected.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



§ 5.208.160  TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDED BY TELEPHONE CORPORATIONS.



   A.   The City Council finds and determines as follows:



      1.   The federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and
declares invalid all state rules that restrict entry or limit competition in
both local and long-distance telephone service.



      2.   The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) is
primarily responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition,
and it issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to new
entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange
services and related telecommunications service, whether using their own
facilities or the facilities or services provided by other authorized
telephone corporations.



      3.   Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 234(a) defines a “telephone
corporation” as “every corporation or person owning, controlling,
operating, or managing any telephone line for compensation within this
state.”



      4.   Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 616 provides that a telephone
corporation “may condemn any property necessary for the construction and
maintenance of its telephone line.”



      5.   Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 2902 authorizes municipal
corporations to retain their powers of control to supervise and regulate the
relationships between a public utility and the general public in matters
affecting the health, convenience, and safety of the general public,
including matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public
utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any
public utility on, under, or above any public streets.



      6.   Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 7901 authorizes telephone and
telegraph corporations to construct telephone or telegraph lines along and
upon any public road or highway, along or across any of the waters or lands
within this state, and to erect poles, posts, piers, or abutments for
supporting the insulators, wires, and other necessary fixtures of their
lines, in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the public use
of the road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters.



      7.   Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 7901.1 confirms the right of
municipalities to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place, and
manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, which control
must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner.  Nothing in §
7901.1 adds to or subtracts from any existing authority that municipalities
have with respect to the imposition of fees.



      8.   Cal. Gov’t Code § 50030 provides that any permit fee
imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair, or upgrading of
telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles, or antennas, by a
telephone corporation that has obtained all required authorizations from the
CPUC and the FCC to provide telecommunications services, must not exceed the
reasonable costs of providing the service for which the fee is charged, and
must not be levied for general revenue purposes.



   B.   In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory
authorizations and requirements set forth above in paragraph A., the
following regulatory provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation
that desires to provide telecommunications service by means of facilities
that are proposed to be constructed within the city’s public rights-of-way:



      1.   The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as
may be applicable, an excavation permit, an encroachment permit, or a
building permit (ministerial permit).



      2.   In addition to the information required by this code in
connection with an application for a ministerial permit, a telephone
corporation must submit to the city the following supplemental information:



         a.   A copy of the certificate of public convenience and
necessity issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC
decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the telecommunications
service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the
city’s public rights-of-way.  Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided
telecommunications service under administratively equivalent documentation
issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that documentation in lieu of a
certificate of public convenience and necessity.



         b.   If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a
certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate as a
“competitive local carrier,” the following additional requirements are
applicable:



            (1)   As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the
CPUC, the applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the city a
quarterly report that describes the type of construction and the location of
each construction project proposed to be undertaken in the city during the
calendar quarter in which the application is filed, so that the city can
coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary.



            (2)   If the applicant’s proposed construction
project will extend beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas
or other rights-of-way, the applicant must establish that it has filed a
petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of public convenience and
necessity and that the proposed construction project has been subjected to a
full-scale environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by Decision No.
95-12-057 of the CPUC.



            (3)   The applicant must inform the city whether
its proposed construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation
measures specified in the Negative Declaration [“Competitive Local Carriers
(CLCs) Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout
California”] or to the Mitigation Monitoring Plan adopted in connection
with Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC.  The city’s issuance of a
ministerial permit will be conditioned upon the applicant’s compliance with
all applicable mitigation measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the
CPUC upon telephone corporations that are designated as “competitive local
carriers.”



   C.   The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later
acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or telecommunications
service that is provided, or proposed to be provided, by a telephone
corporation.  These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the
imposition of reasonable conditions in addition to or different from those
set forth in this section, the exaction of a fee or other form of
consideration or compensation for use of public rights-of-way, and related
matters; provided, however, that such regulatory rights and authority must be
consistent with federal and state law that is applicable to cable or
telecommunications services provided by telephone corporations.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



ARTICLE V.  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 5.208.170  FINDINGS; POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.



   A.   The City Council finds and determines that numerous and
repetitive excavations in the public rights-of-way diminish the useful life
of the surface pavement and generally cause adverse negative impacts for
local residents, local businesses, and vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
The City Council further finds and determines that the utility substructure
in the public rights-of-way is subject to potential adverse negative impacts
as a consequence of new economic and regulatory policies that foster
increased competition between various utility service providers, including
telephone corporations, and between other service providers, such as cable
system operators.  In order to mitigate these potential adverse negative
impacts, the following policies are adopted:



      1.   The City Manager is directed to develop and to implement
public rights-of-way policies and procedures that incorporate, to the extent
reasonably feasible and consistent with all applicable laws and regulations,
the following requirements that are intended to encourage the shared use by
utility and other service providers of existing facilities in the public
rights-of-way:



         a.   A requirement that utility and other service
providers requesting permits review information provided by the city that
identifies the location of facilities, such as underground conduits, that are
available for shared use, and the owners of those facilities.



         b.   A requirement that utility and other service
providers requesting permits submit a written statement that describes in
reasonable detail the efforts made to obtain from other utility service
providers the right to use excess capacity within existing facilities, and to
thereby avoid the construction of new facilities.



         c.   Any additional requirements that will encourage
utility and other service providers to share excess capacity within
previously-constructed facilities and to coordinate the construction of new
facilities in order to minimize the number of excavations in the public
rights-of-way.



      2.   The City Manager is directed to ensure that all utility
and other service providers, including telephone corporations and cable
system operators, comply with all local design, construction, maintenance and
safety standards that are consistent with state and federal laws and
regulations and that are contained within, or are related to, any permit that
authorizes the construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way,
including all applicable insurance provisions.



      3.   Based upon the city’s projected plans for street
construction or renovation projects, the City Manager is authorized to
establish on a quarterly basis one (1) or more construction time periods or
“windows” for the installation of facilities within arterial or collector
streets, or where city rehabilitation or maintenance activities within the
public rights-of-way will be affected.  Cable system operators, telephone
corporations, and other utility service providers that submit applications
for permits to construct facilities after a predetermined date may be
required to delay such construction until the next quarterly “window”
that is established by the city; provided, however, that exemptions and
exceptions may be established for the emergency repair of facilities within
arterial or collector streets, or for safety-related work that must be
completed prior to the next construction time period or “window.”



   B.   The City Council finds and determines that the installation in
the public rights-of-way of numerous above-ground facilities by utility
service providers, including telephone corporations, and other service
providers may create safety hazards and adverse visual impacts. 
Consequently, the city is authorized to impose, in a manner consistent with
all applicable laws and regulations, reasonable conditions in order to
mitigate those potential adverse impacts that may result, whether on an
individual or a cumulative basis, from permitted above-ground facilities. 
Those conditions may include or relate to, without limitation, the following:



      1.   Prior to issuance of the requisite permits, all
above-ground facilities proposed to be installed by a utility or other
service provider in the public rights-of-way must be clearly delineated on
the plans when they are submitted for the city’s review.



      2.   The design and installation by qualified professionals of
landscaping and barriers to minimize public view of above-ground facilities
whose location has been approved by the city.



      3.   The maintenance of all above-ground facilities in good
condition, including compliance with the city’s maintenance standards and
ordinances regarding graffiti removal.



      4.   The placement of above-ground facilities, such as
overhead drops, as close as possible to other utility drops, consistent with
all applicable electrical codes.



      5.   Reasonable limitations upon the number of above-ground
facilities that may be installed within a designated geographical area.



      6.   Reasonable limitations upon the dimensions or volume, or
both, of above-ground facilities.



      7.   The specification of colors, as are available from the
manufacturer used by the service provider, of above-ground facilities
reasonably requested by the city to ensure that these facilities blend with
the surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible.



      8.   Such additional conditions regulating the time, place,
and manner of installations of above-ground facilities as will reasonably
mitigate potential safety hazards and adverse visual impacts attributable to
these facilities.



   C.   The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later
acquire to adopt and implement city-wide requirements for the undergrounding
of above-ground facilities, or any portion thereof, in a competitively
neutral and non-discriminatory manner.  To the extent authorized by law, all
utility and other service providers will be required to comply with those
requirements at their sole expense.



   D.   Disputes relating to the application of the policies,
conditions and limitations set forth in this Article V to utility service
providers, cable system operators, holders of state video franchises, or
other users of the public rights-of-way, as well as denials of encroachment
permit applications for use of public rights-of-way, may be appealed to the
City Council for a final determination.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04; Am. Ord. 1099, passed 4-17-07)



ARTICLE VI.  DEFINITIONS



§ 5.208.180 DEFINED TERMS AND PHRASES.



   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and
words in the singular include the plural number.



   B.   Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases
not defined in this section will be given their meaning as used in 47 U.S.C.,
as amended, and, if not defined in that code, their meaning as used in 47
C.F.R.



   CABLE SERVICE.  The one (1)-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if
any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or
other programming service.  For the purposes of this definition, “video
programming” means programming provided by, or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and
“other programming service” means information that a cable system
operator makes available to all subscribers generally.



   CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION
SYSTEM.  A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is
provided to multiple subscribers within a community.  CABLE SYSTEM does not
include:



      1.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations;



      2.   A facility that serves subscribers without using any
public right-of-way;



      3.   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole
or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except
that such facility will be considered a CABLE SYSTEM (other than for purposes
specified in § 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent such facility
is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers,
unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services;



      4.   An open video system that complies with § 653 of the
Communications Act; or



      5.   Any facilities of an electric utility that are used
solely for operating its electric utility system.



   CABLE SYSTEM OPERATOR.  Any person or group of persons:



      1.   Who provides cable service over a cable system and
directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in
that cable system; or



      2.   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.



   CITY.  The City of Brea as represented by its City Council or by any
delegate acting within the scope of its delegated authority.



   ______ C.F.R. ____.  The Code of Federal Regulations.  Thus, the
citation of “47 C.F.R. 80.1” refers to Title 47, part 80, section 1, of
the Code of Federal Regulations.



   COMMUNICATIONS ACT.  The Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. §§
153, et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.



   FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.  The federal administrative
agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate
telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers on a
national level.



   FRANCHISE.  An initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial
authorization, granted by the City Council, whether such authorization is
designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract,
certificate, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a
cable system or an open video system.



   FRANCHISE FEE.  Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind that is
authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as
compensation in the nature of rent for the grantee’s use of the public
rights-of-way.  FRANCHISE FEE does not include:



      1.   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability
(including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and
cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee, or
assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable
subscribers);



      2.   Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be
incurred by a grantee for public, educational, or governmental access
facilities;



      3.   Requirements or charges that are incidental to the award
or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security
funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or
liquidated damages; or



      4.   Any fee imposed under 17 U.S.C.



   FRANCHISE SERVICE AREA or SERVICE AREA.  The entire geographic area of
the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted,
unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a
franchise, or in a franchise agreement.



   GRANTEE.  Any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with
this chapter, and that person’s lawful successor, transferee, or assignee.



   MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR or VIDEO PROGRAMMING
DISTRIBUTOR.  A person such as, but not limited to, a cable system operator,
an open video system operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution
service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only
satellite program distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video
programming for purchase by subscribers or customers.



   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM.  A facility consisting of a set of transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that
is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, provided that the FCC
has certified that such system is authorized to operate in the city and
complies with 47 C.F.R. 1500 et seq., entitled “Open Video Systems.”



   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM OPERATOR.  Any person or group of persons who
provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through one
(1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system,
or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation of
that open video system.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, limited liability company,
association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity.



   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES or PEG ACCESS
FACILITIES.  The total of the following:



      1.   Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public,
educational, or government use; and



      2.   Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel
capacity.



   SUBSCRIBER or CUSTOMER or CONSUMER.  Any person who, for any purpose,
subscribes to the services provided by a multichannel video programming
distributor and who pays the charges for those services.



   STREET or PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Each of the following that has been
dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others
and is located within the city limits:  streets, roadways, highways,
avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, and similar
public property that the city from time to time authorizes to be included
within the definition of a street.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  The transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without
change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT.  Equipment, other than customer premises
equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to provide
telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that
equipment.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  The offering of telecommunications
directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be
effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or
facilities that are used.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER.  Any provider of
telecommunications service.



   ____ U.S.C. § ____.  The United States Code.  Thus, the citation of
“47 U.S.C. § 153” refers to Title 47, section 153, of the United States
Code.



   VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER.  Any person or group of persons who has
the right under the federal copyright laws to select and to contract for the
carriage of specific video programming on a cable system or an open video
system.



   VIDEO PROVIDER.  Any person, company, or service that provides one (1)
or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a home,
multi-family dwelling complex, congregate-living complex, condominium,
apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that service, whether
directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public
rights-of-way are used in the delivery of that video programming.  A VIDEO
PROVIDER includes, without limitation, providers of cable television service,
open video system service, master antenna television, satellite master
antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution
services, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



ARTICLE VII.  VIOLATIONS; SEVERABILITY



§ 5.208.190  VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   Unless precluded by applicable law, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as
provided for in Chapter 1.04.



   B.   The misdemeanor penalty specified above in paragraph A. is not
applicable to a violation of any provision of this chapter for which another
sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease, or
similar written agreement between the city and a multichannel video
programming distributor or telecommunications service provider.



   C.   The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1082, passed 11-16-04)



CHAPTER 5.212:  ESCORT BUREAUS



Section



   5.212.010   Purpose and intent



   5.212.020   Definitions



   5.212.030   Permit required



   5.212.040   Permit term



   5.212.050   Permit renewal



   5.212.060   Exception



   5.212.070   Application for permit



   5.212.080   Employment and activities of escorts



   5.212.090   Permit for escorts required



   5.212.100   Term of escort permit



   5.212.110   Escort permit renewal



   5.212.120   Permit identification card



   5.212.130   Escort permit renewal application



   5.212.140   Prohibited activities



   5.212.150   Sale or transfer



   5.212.160   Change of location or name



   5.212.170   Prohibited conduct



   5.212.180   Suspension or revocation of permit



   5.212.190   Conducting as a nuisance



   5.212.200   Applicability to existing business



   5.212.210   Appeal of denial or revocation of permit



§ 5.212.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose and intent of the City Council by the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, that the operation of an escort bureau,
as defined in this chapter, should be regulated for the protection of the
public from the perils of fire, hazard to health, and for the preservation of
peace and welfare of the community.



('61 Code, § 6A.1)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS OR COMMERCE.  That term as is defined in § 5.00.020 of this
code.



   ESCORT.  Any person who, for pecuniary compensation:



      1.   Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons to,
from or about social affairs, entertainments, places of public assembly or
places of amusement located or situated within the city; or



      2.   Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons in or
about any place of public or private resort or within any private quarters
located or situated within the city; or



      3.   Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons in or
about any business or commercial establishment, or part or portion thereof,
located or situated within the city.



   ESCORT BUREAU.  Any business, agency, or self-employed or independent
escort who, for pecuniary compensation, furnishes or offers to furnish
escorts.



   PECUNIARY COMPENSATION.  Any commission, fee, gratuity, hire, profit,
reward or any other form of consideration.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or
association.



   PROFIT INTEREST.  Any interest or share in the present or prospective
profit of an escort bureau.



('61 Code, § 6A.2)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.030  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on
in or upon any premises or real property, located or situated within the
city, the activities of an escort bureau, unless there has been granted to
such person a valid permit, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  A
separate permit shall, be required for each location within the city at which
an escort bureau is to be established.



('61 Code, § 6A.3)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.040  PERMIT TERM.



   The term of an escort bureau permit, unless sooner suspended or
revoked, shall be for a period of one (1) year.



('61 Code, § 6A.4)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.050  PERMIT RENEWAL.



   An escort bureau permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period
of not to exceed one (1) year on written application to the Chief of Police
made at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the current
valid permit.  The application for renewal of a permit shall contain all of
the information required by § 5.212.050 of this chapter and shall be
processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 6A.5)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.060  EXCEPTION.



   The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no
effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to a person in the lawful
business of an employment agency licensed under the laws of the state.



('61 Code, § 6A.6)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.070  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   A.   Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renew an existing
permit, to operate an escort bureau, shall make application to the Chief of
Police or his or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such
application for a permit or renewal of a permit, a nonrefundable fee, as
established by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the
Department of Financial Services to defray, in part, the cost of the
investigation and report required by this chapter.  The Department of
Finance shall issue a receipt showing that such application or renewal fee
has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied by the
applicant to the Chief of Police at the time such application is filed.
Permit issuance or renewal fees required under this chapter shall be in
addition to any business license, permit or fee required under any other
chapter of this code.



   B.   Neither the filing of an application for a permit or renewal
thereof, nor payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize the
conducting of an escort bureau until such permit has been granted or renewed.



   C.   Each applicant for an escort bureau permit, or renewal thereof,
shall furnish the following information:



      1.   The present or proposed address where the business is to
be conducted;



      2.   The full true name under which the business will be
conducted;



      3.   The full true name and any other names used by the
applicant;



      4.   The present residence and business addresses and
telephone numbers of the applicant;



      5.   Each residence and business address of the applicant for
the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of filing of the
application and the inclusive dates of each such address;



      6.   California driver's license or identification number and
Social Security Number of the applicant;



      7.   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least
eighteen (18) years of age;



      8.   The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair
and date of birth;



      9.   Two (2) photographs of the applicant, at least two (2)
inches by two (2) inches in size, taken within the six (6) month period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;



      10.   The business, occupation or employment history of the
applicant for the three (3) year period immediately preceding the date of the
filing of the application.



      11.   The permit history of the applicant, for the five (5)
year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any
other city, county, state, or territory, has ever had any similar license or
permit issued by such agency revoked or suspended, or has had any
professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended due to
misconduct as described in paragraph H.5. of this section;



      12.   All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant,
including ordinance violations but excepting minor traffic offenses (any
traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor
offense), stating the date, place, nature and sentence of such conviction;



      13.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the
corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of
incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation,
and the names, residence addresses, and dates of birth of each of its current
officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent
(5%) of the stock in the corporation.  If the applicant is a partnership,
the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses and dates of
birth of each of the partners, including limited partners and profit interest
holders.  If the applicant is a limited partnership, the applicant shall
furnish a copy of the certificate of limited partnership as filed with the
County Clerk. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the
provisions of this paragraph pertaining to corporations shall apply. The
corporation or partnership applicant shall designate one (1) of its officers
or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer.  Such
designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of
an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one (1) application fee
shall be charged;



      14.   A definition of the service to be provided;



      15.   The true names and residential addresses of all persons
employed or intended to be employed as escorts;



      16.   Such other identification and/or information as the
Chief of Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters
required to be set forth in the application.



   D.   The applicant or a designated responsible managing officer, if
the applicant is a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the
Police Department of the city and produce proof that the required application
or renewal fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the
information and supporting documentation required by paragraph C. of this
section.



   E.   The Chief of Police may require the applicant, or the
designated responsible managing officer, if the applicant is a partnership or
corporation, to appear in person at the Police Department in order to be
photographed and finger-printed.



   F.   When any change occurs regarding the written information
required by paragraph C. of this section to be included in the application,
the applicant or permit holder, as the case may be, shall give written
notification of such change to the Chief of Police within five (5) business
days after such change.



   G.   The Chief of Police shall have a reasonable period of time in
which to investigate the application and background of the applicant.  The
Chief of Police, or his or her representative, shall, within thirty (30) days
after the date of the filing of the application, render a written
recommendation to the City Manager, as to approval or denial of the
application for the permit or renewal thereof.



   H.   The City Manager, or his or her designee (hereinafter referred
to as “City Manager”), within ten (10) days after receiving the
application and aforementioned recommendation from the Chief of Police, shall
grant the permit, or renewal thereof, only if he or she finds that all of the
following requirements have been met:



      1.   The required fees have been paid;



      2.   The application conforms in all respects to the
provisions of this chapter;



      3.   The applicant has not knowingly made a material
misrepresentation of fact in the application;



      4.   The applicant if an individual; or any of the directors,
officers, or stockholders holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of
the corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, the
holder of any lien of any nature, if a natural person, or profit interest
holder, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
existing or proposed escort bureau, or a natural person employed or
contracted with to be an escort or to provide escort services; has not been
convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony
crime involving criminal misstatement or sexual misconduct including, but not
limited to, all offenses listed in Penal Code § 290, Penal Code §§ 311.2
through 311.7, Penal Code §§ 314 through 318, and subsections (a), (b),
(c), (d) or (h) of § 647 of the Penal Code, or any offenses involving
pimping, pandering, prostitution or lewd conduct; or has knowingly permitted,
through an act of omission or commission, his or her employee or agent, while
so employed, to engage in any type of criminal misstatement or sexual
misconduct offense, whether misdemeanor or felony (under such circumstances,
the conduct of the employee or agent, if such resulted in a conviction or a
plea of nolo contendere or guilty, will be considered imputed to the
principal and shall be grounds for permit denial);



      5.   The escort bureau, as proposed by the applicant, would
comply with all applicable city, county and state laws, including but not
limited to health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards; and



      6.   The applicant, manager or other person principally in
charge of the operation of the business is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.



   I.   If the City Manager does not find that all of the requirements
set forth in paragraphs H.1. through 6. of this section have been met, he or
she shall deny application for the permit or renewal thereof.  In the event
the application for the permit or renewal thereof is denied by the City
Manager, written notice of such denial shall be given within ten (10)
business days to the applicant, specifying the ground or grounds of such
denial.  Notice of denial of the application for the permit, or renewal
thereof, shall be deemed to have been served if it in fact is personally
served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with
postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at the residence address set
forth in the application for the permit or renewal thereof.  Any applicant
whose application for an escort bureau permit, or renewal thereof, has been
denied by the City Manager, may appeal such denial to the City Council as
provided in § 5.212.200 of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 6A.7)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.080  EMPLOYMENT AND ACTIVITIES OF ESCORTS.



   A.   No holder of an escort bureau permit shall employ as an escort
any person under eighteen (18) years of age.



   B.   No holder of an escort bureau permit shall furnish any escort
to, or accept employment from any patron, customer or person to be escorted,
who is under eighteen (18) years of age, except at the special instance and
written request of a parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of
the person upon whose behalf the escort is engaged.  The written request
shall be carried by the escort during the period so employed.



('61 Code, § 6A.8)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.090  PERMIT FOR ESCORTS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an escort unless there
has been granted to such person a valid permit, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.  Such permit shall be issued to the address of the employer of
the escort, who must in turn also hold a valid escort bureau permit issued by
the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 6A.9)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.100  TERM OF PERMIT.



   The term of an escort permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall
be for a period of one (1) year.



('61 Code, § 6A.10)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.110  ESCORT PERMIT RENEWAL.



   An escort permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period of one
(1) year on written application to the Chief of Police made at least ninety
(90) days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. The
application for renewal of a permit shall contain all of the information
required in § 5.212.120 of this chapter, and shall be processed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 6A.11)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.120  PERMIT IDENTIFICATION CARD.



   Each escort permit holder shall be issued an identification card which
will also serve as an escort permit. The permit holder shall carry such card
upon his or her person when acting as an escort and produce the same for
inspection upon request.  Each permit holder shall immediately surrender, to
the Chief of Police, any escort permit issued by the city upon the final
suspension, revocation or expiration of such permit, or upon leaving
employment as an escort.



('61 Code, § 6A.12)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.130  ESCORT PERMIT RENEWAL APPLICATION.



   A.   Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renewal of an
existing permit, to act as an escort, shall make application to the Chief of
Police or his or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such
application for a permit or renewal of a permit, a nonrefundable fee, as
established by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the
Department of Financial Services to defray, in part, the cost of the
investigation and report required by this chapter. The Department of Finance
shall issue a receipt showing that such permit application or renewal fee has
been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied by the applicant
to the Chief of Police at the time such application is filed. Permit fees
required under this chapter shall be in addition to any business license,
permit or fee required under any other chapter of this code.



   B.   Neither the filing of an application for a permit, or renewal
thereof, nor the payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize a
person to act as an escort until such permit has been granted or renewed.



   C.   Each applicant for an escort permit, or renewal thereof, shall
furnish the information required by § 5.212.070.C.1. through 12. of this
chapter, and shall, in addition, furnish the following information:



      1.   Satisfactory evidence that the applicant is employed, or
has been offered employment, by an escort bureau holding a valid permit
issued by the city, including the name and address of the employer or
prospective employer and the fact that such employment or continued
employment is contingent upon the issuance of said permit; and



      2.   Such other identification and information as the Chief of
Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to
be set forth in the application.



   D.   The Chief of Police may require the applicant to appear in
person at the Police Department in order to be photographed or fingerprinted.



   E.   The Chief of Police shall have a reasonable period of time in
which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. The
Chief of Police, or his or her representative, shall, within thirty (30) days
after the date of the filing of the application, render a written
recommendation to the City Manager as to approval or denial of the
application for the permit or renewal thereof.



   F.   The City Manager, within ten (10) business days after receiving
the application and aforementioned recommendation, from the Chief of Police,
shall grant the permit, or renewal thereof, only if he or she finds that all
of the requirements of § 5.212.070.H.1. through 3. have been met and, in
addition, if he or she finds that the following additional requirements have
been met:



      1.   The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;



      2.   The applicant has not been convicted or pleaded nolo
contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime involving criminal
misstatement or sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all offenses
listed in Penal Code § 290, Penal Code §§ 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code
§§ 314 through 318, and subsections (a), (b), (c), (d) or (h) of § 647 of
the Penal Code, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution or
lewd conduct.



   G.   If the City Manager does not find that all of the requirements
set forth in paragraph F. of this section have been met, he or she shall deny
the application for the permit or renewal thereof. In the event that
application for the permit, or renewal thereof, is denied by the City
Manager, written notice of such denial shall be given within ten (10)
business days to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such
denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit, or renewal
thereof shall be deemed to have been served if it, in fact, is personally
served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with
postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence
address as set forth in the application for the permit or renewal thereof.
Any applicant whose application for an escort permit, or renewal thereof, has
been denied by the City Manager, may appeal such denial to the City Council
as provided in § 5.212.210.



   H.   When any change occurs regarding the written information
required by paragraph C. of this section, the applicant or permit holder, as
the case may be, shall give written notification of such change to the Chief
of Police within five (5) business days after such change.



('61 Code, § 6A.13)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.140  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No holder of an escort permit shall escort, offer to escort or perform
any activity described in this article to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age, except at the special instance and written request of the
parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of the person on whose
behalf the escort is engaged.  The written request shall be carried by the
escort during the period so employed.



('61 Code, § 6A.14)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.150  SALE OR TRANSFER.



   Unless prior application is made, thereafter approved, and a permit
issued thereon, upon the sale or transfer of any interest in an escort
bureau, the permit shall immediately become null and void. A new application
shall be made by any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the
escort bureau.  A fee as established by resolution of City Council shall be
payable for each such application.  Any application involving the sale or
other transfer of any interest in an existing escort bureau, as well as any
permit which may thereafter be granted, shall be subject to the provisions of
this chapter.



('61 Code, § 6A.15)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.160  CHANGE OF LOCATION OR NAME.



   A.   A holder of a valid escort bureau permit shall notify, in
writing, the Chief of Police and Director of Planning of any change in the
business location. Such notification shall be made at least ten (10) business
days prior to such change.



   B.   No permit holder shall operate an escort bureau under any name
or designation not specified in the permit.



('61 Code, § 6A.16)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.170  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred ($500)
dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Revocation or suspension of a permit issued under this
chapter shall not be a defense against prosecution.



('61 Code, § 6A.17)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.180  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   A.   If the City Manager finds that any person holding an escort
bureau permit under the provisions of this chapter has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or conducts such business in a manner as would
have been grounds for denial of a permit as set forth in § 5.212.070.H. of
this chapter, or if the City Manager finds that any person holding an escort
permit is engaging in behavior or actions which violate any of the provisions
of this chapter or which would have been grounds for denial of a permit as
set forth in § 5.212.130.F. of this chapter, he or she may suspend or revoke
the permit. No such suspension or revocation shall become effective, except
as provided below, until the permit holder has been notified in writing of
the right of such permit holder to appeal the suspension or revocation
pursuant to the pro-visions of § 5.212.210 of this chapter. Notification of
intent to revoke shall be made either by personal delivery or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permit holder at
such permit holder's residence address as set forth on the application for a
permit or renewal thereof. If a timely appeal is filed, the suspension or
revocation shall be stayed and shall become effective only upon decision of
the City Council. Otherwise, the suspension or revocation shall become
effective after the timely appeal period has expired.



   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Manager may suspend
immediately, upon findings and recommendation by the Chief of Police that
such action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare. If such action is taken, the City Manager must, within twenty-four
(24) hours, give the permit holder a written statement of grounds, and
thereafter provide a hearing within five (5) business days.  The permit
holder shall have the burden of proof to show that his or her permit should
not be permanently revoked.



('61 Code, § 6A.18)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.190  CONDUCTING AS A NUISANCE.



   Any escort bureau operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a
public nuisance and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of
prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions,
proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof,
in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall
apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief
as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person
from operating, conducting or maintaining an escort bureau contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 6A.19)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.200  APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING BUSINESS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this
chapter into law. All such persons and businesses shall have thirty (30) days
from said effective date to apply for an escort business permit. The City
Manager shall issue a permit within the time period set forth in §
5.212.070.G. and H. only if all requirements of that section are met.



('61 Code, § 6A.20)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



§ 5.212.210  APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Upon notification of permit denial or intent to revoke, applicant or
permit holder shall have ten (10) business days in which to file a written
appeal to the City Council. Upon such filing, the City Manager shall notify
the applicant or permit holder of the time and place scheduled for a hearing,
during which time the applicant or permit holder may present evidence on his
or her behalf and may be represented by counsel, if he or she so chooses. No
permit shall be permanently revoked until the permit holder has had such an
opportunity to defend himself. However, a permit may be suspended pending
hearing as provided in § 5.212.180.



('61 Code, § 6A.21)  (Ord. 740, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.216:  FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   5.216.010   Food vending permits generally



   5.216.020   Approval of construction, conversion, and alteration
plans by Health Department; building permit contingency



   5.216.030   Sanitation requirements



   5.216.040   Suspension of permits



   5.216.050   Violations



   5.216.060   Suspension of permits for refusal of entry



   5.216.070   Summary suspension of permits



   5.216.080   Supervision of closing down premises in violation of
chapter



   5.216.090   Rules and regulations



§ 5.216.010  FOOD VENDING PERMITS GENERALLY.



   A.   Required; exceptions.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any food handling establishment in which food is prepared, sold,
processed or manufactured, or served for public consumption, without first
applying for and receiving a food vending permit for such operation issued by
the Health Department under the provisions of this chapter. Retail food
production and marketing establishments shall not be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.



   B.   Applicability of section.  The food handling establishments to
which this section applies shall include, but not be limited to, any
restaurant, itinerant restaurant, food vehicle, food vessel, bakery, food
processing establishment and ice plant located in the city and any vending
machine business operating vending machines in the city, regardless of the
location of the facilities from which they are served.



   C.   Application.  Every applicant for a food vending permit shall
file with the Health Department a written application, which shall state the
name and address of the applicant, the location of the food handling
establishment, the character of the establishment which is proposed to be
conducted and such other information as the Health Department may require.



   D.   Criteria for issuance—investigation by Health Department. 
No permit shall be granted, renewed or reinstated, unless the Health
Department determines, upon making an investigation, that the food handling
establishment for which the application is made is equipped, operated and
maintained in a safe, sanitary and healthful manner, and that no conditions
exist in the establishment which are, or which may be, unsafe, insanitary,
unwholesome or detrimental to the health of the patrons, consumers, employees
or the general public.



   E.   Same—compliance with state and local laws, and the like.  No
permit shall be granted, renewed or reinstated unless the Health Department
determines that the condition of the food handling establishment is in
accordance with the requirements of all applicable provisions of the Cal.
Health & Safety Code, of this chapter and of all rules and regulations
promulgated under the sections below, and that such food handling
establishments are capable of being operated in accordance with such laws and
regulations.



   F.   Expiration; posting.  Permits may be granted at any time
during the year, but all permits shall expire at the end of the calendar
year. Each permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the food handling
establishment or vehicle for which it is issued.



('61 Code, § 12B.11)  (Ord. 519, passed  - - )



§ 5.216.020  APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION, CONVERSION, AND ALTERATION PLANS BY
HEALTH DEPARTMENT; BUILDING PERMIT CONTINGENCY.



   A.   Prior to the construction, conversion or alteration of any food
establishment, or construction or purchase of a model of vehicle not
previously under permit to any person in the city, three (3) copies of the
plans and specifications therefor shall be submitted to the Health
Department. The Health Officer or his or her authorized deputy shall
thereafter issue his or her certificate stating what modifications, if any,
he or she deems required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.



('61 Code, § 12B.12)



   B.   The Building Department of the city shall notify the Health
Department when plans are received to build or remodel a food handling
establishment for which a food vending permit is required. A building permit
shall not be issued until the Health Department has approved the plans.



('61 Code, § 12B.13)



(Ord. 519, passed  - - )



§ 5.216.030  SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   All food handling establishments for which a permit is required
by this chapter shall be constructed, equipped, operated and maintained so as
to comply with the pertinent sections of the Cal. Health & Safety Code. In
addition, at least a single compartment janitorial sink with hot and cold
running water, or other approved facilities, shall be provided for general
clean-up purposes.



   B.   A hand lavatory shall be provided in each food preparation and
packaging area for employees.



('61 Code, § 12B.14)  (Ord. 519, passed  - - )



§ 5.216.040  SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.



   A permit issued under this chapter may be suspended, under the
procedure set forth in §§ 5.216.050 through 5.216.070, for any of the
following reasons:



   A.   Violation of state law.



   B.   Violation of this chapter.



   C.   Upon a recommendation for revocation of the permit, pending a
hearing thereon.



('61 Code, § 12B.15)  (Ord. 519, passed  - - )



§ 5.216.050  VIOLATIONS.



   A.   When any of the aforesaid laws, this chapter or rules and
regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof
entitled “Notice of Violation,” specifying:



      1.   The acts and conditions constituting each violation;



      2.   The provision or provisions violated thereby;



      3.   The corrective steps required;



      4.   The date by which all such corrections must be completed,
allowing a reasonable period therefor;



      5.   That the permittee has a right to a hearing, upon
request; and



      6.   That if no hearing is requested, and if the Health
Department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made
before 9:00 a.m. of the date named under paragraph D. of this section, or
within fifteen (15) days after service of the written notice, whichever comes
first, the permit will be suspended from that time until such violations are
corrected.



('61 Code, § 12B.16)



   B.   The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing on all
violations listed in the notice. The permit shall, however, be suspended
unless the Department receives from the permit holder, before 9:00 a.m. of
the date specified under paragraph A.4. above, a written or oral request for
a hearing or notice that all violations have been corrected as specified.



   C.   The hearing shall be held by the Health Officer or his or her
duly authorized representative who is a qualified sanitarian, but shall not
be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective
measures taken.



   D.   The person conducting the hearing shall make a written order as
to each alleged violation listed on the notice and shall deliver a signed
copy thereof to the permittee. As to each violation, the order shall:



      1.   Suspend the permit until it is corrected; or



      2.   Extend the time or modify the measures to be taken for
correction before suspension; or



      3.   Declare that the violation has been corrected so as to
comply with the applicable law; or



      4.   Declare that there was no violation.



('61 Code, § 12B.17)



(Ord. 519, passed  - - )



§ 5.216.060  SUSPENSION OF PERMITS FOR REFUSAL OF ENTRY.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to deny or
hinder entry by any inspector for the purpose of inspecting any food handling
establishments, or any portion thereof, and in such event, the inspector may
forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the establishment.



('61 Code, § 12B.18)  (Ord. 519, passed  - - )



§ 5.216.070  SUMMARY SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.



   Whenever an inspector finds insanitary or other conditions in the
operation of any food handling establishment which, in his or her judgment,
constitute an immediate and substantial hazard to the public health, he or
she shall issue a written notice to the permit holder or person in charge of
the food handling establishment, stating that the permit is immediately
suspended, and shall set forth the substance of the suspension as provided in
§ 5.216.050.A. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall immediately
comply therewith; but, upon request made to the inspector who orders the
suspension, or the Health Officer or his or her authorized representative,
whether personally, by telephone or in writing, he or she shall be afforded a
hearing as soon as possible, and notice of its setting may be given in the
same manner as the request.



('61 Code, § 12B.19)  (Ord. 519, passed  - - )



§ 5.216.080  SUPERVISION OF CLOSING DOWN PREMISES IN VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.



   When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any food handling
establishment governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in
an insanitary condition, the Health Department shall have the power to enter
to insure that the food handling establishment is closed down in a manner
which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his or her
employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the
condition of the food handling establishment, the owner of the food handling
establishment shall be notified of the insanitary conditions and shall be
required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such
condition.



('61 Code, § 12B.20)  (Ord. 519, passed  - - )



§ 5.216.090  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Health Officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations
necessary to administer this chapter, including regulations pertaining to:



   A.   Forms for applications, permits and notices.



   B.   Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting, denying,
suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits.



   C.   Inspections of food handling establishments and reporting
thereon.



('61 Code, § 12B.21)  (Ord. 519, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.220:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS



Section



Article I.  Massage Establishments and Definitions



   5.220.010   Definitions



   5.220.020   Permit required



   5.220.030   Exceptions



   5.220.040   Application



   5.220.045   Minimum proximity requirements



   5.220.050   Operating requirements



   5.220.060   Facilities



   5.220.070   Inspections



   5.220.080   Permit nonassignable



   5.220.090   Change of location or name



   5.220.100   Notification of change



   5.220.110   Renewal of permit



Article II.  Certified Massage Therapists/Certified Massage Practitioners



   5.220.200   Massage certificate required



Article III.  Out Call Massage Services



   5.220.300   Out call massage services



Article IV.  Prohibited Conduct, Procedures and Penalties



   5.220.400   Prohibited conduct



   5.220.410   Suspension pending revocation



   5.220.420   Revocation of massage establishment permit



   5.220.430   Permit denial/revocation appeal procedure



   5.220.440   Burden of proof at hearing



   5.220.450   Penalties



   5.220.460   Civil remedies available



ARTICLE I.  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND DEFINITIONS



§ 5.220.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT(S).  The individual applicant and/or the designated officer
or managing partner acting on behalf of a corporation or partnership.



   CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST and CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER.  Any
person holding a valid and current massage certificate.



   CHIEF.  The Police Chief of the City of Brea, or his or her designee.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Finance of the City of Brea, or his or her
designee.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person, other than a certified massage therapist or
certified massage practitioner, who may render any service to the permittee,
and who receives compensation from the permittee or his or her agent, and who
has no physical contact with the customers or clients.



   HEARING OFFICER.  The City Manager of the City of Brea, or his or her
designee.



   MASSAGE.  Any method of treating the external parts of the human body
for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes by means of pressure on or
friction against; or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding; or
stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or other
parts of the human body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliances; or with or without supplementary aids,
such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams,
lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations.



   MASSAGE CERTIFICATE.  A certificate issued to any massage therapist or
practitioner pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 4601, or any successor
provision thereto.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation
engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted
or carried on, any business of giving massages, baths, administration of
fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, alcohol rubs, or any other type
of system for treatment or manipulation of the human body with or without any
character of bath, such as Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor,
shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath.



   OUT CALL MASSAGE SERVICE.  Any business where the primary function of
such business is to engage in or carry on massage at locations designated by
the customers or clients.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation having a
massage establishment permit issued hereunder.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.020  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation
to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted
or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city, the operation of a
massage establishment as herein described, without first having obtained a
massage establishment permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions
herein set forth. The permit shall immediately be surrendered to the Director
upon suspension, revocation or expiration of the permit.



   B.   A permit under this Article I shall be valid for twelve (12)
months from the date of issuance unless revoked or suspended. The permit
required shall be in addition to any business license required by city
ordinance or any other permit required for such use including, but not
limited to, any conditional use permit or other similar entitlement for
use.  A massage establishment permit may be renewed up to thirty (30) days
after the expiration date upon payment of a late fee in such amount as
established by resolution of the City Council. Thereafter, such business must
comply with all requirements of this chapter applicable to new massage
establishment applicants.



   C.   Except as provided in § 5.220.030 (Exceptions), if any other
type of business, including but not limited to, a tanning salon, spa,
reflexology facility or acupuncture facility, allows any type of massage,
that business must obtain a massage establishment permit.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 1-19-16)  Penalty, see §
5.220.450



§ 5.220.030  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage services
provided by the City of Brea or by any city authorized person, group, entity,
business or organization as part of an official city program or function
approved by the City Manager or designee, nor shall the provisions of this
chapter apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the
performance of the duties of their respective professions:



   A.   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical
therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in
the state;



   B.   Nurses registered under the laws of the state;



   C.   1.   Barbers and cosmetologists, licensed by the State of
California, and persons licensed by the State of California to provide skin
care (estheticians) or nail care (manicurists), as defined and to the extent
provided in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 7316, or any successor provision
thereto, as follows:



         a.   Barbers may massage the face and scalp;



         b.   Cosmetologists may massage the scalp, face, neck,
arms, hands, feet below the calf, and the body extending from the clavicles
upward;



         c.   Estheticians may massage the face, neck, arms and
the body extending from the clavicles upward; and



         d.   Manicurists may massage the hands, and feet below
the calf.



      2.   State licensed barbers, cosmetologists, estheticians and
manicurists are subject to the exemption provided by subparagraph C. of this
section only while providing other barbering, cosmetology, skin care or nail
care services in a facility licensed by the City of Brea to provide such
services.  The provisions of this subparagraph C. apply to apprentices of
any of the foregoing who are licensed by the State of California, but only
while performing barbering, cosmetology, skin care or nail care services
under the direct supervision of a barber, cosmetologist, esthetician or
manicurist who is subject to the exemption provided by this subsection;



   D.   Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums or other health care
facilities duly licensed by the state;



   E.   Accredited high schools, junior colleges and colleges or
universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their
employment; and



   F.   Trainers of amateur, semiprofessional or professional athletes
or athletic teams.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.040  APPLICATION.



   A.   Any person, firm, corporation, or partnership desiring to
obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment shall make application
under penalty of perjury of the laws of the state, to the Director. Prior to
submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by
the City Council shall be paid to the city to defray, in part, the cost of
the investigation and reports required by this Article I. A copy of the
receipt showing payment of the required fee shall accompany the application. 



   B.   The application and fee required under this section shall be in
addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other provisions of
this code or ordinance heretofore or hereafter adopted, and shall be
submitted together with a writing, signed and dated by the applicant, under
penalty of perjury, stating that all information contained in the application
is true and correct.



   C.   The application for permit does not authorize conducting a
massage establishment. No business shall be conducted until such permit has
been granted.



   D.   Each applicant for a massage establishment permit shall submit
the following information:



      1.   The full true name under which the business will be
conducted. If the name is a fictitious name, all individual owners,
stockholders, partners, etc., shall be identified;



      2.   The present or proposed address where the business is to
be conducted;



      3.   The applicant’s full, true name, any other names used,
date of birth, California driver’s license number or California
identification number, Social Security number, present residence address and
telephone number; sex, height, weight, color of hair, and color of eyes. The
applicant shall also state whether, during the previous ten (10) years, the
applicant or any managing responsible employee thereof or any person
enumerated in subparagraph 5.220.040.D.9. or subparagraph 5.220.040.D.10. of
this Article I (“applicant parties,” collectively), has been convicted of
or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any charge of a violation
of any state, federal or other governmental law similar to and including: (i)
Cal. Penal Code § 290; or (ii) any statute for which the applicant or any of
the applicant parties is required to register pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §
290 or any such similar registration law; or (iii) any law similar to and/or
including Cal. Penal Code §§ 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647, or any
other crime involving the elements of the foregoing code sections, including
any plea bargain; or (iv) any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or any
lesser included offense. The applicant shall also state whether he or she has
ever had any ownership interest in any business providing massage services as
to which, during the previous five (5) years, any permit or authorization of
any kind to provide massage services was revoked;



      4.   Previous eight (8) years of residences of the applicant
and the inclusive dates at each address;



      5.   The applicant’s business, occupation, and employment
history for eight (8) years preceding the date of application, and the
inclusive dates of same;



      6.   A complete explanation of all services to be provided;



      7.   The name, address, and date of birth of each certified
massage therapist, certified massage practitioner, aide, trainee or employee
who is or will be employed in such establishment;



      8.   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least
eighteen (18) years of age;



      9.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the
corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of
incorporation or charter together with the state and date of incorporation
and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and
directors, and of each stockholder holding five percent (5%) or more of the
stock of that corporation;



      10.   If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall
set forth the name and residence addresses of each of the partners, including
limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish
a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed with the County
Clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of
subparagraph 5.220.040.D.9. pertaining to corporate applicants shall apply;



      11.   A description of any other business to be operated on
the same premises, or on adjoining premises, owned or controlled by the
applicant shall be set forth;



      12.   The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real
property upon or in which the business is to be conducted shall be
identified. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the
property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a
notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a massage
establishment will be located on his or her property;



      13.   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application shall be required. The Chief shall
provide such assistance to the Director as may be required to fully
investigate the applicant and the truth of the matters set forth in the
application;



      14.   The applicant shall submit any change of address or fact
which may occur during the procedure of applying for a massage establishment
permit; and



      15.   a. A certificate of compliance and certificate of
occupancy (for new applicants) from the City Development Services Department,
Building and Safety Division, must be submitted prior to the application
approval. Any required inspection fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.



         b.   If the certificates of compliance and occupancy are
not received by the Director within sixty (60) days of the date of filing,
the application shall be deemed void. If any land use permit or other
entitlement for use is required, such permit or use shall be applied for and
received prior to the massage establishment permit becoming effective.



   E.   The Director shall have up to one hundred twenty (120) calendar
days to investigate the application and the background of each applicant for
a massage establishment permit. Upon completion of the investigation, the
Director shall grant the permit if he or she finds as follows:



      1.   The required fee has been paid;



      2.   The application conforms in all respects to the
provisions of this Article I;



      3.   The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation
in the application;



      4.   All persons who will provide massage services are
certified massage therapists or certified massage practitioners, as evidenced
by the submission of copies of a valid and current massage certificate,
attested to by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, as being true and
correct;



      5.   During the ten (10) previous years, neither the applicant
nor any of the applicant parties has been convicted of or entered a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere with respect to a violation of any of the laws,
statutes, or Cal. Penal Code sections described, referenced or identified in
subparagraph 5.220.040.D.3 of this Article I; and



      6.   During the previous five (5) years, no business providing
massage services in which the applicant had any ownership interest, had any
permit or authorization of any kind to provide massage services revoked.



   F.   If the Director, following investigation of the applicant,
determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements of this
Article I, the Director shall deny such application by dated, written notice
to the applicant, forwarded to the applicant’s address as set forth in the
application, by U.S. mail, with a proof of service attached. Following a
denial or revocation of a massage establishment permit, no application for a
massage establishment permit may be filed by such applicant, at the same or
substantially similar physical location, for at least one (1) year following
the date of such denial or revocation. The applicant shall have the right of
appeal as to any denial, as set forth in § 5.220.430.



   G.   Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of the Brea
City Code and the applicable ordinances shall be provided prior to the
issuance of any permits.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 1-19-16)



§ 5.220.045  MINIMUM PROXIMITY REQUIREMENTS.



   No massage establishment shall be located within specified distances of
certain land uses as set forth below:



   A.   No massage establishment shall be located within five hundred
(500) feet or less of any school or place of worship. Distance shall be
measured from the closest business premises property line of the massage
establishment, to the closest business premises property line of the
specified use.



   B.   No massage establishment shall be located within three hundred
(300) feet or less of any other massage establishment. Distance shall be
measured from the closest business premises property line of the existing
massage establishment, to the closest property line of the proposed or
intended business premises.



(Ord. 1180, passed 1-19-16)



§ 5.220.050  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on, or permit to be
engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any massage establishment, unless each
and all of the following requirements are met.



   A.   Each person employed to perform massage must be a certified
massage therapist or certified massage practitioner in possession of a valid
massage certificate, which certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous
area open to the public at all times. It is unlawful for any owner, manager,
operator, responsible managing employee, or permittee in charge of or in
control of a massage establishment to employ or permit a person to perform
massage who does not possess a valid massage certificate.



   B.   The possession of a valid massage establishment permit does not
authorize the possessor to perform work for which a massage certificate is
required.



   C.    Massage and bath operations shall be carried on or conducted,
and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.



   D.   A list of services available as approved pursuant to the
application and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open public
place within the premises, and shall be described in readily understandable
language. In the event any list of services and costs posted or provided
hereunder is in other than the English language, the permittee shall, at the
permittee’s cost and expense, provide to the Director an English language
translation thereof. Such English translation shall be attested to being a
full, true and correct translation thereof under penalty of perjury of the
laws of the State of California. No owner, manager, operator, responsible
managing employee, or permittee shall permit, and no certified massage
therapist or certified massage practitioner shall offer or perform, any
service other than those posted.



   E.   The massage establishment permit and a copy of each massage
certificate for every certified massage therapist and certified massage
practitioner, employed in the establishment shall be displayed in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises.



   F.   Every massage establishment shall keep a written record of the
date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of each patron, the
name of the certified massage therapist or certified massage practitioner
administering the treatment, and the type of treatment administered. Such
written record shall be maintained on forms approved by the Director. Such
records shall be open to inspection only by officials charged with
enforcement of this chapter, shall be available during all business hours of
the establishment, and shall be used for no other purpose. Any unauthorized
disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city
or the County of Orange, or the owner or employee of the massage
establishment shall constitute a misdemeanor and such persons shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter in addition to any other
penalties provided by law. Such records shall be maintained on the premises
of the massage establishment for a period of two (2) years.



   G.   Massage establishments shall at all times be equipped with an
adequate supply of clean, sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean
towels, coverings and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets. Towels and
linens shall not be used on more than one (1) patron, unless such towel or
linen has first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and
coverings shall not be used on more than one (1) patron. Soiled linens and
towels shall be deposited in separate, health department approved receptacles.



   H.   Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets,
toilet rooms, shower and bathrooms, tanning booths, whirlpool baths and pools
shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, and at least once each
day the premises are open, with a disinfectant approved by the Orange County
Health Department. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant,
approved by the health department, after each use. All walls, ceilings,
floors and other physical facilities of the establishment must be in good
repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.



   I.   Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on
more than one (1) patron unless such instruments have been sterilized, using
approved sterilizing methods.



   J.   All employees, including certified massage therapists and
certified massage practitioners, shall be clean, and shall wear clean,
nontransparent outer garments. Such garments shall not expose their genitals,
pubic area, buttocks or chest.



   K.   No person shall enter, be or remain in any part of a massage
establishment while in the possession of, consuming, under the influence of
or using any alcoholic beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription
for such drugs. The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager
or permittee shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such
premises.



   L.   No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage,
or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage.



   M.   No massage establishment granted a permit under this Article I
shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or
distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body
that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers or clients that any
service is available other than those services described in subparagraph
5.220.050.D. of this Article I. Nor shall any massage establishment or
outcall massage service employ language in the text of such advertising that
would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is
available other than those services as described in subparagraph 5.220.050.D.
of this Article I.



   N.   A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the
presence of a certified massage therapist or other employee unless the
patron’s genitals are fully covered by a nontransparent covering. In
addition, a female patron’s breasts shall be fully covered by a
nontransparent covering.



   O.   No massage establishment shall be open for business without at
least one (1) certified massage therapist or certified massage practitioner
on the premises at all times who is in possession of a current, valid massage
certificate.



   P.   Each massage establishment granted a permit under this article
shall have a manager on the premises at all times the massage establishment
is open for business. The operator of each massage establishment shall file a
statement with the Director designating the person or persons who shall act
as manager. The operator, or manager in the operator’s absence, shall be
responsible for ensuring compliance with this chapter.  Any act or omission
of any employee or independent contractor, performing services as part of the
massage establishment’s business, constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an act or omission of the
massage establishment permittee for purposes of determining whether the
massage establishment permittee’s permit shall be revoked, suspended,
denied or renewed.



   Q.   A massage establishment permit will not be granted for, and no
massage establishment may open or operate in, any location where, during the
previous year, a business providing massage services was closed due to
criminal activity, had its business license revoked, or had a massage
establishment permit revoked.



   R.   Any existing massage establishment operating in a location
where such use is no longer permitted by right shall be a nonconforming use.
Any existing massage establishment operating in a location where such use is
no longer permitted by right shall be discontinued within one (1) year of the
effective date of this subsection.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 1-19-16)  Penalty, see §
5.220.450



§ 5.220.060  FACILITIES.



   Every massage establishment shall maintain facilities meeting all of
the following requirements:



   A.   Signs shall be in conformance with the current ordinances of
the city;



   B.   Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with Cal.
Building Code § 1205 or successor provision or provisions. In addition, at
least one (1) artificial light of not less than sixty (60) watts shall be
provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on
patrons;



   C.   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with Cal.
Building Code § 1203 or successor provision or provisions;



   D.   Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments
used in performing the acts of massage shall be readily available;



   E.   Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times;



   F.   Closed cabinets shall be provided for storage of clean linens;



   G.   A minimum of one (1) separate wash basin for employees shall be
provided at all times. The basin shall be located within or as close as
practicable to the area devoted to performing of massage services. Sanitary
towels shall also be provided at each basin; and



   H.   Pads used on massage tables shall be covered with a durable,
washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the Orange County
Health Department.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.070  INSPECTIONS.



   The Director, Chief, and the Orange County Health Department, or any of
their authorized representatives, shall have the right to enter any massage
establishment for the purpose of making reasonable unscheduled inspections to
observe and enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws, and
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.080  PERMIT NONASSIGNABLE.



   A.   No massage establishment permit may be sold, transferred or
assigned by the permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or
persons, and any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale,
transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender
of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be deemed terminated and
void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership
and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the
surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the
deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of
such permit and in each case the permittee shall thereafter be deemed to be
the surviving partner(s). One (1) or more proposed partners, in a partnership
granted a permit hereunder, may make application to the Director, together
with the fee established by the City Council therefore, to amend the original
application, providing all information as required for partners in the first
instance and, upon approval thereof, the transfer of the interests of one (1)
or more partners to the proposed partner or partners may occur. 



   B.   If the permit is issued to a corporation, stock may be sold,
transferred, issued, or assigned to stockholders who have been named on the
application. If any stock is sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to a
person not listed on the application as a stockholder, the permit shall be
deemed terminated and void; provided, however, the proposed transferee may
submit to the Director, together with a fee established by the City Council,
an application to amend the original application providing all information as
required for stockholders in the first instance, and, upon approval thereof,
the transfer may then occur.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.090  CHANGE OF LOCATION OR NAME.



   A.   A change of location may be approved by the Director provided
the massage establishment complies with all ordinances and regulations of the
city.



   B.   No permittee shall operate under any name or conduct any
establishment under any designation not specified in the permit.



   C.   Any application for an expansion of a building or other place
of business of a massage establishment shall require compliance with this
Article I.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.100  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE.



   A.   The holder of the permit to operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall notify the Director, in writing, of the name and address
of each person employed, including certified massage therapists and certified
massage practitioners, at such establishment within five (5) days of said
person being employed. The requirements of this section are in addition to
the other provisions of this chapter, and nothing contained herein shall
relieve the permittee of the responsibility of ascertaining, prior to
employment, whether an employee has a current, and valid massage certificate.



   B.   If, during the term of a permit, the applicant has any change
in information provided on or concerning the original application or permit
renewal application, notification shall be made to the Director in writing,
within ten (10) business days of the change.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.110  RENEWAL OF PERMIT.



   A massage establishment licensed under this Article I shall submit an
application for renewal thirty (30) days prior to the expiration thereof. The
renewal application shall be submitted together with the requisite fee as
established by the City Council. Approval of the renewal application shall be
contingent upon satisfactory compliance with all pertinent provisions of this
Article I.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



ARTICLE II.  CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPISTS/CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS



§ 5.220.200  MASSAGE CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of providing or
performing massage unless such person holds a valid and current massage
certificate.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)  Penalty, see § 5.220.450



ARTICLE III.  OUT CALL MASSAGE SERVICES



§ 5.220.300  OUT CALL MASSAGE SERVICES.



   It is unlawful for any person to provide out call massage services
unless such person is a certified massage therapist or certified massage
practitioner. 



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)  Penalty, see § 5.220.450



ARTICLE IV.  PROHIBITED CONDUCT, PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES



§ 5.220.400  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   It is unlawful for any certified massage therapist or certified massage
practitioner, or for any permittee to permit or allow any certified massage
therapist or certified massage practitioner, to touch or massage the genital
area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron, or for any massage
establishment to allow or permit such massage. Massaging of the breasts is
permissible provided the recipient has consented in writing and possesses a
written referral recommending such massage by a licensed California health
care provider.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 1-19-16)  Penalty, see §
5.220.450



§ 5.220.410  SUSPENSION PENDING REVOCATION.



   When the grounds for revocation under this chapter are that the
permittee is suspected of illegal, improper, or otherwise objectionable
conduct in violation of this chapter, the permit may be suspended until the
revocation hearing procedure has been completed.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.420  REVOCATION OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.



   The Director may, after notice and hearing, revoke the massage
establishment permit of any person, firm, partnership or corporation holding
the same upon receipt of satisfactory evidence that:



   A.   The permittee has made a material misrepresentation on the
permit application;



   B.   The permittee, any managing responsible employee thereof or any
person enumerated in subparagraph 5.220.040.D.9. or subparagraph
5.220.040.D.10. of Article I hereof has been convicted of or entered a plea
of guilty or nolo contendere to any charge of a violation of any state,
federal or other governmental law similar to and including Cal. Penal Code §
290, any violation of any statute for which the permittee is required to
register pursuant to § 290 or any such similar registration law, or any
crime that involves conduct which is a violation of any state, federal or
other governmental law similar to and including Cal. Penal Code §§ 266h,
266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647, or any other crime involving the elements of
the foregoing code sections, by way of plea bargain, or any other crime
involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude,  or any lesser
included offense; or



   C.   The permittee, any managing responsible employee, or any
employee, representative, or agent of the permittee, or any certified massage
therapist or certified massage practitioner employed by the permittee, has
engaged in conduct constituting a violation of this chapter or of any of the
enumerated statutes or crimes set forth in subparagraph 5.220.420.B., above.
The Director shall provide the permittee with written notice of the
revocation by U.S. mail, with a proof of service attached, addressed to the
street address of the massage establishment as shown on the application; or



   D.    The massage establishment no longer satisfies the approval
requirements set forth in § 5.220.040, including, but not limited to,
failure of a massage establishment to use or employ only certified massage
therapists or certified massage practitioners to provide massage services.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.430  PERMIT DENIAL/REVOCATION APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   A.   The applicant or permittee, as the case may be, within ten (10)
business days after the date of denial of an application for a permit under
Article I hereof, or notice of revocation, may file an appeal with the City
Clerk to be taken to the Hearing Officer. In the event an appeal of a
revocation is timely filed, and the grounds for revocation are those set
forth in § 5.220.410, then a suspension of the permit shall be in effect
until the final decision has been rendered by the hearing officer.



   B.   If the applicant or permittee fails to timely file an appeal,
then the denial/revocation shall take effect immediately upon expiration of
the appeal filing period. No permit shall be revoked until after a hearing
has been held before the Hearing Officer to determine good cause for such
revocation, or the appeal filing period has lapsed. It is unlawful for any
person to conduct a massage establishment or carry on the business of massage
until the revoked permit has been reinstated by the Hearing Officer.



   C.   Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and mailed at
least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing, by U.S. mail, with a
proof of service attached, addressed to the address listed on the massage
establishment application. The notice shall state the grounds for denial or
revocation, and the time and place where such hearing will be held.



   D.   After the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall render a written
decision within ten (10) business days from the date the matter is submitted
for decision. The action of the Hearing Officer shall be final and conclusive.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)  Penalty, see § 5.220.450



§ 5.220.440  BURDEN OF PROOF AT HEARING.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, the burden is on the
city in any hearing under this Article IV to prove that the determination of
the Director that is being appealed is reasonable, and not an abuse of
discretion.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.450  PENALTIES.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation
to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter.



   B.   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any
provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any of the requirements
thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), or
by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each and every person, firm, partnership or corporation shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or
corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this
chapter.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



§ 5.220.460  CIVIL REMEDIES AVAILABLE.



   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner
provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.



(Ord. 1136, passed 4-6-10)



CHAPTER 5.224:  MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION



Section



   5.224.010   Purpose



   5.224.020   Definitions



   5.224.030   Permit required



   5.224.040   Exemptions



   5.224.050   Application form



   5.224.060   Time for filing applications



   5.224.070   Fees



   5.224.080   Determination by City Manager



   5.224.090   Appeal to City Council



   5.224.100   Public facilities



   5.224.110   Clean up



   5.224.120   Traffic control



   5.224.130   Special restrictions



   5.224.140   Insurance and indemnity



   5.224.150   Suspension



   5.224.160   Revocation



   5.224.170   Violation as a nuisance



§ 5.224.010  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations
governing the issuance of permits for filming, video taping or any related
activity on location within the city, to assure that such activity is
consistent with considerations of the public health, safety, and general
welfare and the protection of property. The requirements provided in this
chapter shall be separate and in addition to those provisions of this code
regarding business regulation and licensing. Any and all fees provided in
this chapter are intended to cover the cost of investigation and processing
permits for filming, as specified herein, and shall be in addition to all
other applicable licenses and/or permits provided in this code.



('61 Code, § 13C.1)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSES.  Filming or video taping for a motion picture or
television production conducted by an organization in which no individual
either directly or indirectly receives a profit from the production,
marketing or showing of the films or tapes.



   CITY.  The city of Brea, a municipal corporation formed and operating
pursuant to the laws of the state.



   CITY CLERK.  The City Clerk of the city.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the city.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the city, or his or her designee.



   FILM OR FILMING.  Feature motion pictures, video tapes, television,
motion pictures, and commercials.



   NEWS PURPOSES.  Filming or video taping for television news
broadcasting by reporters, photographers or camera persons in the employ of a
newspaper, news service, or similar entity, of new events concerning those
persons, scenes, or occurrences which are in the news and of general public
interest. The filming or video taping of such shall be for regularly
scheduled news programs (but not magazine or documentary programs) and
special news programs which are not preplanned and are broadcast within
twenty-four (24) hours after the event.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person, firm, corporation, or group or combination
acting as a unit to whom or which a film permit is granted by the city under
the provisions of this chapter.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, association, or group or
combination acting as a unit.



   PRODUCTION.  The activity of making a film for commercial or
noncommercial purposes on property owned by the city or on private property
within the jurisdiction of the city.



('61 Code, § 13C.2)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.030  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business or activity of filming, video taping or producing
motion pictures on motion picture film or electronic video tape for public
exhibition as motion pictures or for television, at any place within the
city, other than at or in an established motion picture or television studio
or entirely within an enclosed structure or building, with no outside storage
of filming equipment, without a film permit from the City Clerk. Any person
interested in filming within the city shall complete in full a film permit
application as stated in this chapter and provide to city all the information
requested in § 5.224.050.



('61 Code, § 13C.3)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.040  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   A.   The filming or video taping of motion pictures solely for
private or family use;



   B.   The filming or video taping of motion pictures for use in a
criminal investigation, civil proceeding, and emergencies such as fires,
floods, police actions, and the like;



   C.   The filming or video taping of motion pictures for news
purposes (but not magazine or documentary programs);



   D.   Education, government, and public access and local origination
programs for cable television systems franchised within the city;



   E.   The filming or video taping of motion pictures by the city
itself (e.g. video taping of sewer lines and media-services programming); and



   F.   Any other activity as deemed in the public interest by the City
Manager.



('61 Code, § 13C.4)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.050  APPLICATION FORM.



   The City Clerk shall furnish application for such film permit. Such
application form(s) shall request the following information:



   A.   Name, permanent street address, and telephone of the applicant;



   B.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name, principal address
and telephone of the applicant shall be as shown in the most recent statement
of corporation on file with the applicable Secretary of State;



   C.   If the filming or video taping for motion picture or television
production is conducted by a nonprofit organization which qualifies under §
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701 as a
charitable organization, and no person, directly or indirectly, receives a
profit from the marketing and production of film or from showing the film,
tapes, or photos, the applicant must state this on the application form;



   D.   Name, address, and telephone number of the person in charge of
the location and responsible for its conduct;



   E.   The name, address, and twenty-four (24) hour phone number of at
least two (2) persons to be contacted in the event of emergency conditions
which might alter the conditions of the film permit;



   F.   Name of film/project;



   G.   Location(s), date(s), time(s) and activity of the proposed
filming or taping. If the proposed filming or taping involves the use of
private property, the full name and address of the property owner where the
filming/taping is to take place and a signed affidavit from the property
owner granting permission for the proposed use of the property in question
shall be provided to the City Clerk;



   H.   Approximate number of individuals in cast and crew;



   I.   List of types and number of vehicles and other equipment;



   J.   Statement if overnight parking and locations are needed;



   K.   Requests for special assistance at the location, including, but
not limited to street closure, traffic control, and emergency services;



   L.   Special conditions or requests by the applicant;



   M.   Dated signature of applicant;



   N.   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be
signed by two (2) principal officers of the corporation; and



   O.   In addition to the provisions of this chapter, any applicant
whom or which will engage in any activity which requires compliance with any
federal, state or local regulations, including additional licenses or
permits, shall present evidence of satisfactory compliance with such
regulations.



('61 Code, § 13C.5)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.060  TIME FOR FILING APPLICATIONS.



   Applications shall be presented to the City Clerk at least ten (10)
business days in advance of the time that the proposed filming, taping or
production is to commence.



('61 Code, § 13C.6)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.070  FEES.



   A.   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application and investigation fee payable to the city which shall be set by
resolution of the City Council; provided, however, that no fee shall be
required of applicants filming or video taping for motion picture or
television production for charitable purposes, as defined in § 5.224.050.C.



   B.   In the event that weather conditions or other circumstances
beyond the control of the permittee require that the date(s) or time(s) of
the proposed filming or taping need to be altered, no additional application
and investigation fee shall be required because of such alteration of the
date(s) or time(s) so long as the City Clerk is given at least one (1)
business day notice of the alteration, but an additional fee will be charged
if minor changes, additions, deletions and extensions to the original filming
permit are requested which are not beyond the control of the permittee. Said
additional fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. A minor
change, addition, deletion, or extension to the original filming permit
request must be filed with the City Clerk. Only one (1) such request per
permit will be allowed.



   C.   If the City Manager determines that any potential danger to the
public's health, safety, or general welfare, or property would be eliminated
by the presence of police or fire protection at the site of the filming or
video taping for motion picture or television production, the City Manager
may grant the film permit upon condition that the permittee pay in advance to
the city the costs of such police or fire protection as may be required.



   D.   For filming permits which necessitate the city to provide
services to the permittee in addition to police or fire protection, service
charges shall be imposed. Such charges will be determined by the applicable
servicing city department(s) and shall be based on the actual cost incurred
by the city in providing such services. Such service charges shall include,
but shall not be limited to, charges for labor, supervision, overhead,
administration and the use of any and all city equipment, supplies, and the
like. Additional charges may be imposed to cover the cost of extraordinary
film permit investigation and/or staff costs, if the City Manager feels this
is necessary.



   E.   In addition to the fee(s) required herein, a business license
tax (whatever the current rate may be) shall also be required and shall be
payable to the city.



('61 Code, § 13C.7)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.080  DETERMINATION BY CITY MANAGER.



   Before granting any film permit pursuant to this chapter, the City
Manager shall determine that such filming or video taping for motion picture
or television production will not unreasonably interfere with the public
health, safety and general welfare or unreasonably endanger any property. In
making this determination, the City Manager shall take into consideration the
noise, traffic hazards, fire hazards and other environmental problems,
including health and safety which are likely to be caused by such activities.
In granting the permit, the City Manager may further impose any reasonable
conditions as are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare or property.



('61 Code, § 13C.8)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.090  APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.



   A.   Any applicant aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager
with respect to a film permit may appeal such decision to the City Council
within ten (10) days following notice of such decision.



   B.   A written request for such appeal shall be filed with the City
Clerk and all such requests shall contain the following information:



      1.   The name and address of the applicant;



      2.   The date of the decision in question;



      3.   The reasons for the appeal; and



      4.   The grounds relied upon for relief.



   C.   The appeal request shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
appeal fee in an amount to be set by resolution by the City Council. Upon
receipt of the appeal request, the City Clerk shall set the matter for
hearing at a regular meeting of the City Council no later than thirty (30)
days following the date the appeal request was filed. Notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, by certified mail, no
later than ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. Said notice may
also designate certain records that the applicant is required to produce at
the time of the hearing.



   D.   At the hearing as prescribed by this section, the applicant and
the city may submit any and all evidence as they believe to be relevant. The
City Council may require the presentation of additional evidence from either
the applicant or the city, or from both, and may continue the hearing from
time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional
evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may, by resolution
with findings, approve, reverse, or modify the decision of the City Manager
and any such decision of the City Council shall be final.



('61 Code, § 13C.9)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.100  PUBLIC FACILITIES.



   Use of any public facility within the city may require an additional
rental or use agreement.



('61 Code, § 13C.10)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.110  CLEAN UP.



   A permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion. The area
used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion and before leaving
the site(s). A deposit to assure that a permittee removes all trash and
debris from filming site(s) may be required. This requirement and the amount
thereof shall be determined by the City Manager.



('61 Code, § 13C.11)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.120  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   For filming that would impair traffic flow, an applicant shall use city
law enforcement personnel at the applicant's expense.



   A.   If required for traffic safety or as a condition of the film
permit, an applicant shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any
other traffic-control devices in conformance with the Manual of Traffic
Controls, State of California, Department of Transportation. All appropriate
safety precautions shall be taken.



   B.   All interruptions of normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic
must be authorized on the permit. Police officers assigned to on-site
supervision may further restrict operations based on safety concerns.



   C.   Traffic shall not be detoured without prior approval by the
city.



   D.   Unless authorized by the city, camera cars shall be driven in
the direction of traffic and shall observe all traffic laws.



   E.   Any emergency roadwork or construction by state or local
government agencies and/or private contractors under permit or contract to
the city shall have priority over filming activities.



('61 Code, § 13C.12)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.130  SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS.



   For the convenience of the general public, all activity by a permittee
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. may be restricted. As a
condition of film permit approval, all surrounding residents and/or
businesses within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the filming activity
may be required to be notified of date(s) and time(s) in which late evening
and early morning filming is to take place.



('61 Code, § 13C.13)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.140  INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY.



   A.   It shall be a condition of the issuance and continued validity
of any film permit granted pursuant to this chapter that the permittee first
obtain, pay for, and maintain a policy of general liability insurance
approved as to form by the City Attorney which shall insure the city, its
officers, and employees against any liability, or claims of liability,
brought or made by or on behalf of any person for personal injury or property
damage caused by or arising out of any negligent act or omission of either
the permittee, his or her agents or employees, including any officers or
employees of the city, or caused by or arising out of the condition of any
city-owned or controlled property, whether real or personal, and occurring
during the period and as a result of the activities for which such film
permit was issued.  The amount of coverage to be provided by such policy
shall be determined by the City Manager. The permittee may satisfy the
requirement imposed by this section through the presentation of a certificate
of insurance, for at least the required amount of coverage, which indicates
that, by endorsement thereto, the city, its officers, and employees have been
added as additional insureds. Such certificates shall additionally provide
that the required insurance will not be modified, changed, or terminated
unless a written notice thereof has been transmitted to the City Clerk.



   B.   A bond/cash deposit may also be required for purposes of
repairing any damage and restoring the city's facilities to their original
condition. The amount shall be determined by the City Manager. In the event
of such damage, the city shall provide written notice to the permittee
specifying the damage to be repaired and/or city facilities to be restored
within seven (7) days of receipt of said notice. If, after providing
permittee with such written notice, the requested repairs and/or restoration
of city facilities have not been commenced or completed, the city may draw
upon the bond/cash deposit to effect said repairs and/or restoration of city
facilities. In the event of damage requiring emergency repairs and/or
restoration of city facilities by the city, the permittee shall be required
to reimburse the city in full for all costs incurred within thirty (30) days
receipt of invoice from city.



   C.   It shall be a condition of the issuance of any film permit
granted pursuant to this chapter that the permittee shall agree to defend and
to hold the city, its officers and employees harmless, from any and all
claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of
the issuance of such film permit.



('61 Code, § 13C.14)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.150  SUSPENSION.



   Any film permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be
subject to immediate suspension if it is found necessary for the protection
of public health, safety, or general welfare. Such suspension shall only be
instituted upon the recommendation of the city that immediate protective
action is necessary. In the event of such a suspension, the City Manager
shall within twenty-four (24) hours after the suspension:  (1) cause to be
served upon the film permit holder a written statement containing the grounds
for suspension and a notice of hearing to show cause before the City Manager
as to why the film permit should not be suspended pending revocation
hearings; and (2) cause to be served upon the film permit holder a notice of
revocation hearing before the City Council as provided in § 5.224.160. The
hearing before the City Manager shall be held not later than five (5) days
following the service of the notice to the film permit holder.



('61 Code, § 13C.15)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.160  REVOCATION.



   A.   Any film permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter may be revoked after a public hearing before the City Council. 
A film permit may be revoked under the following circumstances:



      1.   Where it has been determined that the permittee has
violated or has failed to comply with any of the terms or conditions of the
film permit;



      2.   Where it has been determined that the permittee has
violated or has failed to comply with any of the ordinances, resolutions, or
applicable regulations of the city;



      3.   Where it has been determined that the film permit has
been granted pursuant to false or fraudulent information contained in the
film permit application;



      4.   Where it has subsequently been determined that filming
activity will fail to meet the criteria enumerated in this chapter for
granting a film permit; or



      5.   Where it has been determined that the preservation of the
public health, safety, and general welfare-demand revocation of the film
permit.



   B.   A notice of revocation shall be mailed to permittee, by
certified mail, stating the grounds for revocation and providing a date
within thirty (30) days of mailing of such notice for a public hearing before
the Council. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may, by
resolution with findings, revoke or modify the film permit and the decision
of the City Council shall be final and conclusive as to all matters in
controversy.



('61 Code, § 13C.16)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



§ 5.224.170  VIOLATION AS A NUISANCE.



   Any filming, video taping, or related activity conducted contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be an
unlawful action and a public nuisance. The city may commence an action at law
or in equity in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction
against the permit holder to ensure compliance of the terms and provisions of
this chapter. All remedies prescribed herein will be cumulative and the use
of any one (1) or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any
other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 13C.17)  (Ord. 839, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 5.228:  PUBLIC DANCES AND ENTERTAINMENT



Section



Article I.  Public Dances



   5.228.010   Definition



   5.228.020   Permit required



   5.228.030   Application for permit



Article II.  Regulation of Entertainment



   5.228.210   Permit required



   5.228.220   Entertainment defined



   5.228.230   Exclusions



   5.228.240   Application for permit



   5.228.250   Investigation and hearing



   5.228.260   Notice of hearing



   5.228.270   Action at hearing



   5.228.280   Denial of application



   5.228.290   Conditions imposed on permit



   5.228.300   Suspension or revocation of permit



   5.228.310   Fees



   5.228.320   Time for filing application



   5.228.330   Security guard required when dancing permitted



   5.228.340   Appeals



ARTICLE I.  PUBLIC DANCES



§ 5.228.010  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC DANCE.  Any entertainment where the guests or, persons
attending, except performers, dance or are permitted to dance, and for the
attendance of which gathering or entertainment, a charge is made or
collection is taken, except that public dance shall not include dances
opened, held or conducted by any lodge or fraternity for purposes other than
for profit.



('61 Code, § 18.1)  (Ord. 65, passed - - )



§ 5.228.020  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or cause to be conducted
or to manage or supervise the opening or conducting of any public dance
within the city, without having procured a permit from the City Council to do
so.



('61 Code, § 18.2)  (Ord. 65, passed - - )



§ 5.228.030  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Any person before opening or conducting a public dance as defined in
the preceding section, shall file application with the Clerk, which
application shall set forth the name of the person proposing to open, hold or
conduct such dance, the name of the person who will be in charge of the
dance, the date the dance shall be held, the place where it is to be held and
the hours during which it shall be conducted. The City Council shall
thereupon at its next regular meeting, pass upon the application, and shall,
if it deems advisable, issue a permit to hold such public dance at such time
and place as stated in the application, and shall prescribe such other and
further regulations as it may deem advisable.



('61 Code, § 18.3)  (Ord. 65, passed - - )



ARTICLE II.  REGULATION OF ENTERTAINMENT



§ 5.228.210  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or business entity shall
operate, conduct or manage any place or premises open to the public where
food or beverages are sold, offered for sale, or given away, and where any
form of entertainment, as defined herein, is provided or furnished without
first obtaining an annual permit to so do as hereinafter provided for in this
article. Entertainment permits hereunder shall be in addition to any other
permit, license or entitlement required by this code or state law.



§ 5.228.220  ENTERTAINMENT DEFINED.



   Entertainment means every form of live entertainment, music, solo band
or orchestra, act, play, burlesque show, fashion show, review, pantomime,
scene, song or dance, act or song, and dance act, or any other act or
performance participated in by one or more persons for the purpose of holding
the attention of, gaining the attention and interest of, diverting or amusing
guests or patrons or the use of a radio or other electronic playback device
providing music for dancing by patrons or guests when operated by or under
the control of an announcer or “disc jockey” who at anytime provides any
form of vocal entertainment, including the announcing of song titles or
artists names.



§ 5.228.230  EXCLUSIONS.



   The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to require a permit
for the following:



   A.   For any entertainment provided for members or guests at a
private club or party, including wedding receptions, where admission is not
open to the public;



   B.   For entertainment conducted in connection with a regularly
established motion picture theater, recreation park, circus, or fairground;



   C.   For entertainment conducted by or sponsored by any bona fide
club, society, or association, organized or incorporated for benevolent,
charitable, dramatic or literary purposes, having an established membership,
and which holds meetings at regular intervals of not less than once per three
(3) month period, when proceeds arising from such entertainment, if any, are
used to further the purposes of such club, society or association.



§ 5.228.240  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   Applicants for entertainment permits shall pay a processing fee as
required by § 5.228.310, and shall file a written, signed and verified
application with the City Manager, or his or her designee (hereinafter
“City Manager”), showing:



   A.   The name and permanent address of the applicant;



   B.   The name, proposed and current, if any, and business address of
the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly
as set forth in its articles of incorporation and the applicant shall show
the name and residence address of each of the officers, directors, and each
stockholder owning ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation or more.
If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall show the names and
residence addresses of each of the members, including limited partners;



   C.   A detailed description of the proposed entertainment, including
type of entertainment, number of persons engaged in the entertainment, and
any further information about the entertainment or entertainers, as the City
Manager may deem necessary;



   D.   The date, hours and location where the entertainment is
proposed to be conducted, and the admission fee, if any, to be charged;



   E.   The name or names of the person or persons responsible for the
management or supervision of applicant's business and of any entertainment
and residence address thereof;



   F.   A statement of the nature and character of applicant's
business, if any, to be carried on in conjunction with such entertainment,
including whether or not alcohol will be served as part of such business;



   G.   Whether or not the applicant or any person or persons
responsible for the management or supervision of applicant's business have
been, within the previous five (5) years, convicted of a felony, the nature
of such offense, and the sentence received therefor including conditions of
parole or probation, if any;



   H.   Whether or not the applicant has ever had any permit or license
issued in connection with the sale of alcohol or provision of entertainment
revoked, including the date thereof and the name of the revoking agency;



   I.   The specific names and locations, if any, where the applicant
has provided entertainment within the previous five (5) years;



   J.   Such other reasonable information as the City Manager, or
designee, may deem necessary.



§ 5.228.250  INVESTIGATION AND HEARING.



   After a complete application for an entertainment permit has been
filed, the City Manager shall cause an investigation to be made of such
application, and after such investigation has been completed, shall cause the
application to be set for hearing before him or her and shall notify the
applicant of the date of such hearing. The investigation, public hearing and
approval or denial of the application shall be completed within forty-five
(45) days of the filing of a complete application. The time limit set forth
herein may be extended upon written authorization of the applicant.



§ 5.228.260  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   After the City Manager has set the application for hearing, notice of
the hearing shall be given to all property owners within three hundred (300)
feet of the proposed or actual location of applicant's business. For the
purposes of this section, notice to property owners shall be sufficient if
given to those property owners who appear as such on the most recent
equalized assessment roll prepared by the County of Orange. All notices
provided for in this section shall be in such form as prescribed by the City
Manager.



§ 5.228.270  ACTION AT HEARING.



   At the time and place set for public hearing as to any application, and
as may be continued, the City Manager shall hear and determine all the facts
and evidence relevant to the applicant and supervisory employees, as well as
the entertainment proposed, including the nature and location of the proposed
entertainment.



§ 5.228.280  DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall grant,
conditionally grant, or deny the application, which decision shall be final
unless appealed in accordance with the provisions of § 5.228.340, within ten
(10) business days of the decision. Such decision shall be set forth in a
statement of decision making necessary findings which shall be issued within
the time specified in § 5.228.250. The City Manager or, on appeal the City
Council, may deny said application if it is found and determined that any of
the following exist:



   A.   The conduct of the establishment or the granting of the
application would be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare; or



   B.   The premises or establishment is likely to be operated in an
illegal, improper or disorderly manner; or



   C.   The applicant or any other person associated with the applicant
as principal or partner, or in a position or capacity involving partial or
total control over the conduct of the business for which such permit is
sought to be issued, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction
of any offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of any
obscene show of any kind, or of a felony, or has had any approval, permit or
license issued in connection with the sale of alcohol or the provision of
entertainment revoked within the preceding five (5) years; or



   D.   That granting the application would create a public nuisance; or



   E.   That the normal operation of the premises would interfere with
the peace and quiet of any surrounding residential neighborhood; or



   F.   The applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the required application.



§ 5.228.290  CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON PERMIT.



   After the public hearing as to any application, the City Manager, or
the City Council on appeal, in granting any permit may also impose such
reasonable conditions as to the use or extent of such permit as may be
required to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to implement
the intent and purpose of this article.



§ 5.228.300  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   After notice and hearing, the City Manager may suspend or revoke any
permit granted pursuant to this article if he or she finds and determines
that any permittee, agent or employee thereof, or any person connected or
associated with the permittee as partner, director, officer, general manager,
or other person exercising managerial authority of, or on behalf of, the
permittee or any entertainer acting under the authority of such permit has:



   A.   Made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in the application for permit, or in any report or record
required to be filed pursuant to this article; or



   B.   Violated any provision of this article or any statute,
ordinance, or condition relating to the permitted activity; or



   C.   Been convicted of a felony; or



   D.   Violated any rules, regulations or conditions imposed upon the
permittee's business or permit; or



   E.   Conducted a permitted business in a manner contrary to the
peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public; or



   F.   Demonstrated a lack of fitness to be trusted with the
privileges granted by such a permit.



The decision of the City Manager shall be set forth in a statement of
decision which shall become final ten (10) business days thereafter unless
appealed in accordance with the provisions of § 5.228.340.



§ 5.228.310  FEES.



   The fee for an entertainment permit shall be in such amount as
established by resolution of the City Council, payable annually on or before
the anniversary of the original date of permit approval. Such permit fee
shall be in addition to any business license fee as may be required by the
business license law of the city. No permit issued hereunder shall be valid
for more than one (1) year nor may the same be assigned or transferred.



§ 5.228.320  TIME FOR FILING APPLICATION.



   All persons engaged in providing entertainment in the city prior to the
effective date of this article shall have one year to obtain an entertainment
permit as required hereby; provided, however, that such entertainment being
conducted prior to the effective date of this article was properly and
validly licensed or permitted pursuant to any then existing provision of the
Brea City Code; and further provided that the enactment of this article shall
not excuse any violation of any entertainment regulation heretofore part of
the Brea City Code.



§ 5.228.330  SECURITY GUARD REQUIRED WHERE DANCING PERMITTED.



   All persons conducting entertainment where dancing by patrons or
customers is permitted, shall have in attendance at the premises for the
purpose of supervising the dancing and the conduct of all patrons and
customers, a duly licensed and uniformed security guard at all times such
dancing is permitted or allowed. However, the provisions of this section
shall apply only to those establishments or premises where a dance floor or
area in excess of one hundred (100) square feet is available or designated
for dancing by customers or patrons.



§ 5.228.340  APPEALS.



   A.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager
pertaining to the issuance, denial, suspension or revocation of an
entertainment permit may appeal such decision to the City Council within ten
(10) business days following the date of such decision. Any such appeal shall
be in writing, filed with the City Clerk, and shall contain the name and
address of the appellant, the date of the decision in question, and facts
supporting the appeal.



   B.   The written appeal shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee
in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council. Upon receipt of the
written appeal, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing at a regular
meeting of the City Council, no later than thirty (30) days following the
date the appeal was filed. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be mailed to the appellant, by certified mail, no later than ten (10)
business days prior to the hearing date. Written notice shall also be given
to surrounding property owners, as provided in § 5.228.260.



   C.   At the hearing on the appeal, the appellant and the city may
submit any and all evidence believed to be relevant. The City Council may
require the presentation of additional evidence from the appellant and/or the
city, and may continue the hearing from time to time in order to consider
such additional evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council
shall, by adoption of a resolution with findings, affirm, reverse or modify
the decision of the City Manager, which decision shall be final.



CHAPTER 5.232:  UNLAWFUL EXPOSURE OF PRIVATE PARTS AND FEMALE BREASTS



Section



   5.232.010   Prohibited acts by waiters, waitresses or entertainers
generally; causing or permitting



   5.232.020   Compensation not necessary to definition of waiter,
waitress or entertainer



   5.232.030   Prohibited acts in public places; causing or permitting



   5.232.040   Exemption of certain establishments



§ 5.232.010  PROHIBITED ACTS BY WAITERS, WAITRESSES OR ENTERTAINERS
GENERALLY; CAUSING OR PERMITTING.



   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while acting as a waiter,
waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves food, beverages or
food and beverages, including but not limited to alcoholic beverages, for
consumption on the premises of such establishment:



   A.   Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or



   B.   Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or



   C.   Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.



('61 Code, § 18A.1)



   D.   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits,
procures, counsels or assists any person to expose or simulate exposure as
prohibited in this section.



('61 Code, § 18A.2)



(Ord. 518, passed - - )



§ 5.232.020  COMPENSATION NOT NECESSARY TO DEFINITION OF WAITER, WAITRESS
OR ENTERTAINER.



   A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if
such person acts in that capacity, without regard to whether or not such
person is paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in
which the activity is performed.



('61 Code, § 18A.3)  (Ord. 518, passed - - )



§ 5.232.030  PROHIBITED ACTS IN PUBLIC PLACES; CAUSING OR PERMITTING.



   A.   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while
participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public
place, place open to the public, or place open to public view:



      1.   Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal
cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region;



      2.   Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, public hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or



      3.   Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof.



('61 Code, § 18A.4)



   B.   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits,
procures, counsels or assists any person to expose or simulate exposure as
prohibited in this section.



('61 Code, § 18A.5)



(Ord. 518, passed - - )



§ 5.232.040  EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to conduct occurring
within a theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily
devoted to theatrical performances.



('61 Code, § 18A.6)  (Ord. 518, passed - - )



CHAPTER 5.236:  TAXICAB SERVICE



Section



   5.236.010   Definitions



   5.236.020   City authorization required



   5.236.030   Driver's permit required



   5.236.040   Taxicab vehicle permit required



   5.236.050   Taxicab business permit required



   5.236.060   Application for permits



   5.236.070   Testing for controlled substances and alcohol



   5.236.080   Insurance required



   5.236.090   Nontransferability



   5.236.100   Equipment



   5.236.110   Mechanical condition



   5.236.120   Operational requirements



   5.236.130   Rates and charges



   5.236.140   Separate from business licensing



§ 5.236.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the words and terms set forth below
shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions:



   CITY. The city of Brea.



   CITY AUTHORIZATION. City authorization to operate a taxicab business in
the city.



   DRIVER. A person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab.



   DRIVER'S PERMIT. A valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to
drive or control the movements of a taxicab.



   OCTAP. The Orange County Taxi Administration Program administered by
the Orange County Transportation Authority.



   OPERATE A TAXICAB. To drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up
passengers for hire in the city.



   OWNER. The registered owner or lessor of a taxicab.



   PERSON. Includes natural person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity.



   TAXICAB. A vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the city,
capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, and
used to carry passengers for hire.  The term shall exclude a vehicle
operating as a Charter Party Carrier licensed as such by any state agency,
including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity issued by any state agency,
including the Public Utilities Commission.



   TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT. A valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a
person to operate a taxicab business.



   TAXICAB VEHICLE PERMIT. A valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a
particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab.



(Ord. 1001, 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.020  CITY AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.



   A.   A person shall operate a taxicab only if the owner of that
taxicab is authorized by OCTAP to operate a taxicab business.



   B.   An owner shall allow a taxicab owned by or under the control of
the owner to be operated only if the owner is authorized by OCTAP to operate
a taxicab business.



   C.   City's authorization to operate a taxicab and taxicab business
in the city shall be deemed granted provided each driver and taxicab business
possesses all required OCTAP permits and each business possesses a valid city
business license, as required by this Code.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.030  DRIVER'S PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A person shall operate a taxicab only if that person possesses a
driver's permit and city authorization has been granted.  An owner shall
only allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by or under the control of the
owner if that driver possesses a driver's permit and city authorization has
been granted.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.040  TAXICAB VEHICLE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A person shall operate a taxicab only if that vehicle displays a
taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been granted. An owner
shall allow a taxicab owned by or under the control of the owner to be
operated in the city only if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit
and if city authorization has been granted.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.050  TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A person shall operate a taxicab business in the city only if that
person possesses a taxicab business permit and if city authorization has been
granted.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.060  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   Application for a driver's permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab
business permit shall be made to OCTAP upon a form provided by OCTAP and
shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the
administrative costs of processing said application as established by the
Orange County Transportation Authority.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.070  TESTING FOR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND ALCOHOL.



   A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as
required by any and all applicable state and federal statutes.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.080  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   A driver operating a taxicab in the city shall at all times carry proof
of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as
established by OCTAP and adopted by resolution of the City Council.  Said
proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.090  NONTRANSFERABILITY.



   No permit issued under this chapter shall be used by or assigned to any
person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.100  EQUIPMENT.



   A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be
equipped according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.110  MECHANICAL CONDITION.



   A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be
maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.120  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Each driver shall carry each passenger to his/her destination
by only the most direct and accessible route.



   B.   Each taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP
conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and
adopted by resolution of the City Council.



   C.   Each taxicab shall have the following information continuously
posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger's compartment
according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by resolution of
the City Council:



      1.   A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said
taxicab;



      2.   The driver's name and address;



      3.   The owner's name, address and telephone number;



      4.   The taxicab identification number;



      5.   The driver's permit issued pursuant to this chapter;



      6.   The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this
chapter; and



      7.   Any other information required by the city.



   D.   A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the
request of the person paying the fare.



   E.   A taxicab shall be operated only if the passenger compartment
is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



   F.   A driver shall not leave his or her taxicab to solicit
passengers.



   G.   The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the
taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on
the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP
and adopted by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.130  RATES AND CHARGES.



   No driver shall charge rates or charges other than those established by
OCTAP and adopted by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



§ 5.236.140  SEPARATE FROM BUSINESS LICENSING.



   The requirements of this chapter are separate and independent from all
other provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, those
provisions related to business licensing.



(Ord. 1001, passed 11-18-97)



CHAPTER 5.240:  OFFICIAL POLICE TOWING SERVICES



Section



   5.240.010   Intent and purpose



   5.240.020   Definitions



   5.240.030   Franchise required



   5.240.040   Franchise fee



   5.240.050   Franchise fee reports



   5.240.060   Selection of franchisees



   5.240.070   Grounds for franchise denial



   5.240.080   Franchise terms and conditions



   5.240.090   Franchise application and fee; renewal



   5.240.100   Performance review; re-ranking; franchise suspension and
revocation



   5.240.110   Business license required



   5.240.120   Transfer and assignment of franchise



   5.240.130   Standards for tow trucks, towing equipment and storage
yards



   5.240.140   Insurance



   5.240.150   Indemnity



   5.240.160   Liquidated damages



   5.240.170   Applicability



Statutory reference:



   For state law authorizing cities to require franchise and impose 
franchise fee, see Cal. Veh. Code  § 12110.



§ 5.240.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of this chapter to establish procedures applicable to
the selection, franchising and operation of towing service companies that
will provide official towing services to the Brea Police Department. The
further intent of this chapter is to insure that such services are promptly
and safely performed by responsible towing companies, at reasonable prices,
and in the best interest of the public and efficient police operations.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the City of Brea, or designee
thereof.



   FINANCIAL SERVICES DIRECTOR. The Financial Services Director of the
City of Brea, or designee thereof.



   OFFICIAL POLICE TOW SERVICE. A vehicle towing and storage company
having a franchise with the City of Brea to provide official towing
services.  An OFFICIAL POLICE TOW SERVICE shall be used by the Brea Police
Department for any situation where the Police Department requires the
provision of official towing services.



   OFFICIAL TOWING SERVICES. Towing services, including the storage and
impounding of vehicles, performed for and as required by the Brea Police
Department.



   STORAGE YARD ATTENDANT. Any person who serves as a vehicle storage yard
attendant for an official police tow service.



   TOW POLICY. Collectively, the official vehicle towing and storage
policy, rules and regulations governing the daily operations of each official
police tow service, as established and amended from time to time by the Chief
of Police following written notice to all official police tow services. The
TOW POLICY governs daily operations, establishes response times, and sets
forth administrative procedures. It is provided to each official police tow
service at the commencement of its franchise. The TOW POLICY, as the same may
be amended from time to time, is incorporated herein by reference.



   TOW TRUCK. A tow truck as defined in Cal. Veh. Code § 615, and further
includes any motor vehicle that has been altered or designed and equipped
for, and used in the business of, towing vehicles by means of a crane, tow
bar, tow line, flatbed, roll back, or dolly, or is otherwise exclusively used
to render assistance to other vehicles.



   TOW TRUCK OPERATOR. Any person operating a tow truck for an official
police tow service.



   TOWING SERVICES. The hook-up and towing of vehicles by tow truck, and
may include storage of vehicles towed.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.030  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   No towing service company or operator may provide official towing
services unless such company or operator has been granted a franchise in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.040  FRANCHISE FEE.



   As a condition of being granted the privilege of providing official
towing services, each official police tow service shall pay the city a
franchise fee in such amount as may be set, from time to time, by resolution
of the City Council. The franchise fee shall be payable monthly to the city
during the term of the franchise. 



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.050  FRANCHISE FEE REPORTS.



   On each anniversary of being granted a franchise hereunder, or upon
request of the city, each official police tow service shall provide the
Financial Services Director with a detailed income statement reflecting its
provision of the official towing services and charges collected. Such
statements shall provide such information, and shall be in such substance and
format as may be established by the Financial Services Director and as may
otherwise be required by the tow policy.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.060  SELECTION OF FRANCHISEES.



   A.   At least ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration date
of an existing franchise, or whenever the Chief of Police determines that
there is need and necessity for a new or additional official police tow
service, the Chief of Police may request the Financial Services Director to
send out a notice of request for proposals for the provision of official
towing services. The form of the notice shall be approved by the Chief of
Police. All proposals shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police who may select
the most qualified towing company or companies to submit an application to
become an official police tow service and receive a franchise pursuant to
this chapter. In determining whether a towing company is qualified to submit
an application, the Chief of Police shall be guided by his or her preliminary
determination that, as proposed, the applicant and the applicant’s towing
services will likely comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter
as well as the established tow policy. 



   B.   The Chief of Police shall investigate and take all steps
necessary to verify all information included in the application, including
whether or not the applicant and any other owners of the towing service
satisfy the requirements of this chapter, and to determine the applicant’s
ability to provide quality towing services in furtherance of the intent and
purpose of this chapter.  In the discretion of the Chief of Police, a
hearing may be conducted concerning the granting of any franchise.  If the
Chief of Police finds that the applicant satisfies all such requirements,
that grounds for denial do not exist, and it is in the best interest of the
city, then the Chief of Police shall approve the application for a franchise.
Otherwise the application shall be denied. The Chief of Police, in his or her
discretion, and solely as an accommodation to a franchise applicant, may make
the final grant of a franchise conditional upon satisfactory completion of
all the background investigation provided, however, that such conditional
franchisee shall be subject to all requirements of this chapter and the tow
policy. 



   C.   Prior to commencement of services as a franchisee, and as a
condition of being granted a franchise hereunder, each official police tow
service must agree in writing to be bound by and to comply with, throughout
the term of the franchise, all provisions of this chapter, the tow policy,
and any and all other applicable rules and regulations. 



   D.   Each new franchisee shall be placed at the bottom of the
current call priority list, as established by the Chief of Police provided,
however, that if there are no existing franchises when any such new franchise
or franchises are granted, then the Chief of Police shall establish the
priority list by lottery which shall remain in effect unless and until
revised as provided in this chapter and/or the tow policy. The number one
(No. 1) ranked official police tow service shall receive all calls for
service initiated and required by the Brea Police Department. In the event
the No. 1 official police tow service is unable to respond within the
required response time, the second official police tow service (i.e. ranked
No. 2) shall be given the call.  In the event the No. 2 official police tow
service is unable to respond within the approved time, the No. 3 official
police tow service shall be given the call.  Throughout the term of the
franchise, including any renewal periods, each official police tow service
shall occupy the rank assigned unless and until re-ranked (up or down),
suspended or removed from the priority list by revocation of a franchise, as
provided herein.  A separate, sequential rotation list shall be utilized for
towing services requested by motorists through the Brea Police Department. 



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.070   GROUNDS FOR FRANCHISE DENIAL.



   A franchise application or renewal application may be denied whenever
the Chief of Police determines that:



   A.   The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the
application;



   B.   The applicant or any ten percent (10%) or greater owner has
been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor in connection with the provision of
towing services, or any crime constituting a form of theft or fraud in
connection with any other services rendered to the public, within the
previous ten (10) years;



   C.  The applicant does not, or is likely to not, comply with the
requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, requirements for
tow trucks and equipment, or vehicle storage yards;



   D.  The applicant is unlikely to be able to provide official towing
services on a consistent and uninterrupted basis, based upon the
applicant’s history as a tow service operator, including, but not limited
to, prior towing permit revocation or other disciplinary action, any adverse
civil judgment or settlement, bankruptcy or any other relevant, verifiable
facts bearing upon the likely ability of the applicant to consistently
satisfy the requirements of this chapter throughout the term of a franchise.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.080  FRANCHISE TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   A.   Term. Each franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
non-exclusive and shall be for a term of no longer than four (4) years.



   B.   Maximum number of franchises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
limit the number of franchises in effect at any one time, and no provision of
this chapter shall be deemed to require the granting of a franchise if the
Chief of Police determines that such franchise grant is not in the best
interest of the city and the public.



   C.   Maximum fee schedule. A uniform towing and storage fee schedule
setting forth maximum fees shall be established by the Chief of Police. The
fees shall be determined by computing the average towing and storage fees
allowed by the California Highway Patrol for the Santa Ana region. The fees
may be adjusted no more than once per year unless an adjustment to fees is
approved more frequently by the CHP. No official police tow service shall
charge more than the fees set forth in the fee schedule.



   D.   Fee disputes. Should there be any dispute between an official
police tow service and a vehicle owner over rates, fees or charges imposed
for official towing services rendered under this chapter, such dispute shall
be decided by the Chief of Police, and the official police tow service shall
make no demands upon the vehicle owner for a sum in excess of the amount
determined to be reasonable by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may
hold an administrative hearing on any such dispute, if any party to the
dispute so requests, whereupon both parties shall be provided the opportunity
to present evidence in support of their position. The decision of the Chief
of Police in any such dispute shall be final.



   E.   Compliance with chapter. Following the grant of a franchise or
conditional grant of a franchise, and as a condition of such grant, each
official police tow service shall strictly comply with each and every
provision of this chapter, the tow policy and any and all other laws,
statutes and regulations applicable to the provision of official towing
services to the Brea Police Department. Any failure to so comply shall be
grounds for re-ranking, franchise suspension, or franchise revocation.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.090  FRANCHISE APPLICATION AND FEE; RENEWAL.



   A.   The form of franchise application required to be submitted
pursuant to § 5.240.060 shall be a typewritten document requesting the
granting of a franchise, and containing all information required to be
provided pursuant to this section. It shall be accompanied by an application
fee in such amount as may be established by resolution of the City Council,
to defray all or part of the costs of investigation and processing of the
application. The applicant shall sign at the end of the application,
certifying under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California
that that the information provided therein is true and correct. The
application shall include any information deemed necessary by the Chief of
Police, including, but not limited to, detailed information concerning: (i)
all persons who will be tow truck operators or storage yard attendants, and
any and all persons or entities having any ownership interest in the towing
service company seeking a franchise hereunder; (ii) equipment and property
proposed to be utilized in the provision of official towing services; (iii)
any other information necessary to determine whether or not the applicant
will likely be able to comply with the tow policy; and (iv) the manner in
which official towing services are to be provided. Any change in information
required to be submitted as part of the application process must be reported
to the Chief of Police within ten (10) business days of such change, or
otherwise as required by this chapter or the towing policy.



   B.   Each applicant shall also provide its proposed schedule of
fees, none of which may exceed the maximum fee permitted under this chapter.
If the application is approved, the franchisee shall notify the Chief of
Police of any change in this schedule at least thirty (30) calendar days in
advance of the date the change is to become effective. No official police tow
service shall charge more than the rates filed with the Chief of Police,
unless and until sixty (60) or more days prior written notice of a fee
increase has been filed with the Chief of Police.



   C.   Not later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of
its franchise, any franchisee in good standing may request renewal thereof.
Each renewal applicant shall be required to verify that the information
contained in the original application, as submitted, or as revised following
notice to the Chief of Police as required herein, is true and correct. The
Chief of Police shall be entitled to process the request for renewal in the
same manner and subject to the same criteria as a new application, to the
extent deemed necessary. Such processing may include, but is not limited to,
conducting a complete background investigation. If the Chief of Police
determines that grounds exist for denial of a new application, or revocation
or suspension of the existing franchise, then the renewal application shall
be denied.  Otherwise the renewal application shall be approved or
conditionally approved and the franchisee shall retain its current priority
list ranking unless re-ranked as provided herein.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.100  PERFORMANCE REVIEW; RE-RANKING; FRANCHISE SUSPENSION AND
REVOCATION.



   A.   Review. The Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion,
periodically review the performance and qualifications of any official police
tow service franchisee to ensure compliance with all requirements of this
chapter and the tow policy. In performing such review, the Chief of Police
may request to be provided full, true and correct copies of any and all
records required to be maintained by the franchisee, or to inspect the same
on the franchisee’s premises, including, but not limited to, any and all
citizen's complaints and/or records of response times.



   B.   Re-ranking. In the event any official police tow service fails
to maintain compliance with any requirement of this chapter or the tow
policy, such tow service may be re-ranked to a lower position on the priority
list, depending upon the severity of the violation.  In the case of a minor
violation, the Chief of Police shall be authorized to provide a written
warning to the official police tow service, together with a time by which
such violation must be remedied.  A failure to remedy a violation within a
specified period may result in re-ranking, suspension or revocation.
Procedures applicable to re-ranking and appeal thereof, shall be set forth in
the tow policy.



   C.  Suspension and revocation. Where grounds exist, as set forth in
this section, an official police tow service franchise may be suspended or
revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in the tow policy.



   D.   Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, the Chief of Police
may immediately suspend a franchise and the official police tow service from
the priority call list, pending a hearing, where deemed necessary in order to
protect the public from an immediate threat of harm or risk of injury.



   E.   Any official police tow service that has its franchise revoked
may not re-apply to be an official police tow service for at least six (6)
months, unless otherwise provided as part of a decision following an appeal.



   F.   Grounds for revocation and suspension. A franchise may be
suspended or revoked whenever the Chief of Police determines that an official
police tow service, or owner or operator thereof has:



      1.   Violated or failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter affecting the public health and safety, or has committed a
substantial and severe violation of this chapter or any state or federal law,
or has failed to cure any violation of this chapter following written notice;



      2.   Engaged in any activity, or has become subject to any
governmental action or judicial or regulatory determination including, but
not limited to, conviction of a crime, that would be grounds for denial of a
franchise;



      3.   Failed to consistently maintain a satisfactory level of
service to the Brea Police Department or the public, or has or otherwise is
creating a risk of harm to the public health or safety in the provision of
tow services;



      4.   Committed any fraud or deceit upon the city, including,
without limitation, falsifying data and records relating to the provision of
official towing services, including response times or the type or number of
official towing services performed; or has otherwise engaged in dishonesty in
connection with the franchise obligations;



      5.   Committed any fraud or deceit upon any person in
connection with the provision of towing services;



      6.   Violated any order or ruling of any city official or
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the official police tow service in
connection with its provision of official towing services, unless such order
or ruling is being validly appealed or contested by the tow service through
legitimate proceedings conducted in good faith; or



      7.   Become insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts
and obligations, or is adjudged to be bankrupt, in connection with, or
otherwise so as to adversely affect, the operation of the official police tow
service.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.110  BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Unless exempt by law, each official police tow service shall have and
maintain a valid license to do business in the city at all times during the
term of its franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.120  TRANSFER AND ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE.



   A.   No franchise granted hereunder, or any interest therein, may be
assigned, sold, transferred, leased, mortgaged, encumbered or conveyed in any
manner whatsoever, either in whole or in part, by forced or involuntary sale,
or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior
written consent of the Chief of Police. Any request to transfer or assign the
franchise must be in writing and must be submitted to the Chief of Police at
least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed effective date of
such sale, transfer, or assignment.



   B.   Upon receipt of a written request to assign or otherwise convey
a franchise, together with an application for a new franchise and application
fee, all as required of new franchise applicants, the Chief of Police shall
process the application in the same manner as an application for a new
franchise. The Chief of Police may approve or deny the request based upon the
same criteria as applicable to new franchise applications.



   C.   The provisions of subsection A, above, shall apply to any
change in control of a franchisee, as determined by the Chief of Police. The
term CHANGE IN CONTROL as used herein is not limited to a change in major
stockholders or partners of the official police tow service, but also
includes any change in actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
In the event an official police tow service is, or is owned by, a
corporation, prior written consent of the Chief of Police shall be required
where ownership or control of more than forty-nine percent  (49%) of the
voting stock of the corporation is being sold or conveyed to non-owners or
shareholders of the official police tow service. Nothing in this provision
shall be construed to require the prior authorization of the Chief of Police
where the only change in control is a transfer of the franchise to a wholly
owned subsidiary of the franchisee.



   D.   Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, mortgage,
or otherwise convey any or all of an official police tow service franchise,
in violation of this chapter, shall be null and void and shall be grounds for
revocation of its franchise.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.130  STANDARDS FOR TOW TRUCKS,  TOWING EQUIPMENT AND STORAGE YARDS.



   Each official police tow service shall, at all times, have exclusively
available, through ownership or lease, for the performance of its obligations
under the towing franchise, the number and types of tow trucks, equipped with
designated towing equipment, as specified in the tow policy. Furthermore,
each official police tow service shall, at all times, have exclusively
available, through ownership or lease, for the performance of its obligations
under the towing franchise, one or more vehicle storage yards of such size
and proximity to Brea Police Department facilities, and manned and equipped,
as specified in the tow policy.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.140  INSURANCE.



   Each official police tow service shall procure and maintain throughout
the term of its franchise, at its sole cost, policies of insurance in such
amount and form as set forth in the tow policy and/or as required by the
Chief of Police. Such insurance shall include, but is not limited to, auto
liability insurance, premises liability insurance, insurance specifically
applicable to towing operations, including the operation of vehicle storage
yards and the protection of stored and impounded vehicles and their contents,
and workers compensation insurance for the benefit of the tow service’s
employees.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.150  INDEMNITY. 



   A.   Each official police tow service shall, to the fullest extent
permitted by law, indemnify, defend and hold the City of Brea, the City of
Yorba Linda (for so long as the City of Brea provides law enforcement
services to the City of Yorba Linda), and each of those cities’ elected
officials, officers, agents, employees, and volunteers (collectively, “the
indemnitees”), free and harmless with respect to any and all claims,
demands, and/or liabilities of any nature, for damages due to death of or
injury to any person, injury to property, or other loss of any nature,
allegedly or actually arising out of or connected with the grant of the
franchise, or the acts or omissions, whether or not negligent or intentional,
of the official police tow service, or any owner, employee, agent,
subcontractor or any other person or entity acting on behalf of or with the
permission of the official police tow service. The indemnity obligation set
forth herein shall include the payment of any and all attorneys’ and
experts’ fees, and all costs of suit incurred by or on behalf of any of the
indemnitees.



   B.   The City of Brea shall not be deemed to have waived any rights
that it may possess against an official police tow service because of the
acceptance by the city, or the deposit with the city, of any insurance policy
or certificate required pursuant to this chapter. This indemnity provision
shall apply regardless of whether or not any insurance policies are
determined to be applicable to the claim, demand, damage, liability, loss,
cost or expense. The obligations of the official police tow service pursuant
to this section will not be limited by the provisions of any workers
compensation act or similar act. Each official police tow service is deemed
to have waived any applicable statutory immunity, under any statute or law,
as to all indemnitees. The indemnity obligations set forth in this section
shall survive the expiration or revocation of the franchise to the maximum
extent permitted by law.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.160  LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.



   A.   An official police tow service’s failure to meet the average
response time specified in the tow policy for any thirty (30) consecutive day
period, or its failure to meet the maximum response time specified in the tow
policy for any single request for tow service, will result in damage being
sustained by the city. Such damages are, and will continue to be speculative
and difficult to ascertain. Therefore, as a liquidated damage and not as a
penalty, each official police tow service shall pay the city two hundred
fifty dollars ($250) each time the tow service fails to meet the average
response time requirements for any thirty (30) calendar day period, and one
hundred dollars ($100) each time it exceeds the maximum response time
requirement. Such amounts represent the minimum expense caused to the city
for each described response time violation.



   B.   Written notice and an opportunity for a hearing shall be given
to the official police tow service prior to the imposition of liquidated
damages, as set forth in the tow policy.



   C.   The remedies set forth in this section pertaining to violations
of response time requirements, are alternative to any other applicable
remedies set forth in this chapter.



   D.   Acceptance of liquidated damages by the city on any occasion
shall not be deemed to be a waiver of any subsequent violation by an official
police tow service, nor shall acceptance of liquidated damages by the city
preclude the Chief of Police from suspending or revoking a franchise as
permitted herein for any subsequent violation.



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



§ 5.240.170  APPLICABILITY.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, each towing
service company providing official towing services to the City of Brea as of
the effective date of this chapter shall:



      1.   Be deemed to be an official police tow service having a
franchise for a term specified by the Chief of Police not exceeding four (4)
years;



      2.   Maintain its ranking on the priority list as it existed
upon that effective date; and



      3.   Be subject to all requirements of the chapter enacted
hereby, including the payment of franchise fees.



   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no towing service company
currently providing official towing services shall be granted a franchise as
provided in this section unless such company has submitted a franchise
application that has been approved by the Chief of Police prior to this
chapter becoming effective, or within such other time as he or she may
specify. 



(Ord. 1070, passed 6-1-04)



TITLE 6:  ANIMALS



   Chapter



      6.00   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      6.04   ANIMAL CONTROL, WELFARE AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS



CHAPTER 6.00:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   6.00.010   Definition



   6.00.020   Enclosures to be neatly constructed and painted



   6.00.030   Sanitary conditions required



   6.00.040   Hogs or swine prohibited within city



   6.00.050   Wild bird sanctuary



   6.00.060   Feeding or making food available to non- domesticated
animals prohibited



Cross-reference:



   Beekeeping prohibited, see § 8.32.010



   Horse riding within parks, trails and recreational facilities, see §
12.00.100



§ 6.00.010  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY POUND.  The public pound of the county.



('61 Code, § 4.1)



§ 6.00.020  ENCLOSURES TO BE NEATLY CONSTRUCTED AND PAINTED.



   Any building, pen, other place or structure where animals, fowl, birds
or pigeons are kept or maintained shall be neatly constructed, painted in
such manner as to conform to the neighborhood and not constitute an unsightly
condition.



('61 Code, § 4.2)  (Ord. 230, passed  - - )



§ 6.00.030  SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.



   Whether or not a special permit is required by the provisions of this
chapter, all animals, fowl, pigeons or birds kept or maintained within the
city shall be kept and maintained in a sanitary condition, all refuse and
manure removed from the premises at least once each calendar week, and all
rules and regulations of the Health Department pertaining to sanitary
conditions and maintenance of the premises shall be complied with; regardless
of whether a permit is required or not, nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as allowing a nuisance of any kind or character to be committed.



('61 Code, § 4.3)  (Ord. 230, passed  - - )



§ 6.00.040  HOGS OR SWINE PROHIBITED WITHIN CITY.



   It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any hog or swine within the
city limits.



('61 Code, § 4.4)  (Ord. 230, passed  - - )



§ 6.00.050  WILD BIRD SANCTUARY.



   A.   The city is hereby designated a bird sanctuary. Signs bearing
the legend “BREA IS A WILD BIRD SANCTUARY” may be placed at appropriate
locations at or near the city limits at principal entrances to the city.



   B.   No person shall shoot or otherwise harm any wild birds within
the city, and no person shall molest or damage the nest or the eggs of any
wild birds within the city. In the event the City Council or the Chief of
Police shall determine that any species of bird has become a public nuisance
or a menace to health or property, the nuisance may thereupon be abated by
the destruction of such birds, their nests and eggs and their breeding
grounds and by any other lawful means.



('61 Code, § 4.9-1)  (Ord. 364, passed  - - )



§ 6.00.060  FEEDING OR MAKING FOOD AVAILABLE TO NON- DOMESTICATED ANIMALS
PROHIBITED.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to feed or provide food to any
non-domesticated animal. For purposes of this section, NON-DOMESTICATED
ANIMAL means and refers to non-domesticated mammalian predators including
coyotes, racoons, foxes, and opossums, and non-domesticated rodents.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to place in any outdoor area any
food of any kind for consumption by any non-domesticated animal.



   C.   This section shall not apply to the feeding of any non-
domesticated animal by the owner of such animal provided the animal is being
lawfully kept under a valid certificate or permit issued by the State of
California Department of Fish and Game.



   D.   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty
of an infraction for the first violation, and a misdemeanor for any
additional violation occurring within one (1) year of a previous violation.
Violations are subject to punishment as provided for in Chapter 1.04 of this
code.



(Ord. 1209, passed 3-5-19)



CHAPTER 6.04:  ANIMAL CONTROL, WELFARE AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS



Section



   6.04.010   County regulations adopted



   6.04.020   Fines and penalties



   6.04.030   Establishment of fees



§ 6.04.010  COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED.



   A.   The following parts of the codified ordinances of the County of
Orange, as the same exist on January 1, 2018, and excluding any penalty
provisions, are hereby are adopted by reference as if set forth in full
herein:



      1.   Division 1 of Title 4;



      2.   Article 1 of Division 1 of Title 5;



      3.   Sections 5-1-29 and 5-1-30 of Article 2 of Division 1 of
Title 5;



      4.   Article 3 of Division 1 of Title 5;



      5.   Division 2 of Title 5;



      6.   Article 17 of Division 3 of Title 5.



   B.   To the extent the context permits or requires, all references
in the foregoing parts of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange to
unincorporated areas of the County of Orange, shall mean and refer to all
areas within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Brea.



   C.   At least one certified copy of the foregoing parts of the
Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange adopted by reference are on file
in the office of the City Clerk.



('61 Code, § 4.10)  (Ord. 421, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 483, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 599, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1108, passed 10-16-07; Am. Ord. 1202,
passed 2-20-18)



§ 6.04.020  FINES AND PENALTIES.



   A.   Establishment of fines and penalties. Civil fines for barking
dogs, as defined in § 4-1-3 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of
Orange, and for any other provisions adopted in § 6.04.010 that provide for
a civil fine, shall be as established by resolution of the City Council.



   B.   Collection of unpaid fines.



      1.   On behalf of the city, the county, at its discretion, may
pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid
fines and late penalties relating to administrative penalties arising under
the provisions of Title 4 and/or Title 5 of the Codified Ordinances of the
County of Orange, as adopted in § 6.04.010. Pursuit of one remedy does not
preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines and late
penalties owed by a violator have been collected.



      2.   To the extent permitted by law, failure to timely remit
payment of a citation fine and/or late penalty authorized under § 4-1-59.7
of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange will result in criminal
liability, and a warrant may be issued for a violator's arrest. Nonpayment of
such fine and/or late penalty shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.



   C.   Criminal penalties. Violation of any provision of any Section,
Article or Division of Title 4 or Title 5 of the Codified Ordinances of the
County of Orange, adopted in § 6.04.010 of this chapter that is deemed to be
a misdemeanor, shall be punishable as specified in § 1.04.010.D of this
code, or any successor provision thereto, and any violation thereof deemed to
be an infraction, shall be punishable as specified in § 1.04.010.E of this
code, or any successor provision thereto.



(Ord. 1108, passed 10-16-07; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 2-20-18)



§ 6.04.030  ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES.



   The City Council shall from time to time by resolution adopt and amend
fee schedules for dog licenses and other licenses under this chapter, for
services at the county animal shelter rendered pursuant to this chapter and
under contract with the city, including but not limited to fees for care and
food, vaccination charges, document charges, placement fees, impound fees,
veterinary care and release fees for approved medical research.



('61 Code, § 6.04.20)  (Ord. 452, passed  - - )



TITLE 7:  RESERVED



TITLE 8:  HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE



   Chapter



      8.00     EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS



      8.04     DRIVE-IN AND TAKE OUT RESTAURANTS



      8.08     ENVIRONMENTAL AND ENERGY REGULATIONS



      8.12     FLY PREVENTION AND COMMERCIAL MANURE DEALERS



      8.16     GRAFFITI PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL



      8.20     NOISE CONTROL



      8.24     OIL AND OIL WELLS



      8.28     SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND SALVAGE OF RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS



      8.29   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE MANAGEMENT



      8.30   LARGE EVENT AND VENUE FACILITY WASTE MANAGEMENT



      8.32     MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



      8.36     REGULATION OF AMBULANCES



      8.38     REGULATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS



      8.42   PIPELINE FRANCHISES



      8.44   STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC AREAS



      8.48   CANNABIS PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 8.00:  EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS



Section



   8.00.010   Purposes



   8.00.020   Definition



   8.00.030   Disaster Council



   8.00.040   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services



   8.00.050   Emergency organization



   8.00.060   Emergency plan



   8.00.070   Expenditures



   8.00.080   Punishment of violations



§ 8.00.010  PURPOSES.



   The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the
preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and
property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the
emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of
this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and
affected private persons.



('61 Code, § 8.1)  (Ord. 588, passed  - - )



§ 8.00.020  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY.  The actual or threatened existence of conditions of
disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within
this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm,
epidemic, riot or earthquake or other conditions, including conditions
resulting from war or imminent threat of war, which conditions are or are
likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and
facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political
subdivisions to combat.



('61 Code, § 8.2)  (Ord. 588, passed  - - )



§ 8.00.030  DISASTER COUNCIL.



   The City Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the
following:



   A.   The Mayor, who shall be Chairperson.



   B.   The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be
Vice-chairperson.



   C.   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services.



   D.   Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a
current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter.



   E.   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans,
professional or other organizations having an official emergency
responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and
consent of the City Council.



('61 Code, § 8.3)



   F.   It shall be the duty of the City Disaster Council, and it is
hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council,
emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and
resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such
plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the
Chairperson or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such
meeting, upon call of the Vice-chairperson.



('61 Code, § 8.4)



(Ord. 588, passed  - - )



§ 8.00.040  DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES.



   A.   Creation of offices.



      1.   There is hereby created the office of Director of
Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency
Services.



      2.   There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director
of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director.



('61 Code, § 8.5)



   B.   Powers and duties.



      1.   The Director is hereby empowered to:



         a.   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence
or threatened existence of a local emergency if the City Council is in
session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session.
Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council
shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter
or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.



         b.   Request the governor to proclaim a state of
emergency when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available
resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.



         c.   Control and direct the effort of the emergency
organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this
chapter.



         d.   Direct cooperation between and coordination of
services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve
questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.



         e.   Represent this city in all dealings with public or
private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.



         f.   In the event of the proclamation of a local
emergency, as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by
the governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or of
the existence of a state of war emergency, the Director is hereby empowered:



            (1)   To make and issue rules and regulations on
matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected
by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be
confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;



            (2)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such
other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and
property, and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required
immediately, to commandeer such for public use;



            (3)   To require emergency services of any city
officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a local
emergency or state of emergency in the county in which this city is located
or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many
citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of
his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges,
benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster
service workers;



            (4)   To requisition necessary personnel or
material of any city department or agency; and



            (5)   To execute all of his or her ordinary power
as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this
chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the
City Council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any
agreement approved by the City Council and by any lawful authority.



      2.   The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the
order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director
is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties
during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City
Council.



      3.   The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of
the Director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop
emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city and shall have
such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.



('61 Code, § 8.6)  (Ord. 588, passed  - - )



§ 8.00.050  EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.



   All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups,
organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including
persons impressed into service under the provisions of § 8.00.040.B.1.f.(3),
be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in
this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization
of the city.



('61 Code, § 8.7)  (Ord. 588, passed  - - )



§ 8.00.060  EMERGENCY PLAN.



   The City Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of
the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective
mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private,
to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or
state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and
duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall
take effect upon adopting by resolution of the City Council.



('61 Code, § 8.8)  (Ord. 588, passed  - - )



§ 8.00.070  EXPENDITURES.



   Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities,
including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for
direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city.



('61 Code, § 8.9)  (Ord. 588, passed  - - )



§ 8.00.080  PUNISHMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, during an emergency to:



   A.   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him
or her by virtue of this chapter.



   B.   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be
likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of
inhabitants of this city, or such as to prevent, hinder or delay the defense
or protection thereof.



   C.   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the emergency agency of the state.



('61 Code, § 8.10)  (Ord. 588, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 8.04:  DRIVE-IN AND TAKE OUT RESTAURANTS



Section



   8.04.010   Defined



   8.04.020   Permit for operation



   8.04.030   Maintenance of premises by permittee



   8.04.040   Conduct prohibited



   8.04.050   Interference with use of premises



   8.04.060   Required sign



   8.04.070   Permissible signs



   8.04.080   Additional permittee building and maintenance requirements



   8.04.090   Revocation of permit



   8.04.100   Permit not transferable



§ 8.04.010  DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVE-IN or TAKE-OUT RESTAURANT.  Any cafe, food establishment or
public eating place as defined in this chapter where food or frozen dessert,
or beverage or drink is delivered to, or served directly, or sold to anyone
for consumption on the premises at tables or stands in the open or unenclosed
areas or in any vehicles stopped, standing or parked upon the premises, or in
or upon any street, alley, land, parking area or grounds immediately adjacent
to such premises, or for consumption off of the premises.



('61 Code, § 12A.1)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.020  PERMIT FOR OPERATION.



   A.   Health permit.  No permit shall be issued under this chapter
for any drive-in or takeout restaurant unless a health permit has been issued
and remains in full force and effect for the conducting of such business on
the premises.



   B.   Permit.  Each application for a permit under this chapter
shall be referred to the Health Officer for processing and report. If the
Health Officer approves the issuance of a permit, the Financial Services
Director shall, upon payment of the required business license fee and upon
compliance with the terms and provisions of this section and this code, issue
a permit to such applicant.



('61 Code, § 12A.2)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.030  MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES BY PERMITTEE.



   A.   The permittee shall maintain the premises in accordance with
the terms and provisions of this section and this code.



      1.   Loud noise, and the like.  The permittee shall not cause
or create or permit any loud music, noise or other sounds by means of
phono-graph, radio, or other broadcasting apparatus or devise, the sound
output of which exceeds at peak volume seventy-five (75) decibels measured
twenty (20) feet from the loud speaker or horn, or seventy (70) decibels
measured seventy-five (75) feet from the loud speaker or horn and shall not
permit fighting, quarreling, loitering, or loud noise or other nuisance
whereby the quiet and peace of the premises or of the neighborhood is
disturbed.



      2.   Refuse disposal.  The permittee shall, at least once in
every forty-eight (48) hours, dispose of waste materials or refuse deposited
or accumulating on the premises of the permittee. The permittee shall provide
and maintain on such premises a sufficient number of adequate waste
receptacles, not less than two (2) in number, for the use of consumers and
the permittee. Waste or refuse as used herein includes paper cups, paper
plates, straws, napkins, food, beverage, drink, frozen dessert, garbage, and
all other waste material intended for disposal and which, if not placed in a
proper receptacle therefor, tends to create a public nuisance by rendering
such property unclean, unsafe, and unsightly.



      3.   Traffic controls.  Each permittee shall place and
maintain at suitable locations on the premises, as approved by the City
Engineer, appropriate traffic control devices and signs and markings
directing traffic entering and leaving the premises and shall designate and
mark parking spaces for the parking of vehicles of patrons on the premises.



   B.    PERMITTEE, as used in this section, shall mean and include the
following, all of whom shall be responsible for all of the duties and
obligations imposed upon the permittee by this section, to wit:  applicant,
permittee, owner, manager, proprietor, or any other person in charge of any
such premises.



('61 Code, § 12A.3)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.040  CONDUCT PROHIBITED.



   In order to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare, the
quiet and peace of the surrounding neighborhood, and in order to prevent
activity which may be inimical to premises upon which food is prepared or
served, the following conduct is prohibited, and no person shall enter or
remain on such premises, or conduct any activity, or cause to be conducted
any activity contrary thereto:



   A.   No person on the premises shall race or accelerate the motor of
any vehicle, or bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, or blow or
honk the horn of any motor vehicle, except where reasonably necessary in the
operation thereof.



   B.   No person shall place, throw or deposit any garbage, refuse or
waste material upon, in or outside of the such premises, except in waste or
refuse receptacles provided therefor on such premises.



   C.   No person shall enter the premises of any drive-in or takeout
restaurant in a motor vehicle of any description and park such vehicle and
leave the premises thereof without getting the consent of the permittee or
owner or operator of such drive-in or take-out restaurant.



   D.   No person shall enter the premises of a drive-in or takeout
restaurant in a motor vehicle except for the purpose of conducting business
with the permittee, owner, manager or proprietor thereof and no such person
shall enter such premises for the primary purpose of cruising a motor vehicle
on such premises, racing a motor vehicle on such premises, or as a short cut
to another street or alley, or for the purpose of annoying or endangering any
person or persons or other vehicle or vehicles lawfully on such premises.



   E.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle onto any of the premises
and then off of such premises without first parking thereon, unless there is
no unoccupied parking space available on such premises, or unless such person
makes or attempts to make a purchase thereon.



   F.   No person shall leave a motor vehicle on the premises so as to
block any driveway of ingress or egress.



   G.   It is unlawful for any person on the premises to have in his or
her possession any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic
beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which
have been partially removed. This paragraph does not apply within premises
licensed under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, or to any person under
twenty-one (21) years of age, or to anyone keeping alcoholic beverage in a
vehicle in the manner authorized by the Vehicle Code.



('61 Code, § 12A.4)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.050  INTERFERENCE WITH USE OF PREMISES.



   Any person remaining on the premises after being asked by the
permittee, proprietor, manager or employee thereof to leave and refusing to
do so is guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be unlawful for a group of two (2)
or more persons to congregate and linger on any premises of a drive-in
restaurant or take-out restaurant, other than within a structure enclosed on
all sides, and provided for delivery or consumption of food, or other than in
a legally parked motor vehicle, except where such persons are in the process
of waiting for, receiving or consuming a product vended on such premises.



('61 Code, § 12A.5)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.060  REQUIRED SIGN.



   Each permittee owning, operating, managing or conducting a drive-in or
take-out restaurant where motor vehicle parking space or driveways are
provided for customer use shall place in conspicuous places at each entrance
and exit from the premises, as well as in at least two (2) other places,
signs in letters at least two (2) inches in height on contrasting background
containing words or phrases as follows:



   Unnecessary noise, motor racing, vehicle cruising or congregating and
loitering outside of a motor vehicle is unlawful. No unoccupied vehicles may
be left on the premises without the consent of the owner.



('61 Code, § 12A.6) (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.070  PERMISSIBLE SIGNS.



   A.   In addition to the foregoing sign, any permittee may add the
following:



   Parking Limited to Customers of



   (Name of Premises)



   Public Parking Prohibited



   Unauthorized Vehicles Will Be Removed



   Brea Municipal Code Sec. 8.04.070



   Law Enforcement Agency, Brea Police Department



   B.   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on the
premises where such sign is posted unless with the actual consent of the
permittee or for the purpose of conducting business with the permittee or for
the purpose of receiving or purchasing a product from the permittee or
consuming or receiving a product of food vended, sold or delivered by the
permittee.



('61 Code, § 12A.7)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.080  ADDITIONAL PERMITTEE BUILDING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   No permit shall be issued for a drive-in or take-out restaurant
and no permit shall be maintained in full force and effect for any permittee
unless:



      1.   The parking and driveway area of any such premises are
adequately illuminated by electrical lights in accordance with the standards
established by the City Engineer, but all illumination shall be so arranged
by the permittee so as to reflect away from an adjoining residential property.



      2.   The parking and driveway areas of the premises shall be
satisfactorily paved or treated so as to avoid creating dust and so as to
provide for adequate drainage of surface water.



      3.   Any drive-in or take-out restaurant constructed in the
future, in addition, shall be provided with access available to public
streets or other public ways from at least two (2) points at all times. Such
means of access shall be kept clear by the permittee at all times to
facilitate the departure of persons in motor vehicles and to permit entrance
of fire apparatus or ambulances, law enforcement vehicles or other emergency
vehicles.



      4.   Each permittee shall provide and maintain a reinforced
cement or block masonry wall not less than three (3) feet and not more than
six (6) feet in height at the exterior boundaries of any area provided for
customer vehicle parking and driveway, except within the front yard set-back
area and at those locations approved for ingress and egress. Where such
parking or driveway area abuts a street, other than an alley, no such wall
shall be required. Where such parking or driveway area abuts upon an
adjoining use devoted to vehicle parking or drive-ways, no such wall shall be
required.



   B.   The requirements of this section may be modified upon
application to the City Council and the establishment of unusual
circumstances making the application of this subsection under such
circum-stances unreasonable or unnecessary. In granting such a modification,
the City Council may impose any reasonable conditions in order to protect the
public health, peace, safety and welfare.



   C.   Permits for drive-in or take-out restaurants issued to
establishments existing as of the effective date of this chapter may provide
that the requirements of paragraphs A.1., 2. and 4. of this section need be
complied with only within twelve (12) months after the effective date of this
chapter, in which event such permit shall be deemed to have lapsed unless
compliance is had within such period of time.



('61 Code, § 12A.8)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.090  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by action of
the City Council after public hearing upon written findings and determination
that the permittee has failed on other than isolated occasions to maintain
the premises in accordance with § 8.04.030, has failed to maintain the sign
required by § 8.04.060, or subsequently fails after the issuance of the
permit to meet the requirements of § 8.04.080. Notice of any such public
hearing shall be mailed to the permittee by first class mail, postage
prepaid, at the address of the drive-in or take-out restaurant to which the
permit relates at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the public
hearing.



('61 Code, § 12A.9)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



§ 8.04.100  PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Each permit issued pursuant to § 8.04.020.B. shall be nontransferable.
No person shall operate any drive-in or take-out restaurant within the city
unless and until a permit has been issued therefor pursuant to such §
8.04.020.B. No permittee shall maintain premises of a drive-in or take-out
restaurant contrary to the provisions of §§ 8.04.030, 8.04.060, or
8.04.080. Notwithstanding the foregoing, existing establishments may continue
to operate for a period of ninety (90) days after the effective date of this
chapter without first having obtained a permit.



('61 Code, § 12A.10)  (Ord. 432, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 8.08:  ENVIRONMENTAL AND
ENERGY REGULATIONS



Section



   8.08.010   Exemption from solar shade control provisions



Cross-reference:



   Energy Code, see Ch. 15.28



§ 8.08.010  EXEMPTION FROM SOLAR SHADE CONTROL PROVISIONS.



   Pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 25985, the Council hereby exempts
the city from the provisions of Cal. Pub. Res. Code, Chapter 12 of Division
15, which chapter is concerned with solar shade control.



('61 Code, § 7A.1)  (Ord. 682, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 8.12:  FLY PREVENTION AND COMMERCIAL MANURE DEALERS



Section



   8.12.010   Definitions



   8.12.020   Fly breeding hazard



   8.12.030   Fly control standards



   8.12.040   Costs constitute special assessment; collection of costs



   8.12.050   Remedies not exclusive



   8.12.060   Registration of commercial manure dealers



§ 8.12.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL DAIRY FARM.  Any place or premises upon which milk is
produced for sale or other distribution and where more than two (2) cows or
six (6) goats are in lactation.



   COMMERCIAL MANURE DEALER.  Any person who, for a fee, gathers,
collects, hauls, stockpiles, spreads or sells any manure or manure-like
substance.



   COMMERCIAL POULTRY RANCH.  Any premises where poultry are maintained,
raised or fed for the primary purpose of producing eggs or meat for sale or
other distribution.



   FLY ABATEMENT BOARD.  An administrative board composed of five (5)
members appointed by the County Board of Supervisors.



   FLY BREEDING HAZARD.  The accumulation, existence or maintenance of
any substance, matter, material or condition resulting in the breeding of
flies in an amount or manner such as to endanger public health or safety, or
to create unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment and use of
life and property by others.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Health Officer of the county acting for and on
behalf of the city.



   HORSE STABLE.  Any location where three (3) or more horses are
maintained for any purpose.



('61 Code, § 12C.1)  (Ord. 475, passed  - - )



§ 8.12.020  FLY BREEDING HAZARD.



   A.   Public nuisance.  Any fly breeding hazard in the incorporated
territory of the city is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance.



('61 Code, § 12C.2)



   B.   Inspection of premises by Health Officer.  It shall be the
duty of the Health Officer, upon routine inspection, or whenever he or she is
informed or has reasonable cause to believe that any land, building or
collection of plant or animal waste, or any substance or existing condition
of any lot, farm or other land or any other premises is a fly breeding
hazard, to enter upon such premises and to determine whether or not there is
an existing fly breeding hazard. The Health Officer shall furnish each of his
or her deputies and inspectors with identification in such form as he or she
shall prescribe.



('61 Code, § 12C.3)



   C.   Abatement proceedings.



      1.   Whenever there exists in any place within the
incorporated territory of the city a fly breeding hazard, the Health Officer
shall notify in writing the record owner or person having control or
possession of such place or premises to abate such nuisance and take
corrective measures to prevent its recurrence and to appear at a public
hearing to be held by the Fly Abatement Board. A copy of such notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place upon such place or premises. Such hearing shall
be set by the Health Officer at least ten (10) days after the date of such
notice.



      2.   The notice shall specify what is claimed to be causing
the hazard and what must be done to abate it. Such notice shall direct the
owner or person in control or possession of the place or premises to abate
the nuisance and to perform any and all work necessary to prevent the
recurrence thereof in the places or premises specified in the notice prior to
the time set for the public hearing by the Fly Abatement Board. The notice
shall advise such owner or person that in lieu of such abatement, if the Fly
Abatement Board determines that a fly breeding hazard still exists at the
time of such public hearing, the Health Officer will proceed to abate such
nuisance without further notice, unless such nuisance is abated before a date
specified by the Board and the owner of such place or premises and the person
having control or possession thereof, jointly and severally shall be liable
to the city for the total cost of such work, including all administrative
costs, and such costs shall constitute a charge and lien upon such place or
premises.



      3.   The notice shall be served upon the owner of record, the
person having control or possession of the place or premises upon which the
nuisance exists or upon the agent of either. Notices may be served by any
person authorized by the Health Officer for such purposes in the same manner
as a summons in a civil action.



('61 Code, § 12C.4)



   D.   Hearing.



      1.   At the time fixed for the hearing by the Fly Abatement
Board, such Board shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence
offered by the owner of record or person having control or possession of the
place or premises upon which the fly breeding hazard is stated in such notice
to exist by the Health Officer or his or her agent and by any other
interested person. Upon the conclusion of the hearing the Board shall make
the following findings:



         a.   Whether or not a fly breeding hazard exists.



         b.   Specifically what is causing the hazard.



         c.   What should be done by the owner to abate the
hazard.



         d.   What work, if any, should be done by the owner to
prevent its recurrence.



         e.   Whether the owner or operator shall comply with any
specific regulations of the Health Officer.



         f.   Whether the Health Officer shall abate and,
specifically, what he or she may do at his or her option; provided that
anything not included in the Board's order shall not be done by the Health
Officer.



      2.   If the Board determines that such a fly breeding hazard
exists, it shall direct the Health Officer to abate it without further
notice, unless the condition is abated and such work performed by the owner
on or before a date to be specified by the Board.



('61 Code, § 12C.5)  (Ord. 475, passed  - - )



§ 8.12.030  FLY CONTROL STANDARDS.



   The Fly Abatement Board, upon recommendation of the Health Officer, is
authorized to adopt fly control standards of operation and design of
commercial dairy farms, commercial poultry ranches and horse stables to serve
as guidelines in the abatement proceedings described in § 8.12.020.D. All
such standards shall be printed and made available to all dairymen,
poultrymen and horse stable owners or operators.



('61 Code, § 12C.6)  (Ord. 475, passed  - - )



§ 8.12.040  COSTS CONSTITUTE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT; COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   All costs shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon such
parcel of land. If such costs are not paid within a period specifically set
by the city, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that
parcel as provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 25845. Such special assessment shall
be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes
are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county
taxes. The city shall retain the additional and independent right to recover
its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession
or control, jointly or severally.



('61 Code, § 12C.7)  (Ord. 475, passed  - - )



§ 8.12.050  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The provisions of this chapter are to be construed as an added remedy
of abatement of the nuisance hereby declared and not in conflict with or
derogation of any other actions or proceedings or remedies otherwise provided
by law.



('61 Code, § 12C.8)  (Ord. 475, passed  - - )



§ 8.12.060  REGISTRATION OF COMMERCIAL MANURE DEALERS.



   No commercial manure dealer shall gather, collect, haul, stockpile,
spread or sell any manure or manure-like substance within the incorporated
territory of the city without first registering with the Health Officer on
forms prescribed by him. Such registration shall expire at the end of each
calendar year and shall be renewed annually during the first week in January.
There shall be no fee for such registration nor any subsequent renewal.



('61 Code, § 12C.9)  (Ord. 475, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 8.16:  GRAFFITI PROHIBITION
AND REMOVAL



Section



   8.16.010   Purpose and intent



   8.16.020   Definitions



   8.16.030   Accessibility to graffiti implements



   8.16.040   Graffiti removal requirements



   8.16.050   Rewards



   8.16.060   Reimbursement of cellular phone costs



§ 8.16.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   A.   The City Council hereby specifically finds that graffiti on
public or private property is a blighting factor which not only depreciates
the value of property which has been the target of such vandalism but also
depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties so as to
create a negative impact upon the entire city. Graffiti also has been found
to be a means of identification utilized by gangs and its presence may
encourage further gang related activities.



   B.   Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.3 authorizes the city, under certain
circumstances, to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed
materials from private as well as public property. The Council finds and
determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and unless the
city causes it to be removed from public and private property, it tends to
remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result
that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in
which to be.



   C.   It is the purpose and intent of the City Council, through the
adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect
public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including
the application of graffiti on privately and publicly owned walls and
structures. Such acts are inimical to and destructive of the rights and
values of private property owners as well as the total community. It is the
further intent of the City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to
provide to all of those who disregard the property rights of others, that the
law enforcement agencies of the city, the Police Department and the District
Attorney's Office, will strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute
those persons engaging in the defacement of public and private properties.



('61 Code, § 6.1)  (Ord. 939, passed  - - )



§ 8.16.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER.  Any aerosol container which is adapted or
made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing
property.



   FELT TIP MARKER.  Any tipped style marker or similar implement with a
tip which, at its broadest width, is one-eighth (€") inch or greater.



   GRAFFITI.  Any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked,
etched, scratched, scribed, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to or
on any surface, to the extent the same was not authorized in advance by the
owner thereof, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed by the
City Council to be a public nuisance.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.  An aerosol paint container, felt tip marker, or
any other device containing any solution or substance capable of being used
to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth (€") of an inch in width upon
any surface.



('61 Code, § 6.2)  (Ord. 939, passed  - - )



§ 8.16.030  ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS.



   A.   Furnishing to minors prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any
person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan,
or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or
otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any minor without the consent
of the parent or lawful guardian which consent shall be given in advance in
writing.



   B.   Display requirements.  No person or business engaged in a
commercial enterprise shall display for sale, trade or exchange, any aerosol
paint container or felt tip marker except in an area from which the public
shall be securely precluded without employee assistance. Two (2) acceptable
methods for displaying aerosol paint containers and felt tip markers for sale
shall be by containment in (1) a completely enclosed cabinet or other storage
device which shall be permanently affixed to a building or structure, and
which shall, at all times except during access by authorized representatives,
remain securely locked; or (2) in an enclosed area behind a sales or service
counter from which the public is precluded from entry. Nothing herein shall
relieve such person or business entity from, at all times, complying with the
requirements of Cal. Penal Code § 594.1(c) by posting signs as described
therein.



   C.   Storage requirements.  No person or business engaged in the
business of selling, providing or trading aerosol paint containers or felt
tip markers shall store the same other than in either a completely enclosed
room which shall, at all times except during access or actual occupancy by
the owner or an authorized adult representative of the owner, remain securely
locked; or a completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall
be permanently affixed to a building or building structure, and which shall,
at all times except during access by the owner or an authorized adult
representative of the owner, remain securely locked.  For purposes of this
section, an owner or authorized adult representative of the owner, shall be
deemed to actually occupy a room even during brief periods of absence if the
room is contained within a larger structure which is occupied by the owner or
authorized adult representative of the owner.



   D.   Civil responsibility for damages for wrongful display or
storage.  Any person who displays or stores or permits the display or
storage, of any aerosol paint container or felt tip marker in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be personally liable for any and all
costs, including attorneys fees and court costs, incurred by any party in
connection with the removal of graffiti, the repair of any property
containing graffiti, or such party's prosecution of a civil claim for
reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or property
repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully displayed or
stored aerosol paint container or felt tip marker in violation of the
provisions of any of the Cal. Penal Code sections set forth in §
8.16.080.A.1.



('61 Code, § 6.6)  (Ord. 939, passed  - - )



§ 8.16.040  GRAFFITI REMOVAL REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Right of city to require removal.  It is unlawful for any
person who is the owner, or who has primary responsibility for control, of
private property or who has primary responsibility for the repair or
maintenance of private property (responsible party hereinafter in this
section), to permit said property to be defaced with graffiti for a period in
excess of seven (7) days after service by city by first class mail of notice
of same, unless said person shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence
that he or she does not have the financial ability to remove the defacing
graffiti; or it can be demonstrated that the responsible party has an active
program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the
graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to
permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of fifteen
(15) days after service by first class mail of notice of same.



   B.   Declaration of nuisance.



      1.   Graffiti as a nuisance.  The City Council hereby
declares and finds graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according
to the provisions and procedures herein contained.



      2.   Graffiti attracting surface as a nuisance.  The
existence of any surface of a structure on any privately owned parcel of land
which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five (5) times
in twelve (12) months is hereby deemed to be a nuisance, and may be abated by
the city's requiring modifications thereto, or to the immediate area
surrounding same, according to the provisions and procedures set forth in
Chapter 15.212 of this code. Such modifications may include, but are not
limited to:  Retrofitting of such surfaces at the expense of the property
owner(s) of said lot, not to exceed a total cost of five hundred ($500)
dollars, or at the cost of the city at the city's option, with such features
or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the
attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more
convenient, expedient or efficient removal of graffiti therefrom.



   C.   Right of city to remove.



      1.   Use of public funds.  Whenever the city becomes aware
that graffiti is located on public or private property viewable from a public
or quasi-public place within the city, the city shall be authorized in its
discretion to use public funds for graffiti removal, or for repainting or
repairing of said property. This section shall not authorize graffiti removal
on, or the repainting or repairing of, property owned by another public
entity without prior agreement. This section shall not authorize the
repainting or repairing of any more extensive area than that where the
graffiti is located, unless the city determines that a more extensive area is
required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid aesthetic
disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible
party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more
extensive area.



      2.   Right of entry on private property.



         a.   Securing owner consent.  Prior to entering upon
private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city,
for the purpose of removal of graffiti, the city shall attempt to secure the
consent of the responsible party, and a release of the city from liability
for private or public property damage.



         b.   Failure to obtain owner consent.  If a responsible
party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time herein
specified, or if the city has requested consent to remove or paint over the
graffiti and the responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms
acceptable to the city consistent with the terms of this section, the city
may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the
graffiti pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15.212 of this code, which
procedures authorize the recovery of all costs incurred by the city in
abating graffiti including the recordation of a lien as to affected property.



   D.   Ease of removal provisions.



      1.   Common utility colors and paint type.  Any gas,
telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operating in the
city, other than an electric utility, shall paint their above surface metal
fixtures which are installed or repainted after the effective date of this
chapter, with a uniform paint type and color as directed by the city.



      2.   Conditions on encroachment permits.  Encroachment
permits issued by the city may be conditioned on, among other things, the
permittee applying an anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object or
structure of a type and nature that is acceptable to the city; the immediate
removal by the permittee of any graffiti; the right of the city to remove
graffiti or to paint the encroaching object or structure; the permittee
providing the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti
material on demand for use in the painting of the encroaching object or
structure containing graffiti.



      3.   Conditions on discretionary approvals.  In imposing
conditions upon conditional use permits, variances, building permits to the
extent permitted by this code, or other similar land use entitlements or
development or design applications, the city may impose graffiti removal
requirements, and any or all of the following conditions, or other similar or
related conditions:



         a.   Use of anti-graffiti material.  Applicant shall
apply an anti-graffiti material of a type and nature that is acceptable to
the city, to such of the publicly viewable surfaces to be constructed on the
site deemed by the city to be likely to attract graffiti (graffiti attracting
surfaces).



         b.   Right of access to remove graffiti.  Applicant
shall grant in writing, the right of entry over and access to such parcels,
upon forty-eight (48) hours' posted notice, by authorized city employees or
agents, for the purpose of removing or painting over graffiti on graffiti
attracting surfaces previously designated by the city. Such grant shall be
made an express condition of approval and shall be deemed to run with the
land;



         c.   Supply city with graffiti removal material. 
Applicant, and any and all successors in interest, shall, for a specified
period of years after approval, provide the city with sufficient matching
paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting over or
removal of designated graffiti attracting surfaces.



         d.   Owner to immediately remove graffiti.  Persons
applying for subdivision maps shall, as part of any conditions, covenants and
restrictions, covenant, which covenant shall run with the land and be for the
benefit of the city, in a form satisfactory to the city, that the owners of
the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed on publicly viewable
trees and structures thereon to the city's satisfaction.



('61 Code, § 6.7)  (Ord. 939, passed  - - )



§ 8.16.050  REWARDS.



   A.   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code, § 53069.5, the city reserves the
right to offer a reward in an amount and as to such locations as may be set
by resolution of the City Council, for information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person for violation, within the city, of Cal. Penal Code
§§ 594 or 594.3 by the use of graffiti, Cal. Penal Code §§ 640, 640.5,
640.6. In the event of multiple contributions of information, the reward
amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it shall deem appropriate.
For the purposes of this section, diversion of the violator to a community
service program, a plea bargain to a lesser offense, or the sustaining of any
juvenile petition filed pursuant to Cal. Welf. and Inst. Code, §§ 602 et
seq., shall constitute a conviction.



   B.   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the
city and shall:



      1.   Specifically identify the date, location and kind of
property damaged or destroyed.



      2.   Identify by name the person who was convicted.



      3.   Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction
occurred.



      4.   Be in writing and filed within one hundred eighty (180)
days of such conviction.



   C.   No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the City Council
unless the city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and
determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied.  Once
the claim is verified and said determination is made, the reward shall be
paid within the city's ordinary course of business.



   D.   The person committing the graffiti vandalism, and if an
unemancipated minor, then the parent or lawful guardian of said minor shall
be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section in accordance
with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.5.



('61 Code, § 6.8)  (Ord. 939, passed  - - )



§ 8.16.060  REIMBURSEMENT OF CELLULAR PHONE COSTS.



   The city shall reimburse to any person reporting by means of a cellular
phone an act of graffiti vandalism presently occurring within the city, the
amount of the actual phone charges, exclusive of taxes, incurred by said
person.



('61 Code, § 6.9)  (Ord. 939, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 8.20:  NOISE CONTROL



Section



   8.20.010   Declaration of policy



   8.20.020   Definitions



   8.20.030   Noise level measurement criteria



   8.20.040   Designated noise zone



   8.20.050   Exterior noise standards



   8.20.060   Interior noise standards



   8.20.070   Special provisions



   8.20.080   Motor vehicle racing



   8.20.090   Schools, hospitals and churches



   8.20.100   Air conditioning; refrigeration; pool filters and fans



   8.20.110   Noise level measurement



   8.20.120   Manner of enforcement



§ 8.20.010  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   A.   In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds
emanating from areas of the city, it is hereby declared to be the policy of
the city to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in
this chapter.



   B.   It is determined that certain sound levels are detrimental to
the public health, welfare and safety, and contrary to the public interest.



('61 Code, § 7B.1)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL.  The all-encompassing noise level associated with
a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding
the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a
comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.



   CUMULATIVE PERIOD.  An additive period of time composed of individual
time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.



   DECIBEL (dB).  A unit which denotes the ratio between two (2)
quantities which are proportional to power:  the number of decibels
corresponding to the ratio or two (2) amounts of power is ten (10) times the
logarithm to the base ten (10) of this ratio.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   EMERGENCY MACHINERY, VEHICLE, OR WORK.  Any machinery, vehicle or work
used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe
conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or
public utilities when restoring utility service.



   FIXED NOISE SOURCE.  A stationary device which creates sounds while
fixed or motionless, including but not limited to industrial and commercial
machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air
conditioners and refrigeration equipment.



   GRADING.  Any excavating or filling of earth material, or any
combination thereof, conducted at a site to prepare said site for
construction or other improvements thereon.



   IMPACT NOISE.  The noise produced by the collision of one mass in
motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest.



   MOBILE NOISE SOURCE.  Any noise source other than a fixed noise source.



   NOISE LEVEL.  The “A” weighted sound pressure level in decibels
obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference
pressure of twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter. The unit of
measurement shall be designated as dB(A).



   PERSON.  A person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture,
corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  A parcel of real property which is developed
and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than
transient uses such as hotels and motels.



   SIMPLE TONE NOISE.  A noise characterized by a predominant frequency
or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished.



   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument meeting American National Standard
Institute's Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an
instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will
provide equivalent data.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL OF A SOUND, IN DECIBELS.  Twenty (20) times the
logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a
reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated.



('61 Code, § 7B.2)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.030  NOISE LEVEL MEASUREMENT CRITERIA.



   Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in §
8.20.020.



('61 Code, § 7B.3)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.040  DESIGNATED NOISE ZONE.



   The entire territory of the city is hereby designated as “Noise Zone
1.”



('61 Code, § 7B.4)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.050  EXTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS.



   A.   The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically
indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise
zone:



   NOISE STANDARDS



   Noise Zone      Noise Level      Time Period



       1      55 dB(A)      7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.



      1      50 dB(A)      10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.



   In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact
noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of
the above noise levels shall be reduced by five (5) dB(A).



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the
city to create any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise
controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when
measured on any other residential property, to exceed:



      1.   The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than
30 minutes in any hour; or



      2.   The noise standard plus five (5) dB(A) for a cumulative
period of more than 15 minutes in any hour; or



      3.   The noise standard plus ten (10) dB(A) for a cumulative
period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or



      4.   The noise standards plus fifteen (15) dB(A) for a
cumulative period of more than one (1) minute in any hour; or



      5.   The noise standard plus twenty (20) dB(A) for any period
of time.



   C.   In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first
four (4) noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to
said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level.  In
the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the
maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to
reflect the maximum ambient noise level.



('61 Code, § 7B.5)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.060  INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS.



   A.   The following interior noise standards, unless otherwise
specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a
designated noise zone:



INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS



   Noise Zone      Noise Level      Time Period



       1      55 dB(A)      7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.



      1      45 dB(A)      10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.



   In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact
noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of
the above noise levels shall be reduced by five (5) dB(A).



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the
city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property
owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the
foregoing causes the noise level, when measured on any other residential
property, to exceed:



      1.   The interior noise standard for a cumulative period of
more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or



      2.   The interior noise standard plus five (5) dB(A) for a
cumulative period of more than one (1) minute in any hour; or



      3.   The interior noise standard plus ten (10) dB(A) for any
period of time.



   C.   In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first
two (2) noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to
said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the
event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category the
maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to
reflect the maximum ambient noise level.



('61 Code, § 7B.6)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.070  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this
chapter:



   A.   Activities conducted on the grounds of any public nursery,
elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college.



   B.   Outdoor gatherings, public dances and shows, provided said
events are conducted pursuant to a permit as required by this code.



   C.   Activities conducted on any park or playground, provided such
park or playground is owned and operated by a public entity.



   D.   Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to
or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work.



   E.   Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling,
or grading of any real property, provided said activities do not take place
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday,
or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday.



   F.   All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are
utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods
of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions.



   G.   Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations;
provided such operations do not take place between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a
federal holiday.



   H.   Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control
through pesticide application, provided that the application is made in
accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced
by the Agricultural Commissioner.



   I.   Noise sources, associated with the maintenance of real
property, provided said activities take place between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
on any day.



   J.   Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been
preempted by state or federal law.



('61 Code, § 7B.7)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.080  MOTOR VEHICLE RACING.



   It shall be unlawful to conduct motor vehicle racing, testing, timing
or similar noise-producing activities at raceways, speedways, off-road
vehicle courses, drag strips or other similar places, including, but not
limited to, the operation of midget race cars, drag cars, motorcycles,
off-road vehicles, and specialty automobiles, between the hours of 11:30 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.



('61 Code, § 7B.8)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.090  SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS AND CHURCHES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes
the noise level at any school, hospital or church while same is in use to
exceed the noise limits as specified in § 8.20.050 proscribed for the
assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital or church is located, or
which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions
or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed in three (3) separate locations within
one-tenth of a mile of the institution indicating the presence of a school,
church or hospital.



('61 Code, § 7B.9)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.100  AIR CONDITIONING; REFRIGERATION; POOL FILTERS AND FANS.



   During the five (5) year period following the effective date of this
chapter, the noise standards enumerated in §§ 8.20.050 and 8.20.060 shall
be increased eight (8) dB(A) where the alleged offensive noise source is an
air conditioning, or refrigeration system, fan, or swimming pool filter, or
associated equipment which was installed prior to the effective date of this
chapter.



('61 Code, § 7B.10)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.110  NOISE LEVEL MEASUREMENT.



   The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at
any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made
within the affected dwelling unit. The measurement shall be made at a point
at least four (4) feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the alleged
offensive noise source and may be made with the windows of the affected unit
open.



('61 Code, § 7B.11)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



§ 8.20.120  MANNER OF ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   The Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officer and their
duly authorized representatives are directed to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.



   B.   No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized
person charged with the enforcement of this chapter while such person is
engaged in the performance of his or her duty.



('61 Code, § 7B.12)  (Ord. 812, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 8.24:  OIL AND OIL WELLS



Section



   8.24.010   Purpose of chapter



   8.24.020   Compliance with state law required



   8.24.030   Surfacing of private access roads and drill sites



   8.24.040   Derricks, masts and structures



   8.24.050   Signs



   8.24.060   Fencing required



   8.24.070   Compliance with sound ordinance required



§ 8.24.010  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for oil and
gas exploration, drilling and production sites.



§ 8.24.020  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW REQUIRED.



   All persons shall comply with the requirements of Cal. Pub. Res. Code
§§ 3000 et seq., Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining
thereto, and the supplemental requirements of this chapter.



§ 8.24.030  SURFACING OF PRIVATE ACCESS ROADS AND DRILL SITES.



   Prior to commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads
used for access to the drill site itself shall be surfaced by clean crushed
rock, gravel or decomposed granite, or otherwise surfaced and maintained to
prevent dust and mud.



§ 8.24.040  DERRICKS, MASTS AND STRUCTURES.



   In addition to any requirements imposed by state law (See Cal. Pub.
Res. Code §§ 3000 et seq.), no person shall erect or install any derrick,
mast and/or structure except upon compliance with Title 15 hereof and payment
of all requisite fees therefor.



§ 8.24.050  SIGNS.



   A sign having a surface area of not less than two (2) square feet and
not more than six (6) square feet bearing the current name and number of the
well and the name or insignia of the operator shall be displayed at all times
from the commencement of drilling operations until the well is abandoned. In
the event there are more than two (2) producing wells on one (1) leasehold,
it shall be sufficient if the entrances to such leasehold are posted with a
sign not less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches bearing
the name of the operator together with the name or designation of the lease,
together with an openly visible sign on each producing well designating the
particular number thereof.



§ 8.24.060  FENCING REQUIRED.



   All sumps or sump holes, exploratory equipment and oil or gas well
production equipment having external, moving parts hazardous to life or limb
shall be attended twenty-four (24) hours per day or be enclosed by a steel
chain link type fence not less than six (6) feet in height and in addition
having not less than three (3) strands of barbed wire sloping outward at
approximately a forty-five degree (45°) angle and for eighteen (18) inches
from the top of the fence. There shall be no aperture below such fence
greater than four (4) inches. Fence gates shall be installed at non-hazardous
locations and shall be locked at all times when unattended by a watchman or
service person.



§ 8.24.070  COMPLIANCE WITH SOUND ORDINANCE REQUIRED.



   Oil and gas exploration and/or production operations shall comply with
the requirements of Chapter 8.20 hereof.



CHAPTER 8.28:  SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND SALVAGE OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS



Section



   8.28.010   Legislative policy



   8.28.020   Definitions



   8.28.030   Authority of City Council to issue permits for salvage
and solid waste collection



   8.28.040   Permits for refuse collection and establishment of
collection fees



   8.28.050   Permits for salvagers



   8.28.060   Unlawful collection or salvage



   8.28.065   Placement of unauthorized bins, dumpsters, and other
waste receptacles prohibited



   8.28.070   Permittee may be granted exclusive rights — Exception



   8.28.080   Collection in emergencies



   8.28.090   Hours of collection



   8.28.100   Solid waste, green waste and recyclable material
collection — Spillage



   8.28.110   Solid waste, green waste and/or recyclable material
receptacles



   8.28.120   Placement of receptacles for collection



   8.28.130   Time and date of placement of receptacles



   8.28.140   Solid waste removal



   8.28.150   Refuse disposal



   8.28.160   Special provisions regarding method of disposal



   8.28.170   Burning, burial or dumping



   8.28.180   Disposition of recyclable material — Green waste



   8.28.190   Use of trucks



   8.28.200   No parking of trucks on and city street



   8.28.210   Trucks — Equipment required



   8.28.220   Specifications and restrictions on collection trucks



   8.28.230   Truck inspection



   8.28.240   Permittee's local telephone number



   8.28.250   Permittee's employees



   8.28.260   Permit for rubbish collection operations — Prerequisites



   8.28.270   Permit for salvage operations — Prerequisites



   8.28.280   Permit provisions



   8.28.290   Charges for refuse collection service



   8.28.300   Recyclable material and green waste collection services
— Minimum standards



   8.28.310   Refuse collector reports



   8.28.320   Adverse information



   8.28.330   Failure to report



   8.28.340   Salvage reports



   8.28.350   Right of provision modification



§ 8.28.010  LEGISLATIVE POLICY.



   A.   The City Council finds and determines that storage,
accumulation, collection and disposal of refuse, trash, rubbish, solid waste,
debris and other discarded material, as well as recyclable material, is a
matter of great public concern, in that improper control of such matters
creates a public nuisance, which may lead to air pollution, fire hazards,
illegal dumping, vector breeding and infestation and other problems affecting
the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the city and adjacent
communities. The City Council further declares that regulations provided in
this chapter designed to eliminate or alleviate such problems.



   B.   Further, the legislature of the state of California has enacted
the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Cal. Pub. Res. Code
Division 30, §§ 40000 et seq.) (the “Act” hereinafter) which evidences
the substantial public health, safety and welfare needs of the citizens of
the state with regard to the appropriate utilization of the resources of the
state and directs the cities thereof to embark upon aggressive solutions to
the generation of solid waste and the disposal thereof. The Act declares that
the responsibility for solid waste management is a shared responsibility of
both the state and local governments and establishes goals and objectives for
the management of solid waste, including substantial penalties for failure by
local government to effectively manage the solid waste generated within the
community by means of source reduction and recovery programs, including
recycling activities. Pursuant to the Act, this city has adopted its Source
Recovery and Recycling Element and this chapter is intended to assist in the
implementation thereof.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are
defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it is
apparent from the context that a different meaning was intended:



   ANIMAL WASTE.  Manure, fertilizer, or any form of solid excrement
produced by any and all forms of domestic animals or commercial livestock.



   CITY.  The city of Brea.



   CITY CLERK.  The City Clerk of the city of Brea, and his or her
authorized deputies.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the city of Brea or his or her
designee.



   COMMERCIAL PREMISES.  Buildings, structures and areas used principally
for business, commercial or industrial purposes, and including the following:
Hotels, motels, apartment buildings containing more than four (4) apartments,
condominium buildings containing more than four (4) condominiums, and
including all other places that are not defined as residential units in this
section.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE.  The waste building materials,
packaging, plaster, drywall, cement and rubble resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, buildings and
other structures (except asbestos-containing materials or hazardous waste).



   COMPOSTING.  The controlled biological decomposition of organic wastes
that are source separated from the solid waste stream.



   COMPOSTING CENTER, STATION OR FACILITY.  A facility the principal
function of which is to receive and to process green waste through composting.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the city of Brea.



   GREEN WASTE.  Vegetative cuttings, shrubs, stumps, brush, tree
trimmings, grasses and related materials which have been separated from other
solid waste. GREEN WASTE does not include stumps or branches with a diameter
exceeding eighteen (18) inches or a length exceeding four (4) feet.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as
such pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC §§ 6901
et seq., or the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 USC §§ 9601 et seq., and all future amendments
to either of them, or as defined by the California Environmental Protection
Agency, the California integrated Waste Management Board, or either of them
and shall include medical waste and household hazardous waste. Where there is
a conflict in the definitions employed by two (2) or more agencies having
jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term HAZARDOUS WASTE shall be
construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition.



   OCCUPANT.  Includes every owner of, and every tenant or person in
possession of, is the inhabitant of, or has the care and control of, an
inhabited residence.



   PERMIT.  Written authority granted by the city to any refuse collector
or salvager as evidenced by contract, franchise, certificate or other writing
issued pursuant to this chapter.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person authorized by the City Council or the City
Manager, as the case may be, to conduct business as a refuse collector or
salvager within the city pursuant to this chapter.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, association, or group or
combination thereof acting as a unit.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL or RECYCLABLES.  Material which has been source
separated or commingled with other, similar material and can be reused or
processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or
remanufacture, consistent with the requirements of the Act, and includes
paper, newsprint, printed matter, pasteboard, paper containers, cardboard,
glass, aluminum, PET and other plastics, beverage containers, compostable
materials, and such other materials designated by city's City Manager, or
designated as recyclables by the California Integrated Waste Management
Board, or other agency with jurisdiction, and which are collected by a
permittee pursuant to this chapter.



   RECYCLING.  The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating,
and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and
returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials for
new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards
necessary to be used in the marketplace. RECYCLING does not include
transformation as defined as the incineration, pyrolysis, distillation,
gasification, or biological conversion other than composting.



   RECYCLING CENTER, STATION or FACILITY.  A facility whose principal
function is to receive, store, convert, separate, or transfer recyclable
materials for processing.



   REFUSE.  Includes any and all types of rubbish, trash, garbage or
other waste materiaL referred to in this chapter.



   REFUSE COLLECTOR.  Any person or persons, firm, copartnership, joint
venture, association or corporation engaged in the collection, transportation
and/or disposal of solid waste including recyclable material and green waste
services in the city.



   RESIDENTIAL UNIT.  Each place used for residential purposes, including
the following, but not restricted to: Single-family dwellings, multifamily
dwellings, apartments and/or condominiums containing four (4) units or less,
town houses, mobile home parks, and trailer courts, whether or not utilizing
dumpster-type bins, and not including: Hospitals, convalescent homes, hotels
and motels.



   RUBBISH.  Includes, but is not restricted to, all non-biodegradable
waste or debris such as paper, cardboard, grass, tree or shrub trimmings,
rugs, straw, clothing, wood or wood products, crockery, glass, rubber, metal,
plastic, construction waste and debris and other similar materials.



   RUBBISH DISPOSAL OPERATOR. Synonymous with REFUSE COLLECTOR.



   SALVAGE.  To obtain, either for compensation or other consideration,
directly from the transferor thereof, any recyclable material prior to the
placement of the same in the solid waste stream or the disposal or discarding
thereof whether by collecting, or causing to be collected, the same from the
transferor thereof or by the transferor thereof transporting the same to the
salvager.



   SALVAGER.  Includes any person engaged in salvaging recyclable
material prior to the disposal or discarding of the same in the solid waste
stream and includes the person generating the recyclable material if done by
such persons own employees or any subsidiary thereof. SALVAGER does not
include a non-profit entity including, but not limited to, churches, schools,
community organizations or groups obtaining recyclable materials for purposes
such as, but not limited to, fundraising activities, rehabilitation and
training programs.



   SCAVENGE.  Includes the extraction, segregation, removal or
development of articles or material of value, including recyclable material,
from solid waste.



   SOLID WASTE.  All putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semi-solid
and liquid wastes including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes,
demolition and construction debris, industrial wastes, abandoned vehicles and
parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or
animal solid and semisolid wastes and other solid and semi-solid wastes and
recyclable materials discarded or placed for disposal in bins, containers or
at curbside for collection, whether segregated by type or commingled. SOLID
WASTE does not include hazardous waste as defined herein.



   SOLID WASTE STREAM.  The placement of items, including recyclable
material, into authorized receptacles for collection by an authorized refuse
collector.



   STREETS.  The public streets, ways and alleys, except state freeways,
as the same now or may hereafter exist within the city.



   TRANSFEROR.  Includes any person generating recyclable material who,
for compensation or other consideration, donates, sells or otherwise conveys
or transfers title thereto and possession thereof to a salvager and does not
discard the same as solid waste. TRANSFEROR does not include a resident who
conveys or transfers residential recyclable material, whether for
consideration or as a donation, to a salvager or any non-profit entity
including, but not limited to, churches, schools, community organizations or
groups.



   TRASH.  Includes, but is not restricted to, every accumulation of
animal, vegetable or other material:



      1.   Resulting from the preparation and consumption of edible
foodstuffs; or



      2.   Resulting from decay, dealing in or storage of meats,
fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables, including the cans, containers or wrappers
wasted along with such materials; or



      3.   Such industrial, domestic and organic refuse or residue
of animals sold for meat; or



      4.   Fruit, vegetable and animal matter from kitchens, dining
rooms, markets, food establishments or any other place using, dealing in or
handling meats, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or grains; or



      5.   Offal, animal waste, or the carcasses of animals, fish or
fowl; or



      6.   Non-recyclable glass, paper or metal products.



   TRUCK.  Any truck, trailer, semitrailer, conveyance or vehicle used,
or intended to be used, for the purpose of collecting solid waste and/or
recyclable material or to haul or transport solid waste and/or recyclable
material.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.030  AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL TO ISSUE PERMITS FOR SALVAGERS AND
REFUSE COLLECTION.



   Pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 40059, as the same may be amended
from time to time, or any successor provision or provisions thereto, and the
police power, pursuant to Article Il, § 7 of the California Constitution,
the city shall have, and hereby retains, the authority to issue permits,
including exclusive permits or franchises, for refuse collector services or
salvager services, as provided for in this chapter and may, as a condition
for issuing such permits, require a bond from the permittee in an amount
determined by the City Council to insure the faithful performance of such
collection, transportation and disposal in accordance with this chapter and
the terms and conditions imposed by the City Council. In the event that any
permittee shall fail or refuse to conform to the conditions of the permit or
this chapter or any regulations promulgated hereunder, the Council, at its
option and after a hearing called upon at least ten (10) days prior written
notice to the permittee, may revoke such permit. in issuing permits for
refuse collector services, the city shall not be required to issue the same
based upon the offer of lowest rates, but shall be free to issue such permits
to the person deemed best suited to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and such other terms and conditions imposed by the City Council.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.040  PERMITS FOR REFUSE  COLLECTORS AND ESTABLISHMENT OF 
COLLECTION FEES.



   The City Council determines that the collection, transportation and
disposal of solid waste and green waste and recycling services are services
to be performed in the city in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The city may from time to time issue permits to those parties
meeting the criteria of this chapter and such other standards as may be
established by resolution of the City Council regarding the collection,
transportation and disposal of refuse, rubbish and other forms of solid
waste, green waste and recyclables from residential and commercial units. So
long as any such permit remains in force, collection, transportation and
disposal of such material provided for therein may be made only in accordance
with the terms and conditions thereof and this chapter. Fees and charges for
such refuse collector services shall be those which the City Council may from
time to time hereafter approve by resolution and shall be in lieu of any
business license tax imposed generally by city. No person shall engage in the
refuse collector business within the city from any residential unit or
commercial premises, nor transport the same over any public streets or
rights-of-way, unless a permit to do so has first been obtained from the
Council, such person complies with the provisions of this chapter and any
other regulations which haven been adopted pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.050  PERMITS FOR SALVAGERS.



   The City Council determines that the collection, transportation and
disposal of recyclable material obtained by salvage thereof is an activity to
be performed in the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The city shall issue, from time to time, permits to those persons engaged in
the salvage of recyclable material meeting the criteria of this chapter and
such other standards as may be established by resolution of the City Council
regarding salvage and salvagers. So long as any such permit remains in force,
salvage of recyclable material shall be made only in accordance with the
terms and conditions thereof and this chapter. Fees charged to salvagers for
compliance reporting pursuant to the Act and City's Source Reduction and
Recycling Element shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
Business license taxes shall be as set forth in the City's Business License
Ordinance, as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall be in
addition to any other fees and charges imposed by the city hereunder. No
person shall engage in the business of salvaging recyclable material within
the city from any residential unit or commercial premises, nor transport the
same over any public streets or rights-of-way, unless a permit to do so has
first been obtained from the city and such person complies with the
provisions of this chapter and any other regulations which have been adopted
pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.060  UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OR  SALVAGE.



   No person shall act as a refuse collector within the city unless such
person is a permittee, as defined in this chapter, is exempt in accordance
with paragraphs A. through D. of this section. No person shall permit, allow
or enter into any agreement whatsoever for the collection or transportation
of solid waste, recyclable material, green waste or hazardous waste from any
residential unit or commercial premises with any person who is not a
permittee as herein defined, except as permitted in paragraphs A. through D.
of this section.



   A.   The collection and removal of grass clippings and shrubbery by
individual residents, business owners and by individuals doing business as
professional landscapers, when the collection is directly related to their
work, shall be exempt from the permit system.



   B.   A permittee shall not be required to collect hazardous waste as
part of its regular collection activity. Liquid and dry caustics acids,
flammable, explosive materials, insecticides, and similar substances shall
not be deposited in collection receptacles. Any person collecting such
substances shall, in addition to any requirements of state or federal law,
obtain a permit therefor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   C.   Biohazardous and/or medical waste (as defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 25117.5, as amended from time to time, or any successor
provision or provisions thereto) shall not be collected by a permittee as
part of its regular collection activity. Anyone producing such wastes shall
store, handle and dispose of such materials only in the manner approved by
the County Health Officer or designated deputy, and in accordance with the
Cal. Health and Safety Code. Disposal of biohazardous and/or medical waste
shall be conducted pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter in addition
to any requirements imposed by state law.



   D.   The removal and disposal of refuse from a residential unit by
the occupant or owner thereof shall be exempt from the refuse permit system,
subject to the provisions of § 8.28.140 of this chapter.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.065  PLACEMENT OF UNAUTHORIZED BINS, DUMPSTERS, AND OTHER WASTE
RECEPTACLES PROHIBITED.



   A.   Except as expressly authorized by this chapter, no person other
than a permittee may place a bin, dumpster or other solid waste receptacle
for collection within the city.



   B.   1.   The city shall provide written notice to any person or
business violating this section, that the prompt and permanent removal of
such bin, dumpster or waste receptacle from its location within the city is
required.  The city shall provide such written notice by posting a copy of
the notice prominently upon the bin, dumpster or waste receptacle.  If the
bin, dumpster or waste receptacle is identified with the name and telephone
number of the solid waste enterprise servicing or owning it, the city shall
endeavor to contact such enterprise by telephone.  However, failure to
notify the owner telephonically shall not invalidate the notice.



      2.   The city may impound or cause to be impounded any such
bin, dumpster or waste receptacle if the same is not permanently removed from
its location within the time set forth in the  notice, which time shall not
be less than twenty-four (24) hours after posting of the notice, or not less
than six (6) business hours after telephonic notification, if such
notification is provided.  If the bin, dumpster or waste receptacle has no
markings identifying the owner or setting forth the owner's telephone number,
and if identification of such owner thereof cannot be provided by the
business owner or operator on whose premises the bin, dumpster or waste
receptacle is located, then the city shall be authorized to immediately
remove and impound it.  For purposes of this section, "business hours" shall
mean the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and Saturday
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.  Any person who violates this section shall be liable
to the city for all fees and charges established by resolution of the City
Council and levied in connection with the collection, transportation, storage
and handling of the bin, dumpster or waste receptacle by the city.



      3.   The bin, dumpster or waste receptacle impounded by the
city shall be retrieved by the owner or representative thereof immediately
after all applicable fees and charges have been paid.  The City Manager may
delegate to a permittee the authority to impound and/or store unauthorized
bins, dumpsters and/or waste receptacles, in accordance with the provisions
of this section, and to collect the fees and charges levied by the city.



   C.   If the bin, dumpster or waste receptacle is not claimed within
thirty-five (35) days after removal and notice to the owner, or thirty (30)
days after removal if the identity of the owner is unknown, the bin, dumpster
or waste receptacle and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and
may be disposed of in any manner authorized by law.



   D.   Upon posting of a written notice of violation upon an
unauthorized bin, dumpster or waste receptacle, the customer using the same
shall immediately cease placing solid waste therein.



   E.   For purposes of this section, the terms "bin", "dumpster"
and/or "waste receptacle" shall mean and include any form of solid waste or
recyclable materials receptacle which is placed for collection upon any
public or private property within the city by any person or entity that is
not a permittee.



   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or
corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this section.  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation
violating any provisions of this section or failing to comply with any of its
requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.  Each and every person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this section.



   G.   The violation of any of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by
means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any
other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.



(Ord. 1031, passed 12-21-99)



§ 8.28.070  PERMITTEE MAY BE GRANTED  EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS —  EXCEPTION.



   Excepting existing rights that the city reserves to itself, or as
otherwise provided in this chapter, persons to whom the city may issue a
permit and the agents, servants and employees of any such person, while the
permit is in effect, may be granted the exclusive right to gather, collect
and remove solid waste, recyclables and/or green waste from premises within
the city, subject to such terms and conditions as the Council may apply to
the issuance of such permit.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.080  COLLECTION IN EMERGENCIES.



   In emergencies, such as the breakdown of equipment, or other unforeseen
or unpreventable circum-stances, where in the judgment of the City Manager
the particular situation justifies such action, the City Manager may issue
limited or temporary permits to private persons or corporations to perform
any of the services regulated by this chapter subject to such reasonable
fees, charges and conditions as the circumstances may warrant and as the
parties involved may agree upon; provided that such fees and charges received
from or paid to any private persons or corporations under this section for
any period exceeding twenty (20) days duration shall be approved by the City
Council.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.090  HOURS OF COLLECTION.



   All solid waste and green waste collection or salvage from residential
areas and areas immediately adjacent to residential areas shall be made
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., and collections from commercial
and industrial locations may start at 5:00 a.m.; provided, however, that the
peace and quiet of residential neighborhoods is not disrupted. The City
Manager may require a permittee to change hours of operation in commercial
and industrial areas if, in the City Manager's opinion, disruption of
residential neighborhoods occurs. In the event that more than one (1) refuse
collector and/or salvager is permitted to operate in the city, whether by
area or premises, the City Manager may, in his or her discretion, require
that all refuse collection and salvage activities take place on the same day
of the week in the specified area in order to minimize the traffic in any
given area.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.100  SOLID WASTE, GREEN WASTE  AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL COLLECTION
— EXCEPTION.



   Permittees shall exercise all reasonable care and diligence in
collection activities so as to prevent spilling, scattering or dropping solid
waste, green waste and recyclable material, and shall immediately, at the
time of occurrence, clean up any such spillage.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.110  SOLID WASTE, GREEN WASTE  AND/OR RECYCLABLE MATERIAL 
RECEPTACLES.



   It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee or occupant of any
residential unit or commercial premises, the keeper of every apartment house
and of every other person having solid waste, green waste and/or recyclable
material, to provide without expense to the city and at all times, except on
collection day, to keep within the building, or other approved location, in
which any of the same may be situated sufficient numbers of containers, of a
type and size approved by the City Council, specifically designed for the
containment of solid waste, green waste and/or recyclable material, each of
which shall have suitable bales or handles and a tight-fitting cover which
shall prevent leakage or escape of odors, and which, cumulatively when filled
within four (4) inches of the top shall contain all solid waste, green waste
and/or recyclable material which would ordinarily accumulate on such premises
between collections. The exterior of such receptacles, including covers,
shall be kept clean from accumulated grease or decomposing materials. Except
when placed in accordance with § 8.28.120 hereof for collection purposes,
such receptacles shall be kept and maintained only in storage locations
permitted by the Brea Zoning Ordinance, as the same presently exists or as
may be amended from time to time, or as specified by use permit or other
entitlement for use.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.120  PLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES FOR COLLECTION.



   It shall be the duty of every person having charge and control of any
residential unit or commercial premises to set out or place receptacles for
the collection of refuse, rubbish, miscellaneous debris and combined rubbish
and/or other solid waste, green waste and/or recyclables, as follows:



   Any receptacle for the purpose of reception and removal of solid waste,
green waste and/or recyclables shall be placed at the curb in front of the
dwelling, or the alley in the rear of each dwelling; except where alleys
having access to streets at each end, exist in the rear of such premises, and
from such premises collections shall be made from such alleys, provided that
the permittee may designate some other location for the placement of
receptacles when such placement will expedite collection, as approved by the
City Manager.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.130  TIME AND DATE OF PLACEMENT  OF RECEPTACLES.



   A.   No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any solid waste,
green waste and/or recyclable receptacle therefor, in any public highway or
in any place or in any manner other than herein-above provided, or at any
time other than the days established by the city for the collection thereof
on the particular route involved, earlier than sunset of the day preceding
the day designated for collection, and all receptacles shall be removed from
the place of collection prior to 10:00 p.m. of the day the receptacles have
been emptied.



   B.   Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a residential unit or
commercial premises shall maintain the same in a sanitary condition. If the
containers or receptacles should not be emptied and the contents removed on
the date and time scheduled by the permittee, such person shall immediately
notify the permittee or the city, and it shall be the duty of the permittee
to forthwith arrange for the collection and disposal thereof.



   C.   Refuse, trash, rubbish, green waste, recyclables and other
solid waste which exceeds the limitations hereinabove set forth may, in the
discretion of the permittee, be scheduled for special collection upon the
application of the owner or occupant of the premises. Special collection
charges may be assessed by the permittee for this service with prior approval
from the above-mentioned occupant of the premises and subject to any
requirements set forth in the permit.



   D.   No person, other than the owner thereof, the owner's agents or
employees or an officer or employee of the city or a permittee's agents or
employees authorized for such purposes, shall tamper or meddle with any solid
waste, green waste or recyclable material receptacle or the contents thereof,
or remove the contents thereof, or remove any receptacle from the location
where the same shall have been placed for collection.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.140  SOLID WASTE REMOVAL.



   Pursuant to the requirements of the Cal. Administrative Code §
17331(H) of Article 5 of Chapter 3 of Division 7 of Title 14, all solid
waste, green waste and recyclable material created, produced or accumulated
in or about a residential unit or commercial premises in the city shall be
removed at least once each week. No person who is the occupant of any of the
above-described premises shall fail or neglect to provide for the removal of
such material at least as often as prescribed in this § 8.28.140.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.150  REFUSE DISPOSAL.



   The permittee shall dispose of collected wastes, at permittee's
expense, at a city approved landfill or transfer station in a manner
satisfactory to the city and in accordance with all federal, state and local
laws and regulations.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.160  SPECIAL PROVISIONS  REGARDING METHOD OF DISPOSAL.



   A.   The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from
residential units or other places where highly infectious or contagious
diseases have been present shall be performed under the supervision and
direction of the County Health Officer and such refuse shall neither be
placed in receptacles nor left for regular collection and disposal.



   B.   Highly flammable or explosive or radio-active refuse shall not
be placed in receptacles for regular collection and disposal, but shall be
removed under the supervision of the city at the expense of the owner or
possessor of the material.



   C.   Refuse or other solid waste containing water or other liquids
shall be drained before being placed in a container or receptacle. Matter
which is subject to decomposition shall be wrapped in paper or other material
before being placed in a container or receptacle.



   D.   No battery acid, poisonous, caustic or toxic material or any
other substance capable of damaging clothing or causing injury to the person
shall be mixed or placed with any rubbish, solid waste or other refuse which
is to be collected, removed or disposed of by a permittee. Such items shall
be removed at the occupant's expense only after arrangements have been made
with the permittee or city for such removal.



   E.   Animal waste, as defined in § 8.28.020, shall not be placed in
receptacles for regular collection and disposal, but shall be removed at the
occupant's expense.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.170  BURNING, BURIAL OR DUMPING.



   No person shall burn, bury or dump refuse within the city at any time,
unless a special permit for such burning, burial or dumping has been issued
pursuant to authority conferred by the Council and the Fire Department.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.180  DISPOSITION OF RECYCLABLE  MATERIAL — GREEN WASTE.



   Refuse collectors and salvagers shall sell, give, donate or otherwise
transfer recyclable material scavenged or salvaged to a recycling center,
station or facility and all green waste shall be sold, given, donated or
otherwise transferred to a composting center, station or facility or to a
landfill authorized and permitted to accept green waste as and for refuse
cover. In no event shall the refuse collector or salvager dispose of
recyclable material or green waste in a landfill or solid waste collection
facility except upon written approval of the City Manager.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.190  USE OF TRUCKS.



   Any person who desires to operate privately owned vehicles for
transportation of solid waste, hazardous waste, green waste and/or recyclable
material under provisions of this chapter shall utilize vehicles which are
reasonably watertight and are provided with a tight cover to the reasonable
satisfaction of the City Manager. The City Manager shall require the
permittee to remove from service or repair any vehicle that allows or permits
offensive odors to escape and/or material to be blown, dropped or spilled
therefrom.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.200  NO PARKING OF TRUCKS ON ANY CITY STREET.



   A.   No person, between the hours of 8:00 pm. and 5:00 am., shall
leave a truck utilized pursuant to § 8.28.190 hereof parked on any city
street.



   B.   No person, between the hours of 5:00 am. and 8:00 p.m., shall
leave a truck utilized pursuant to § 8.28.190 hereof parked on any city
street for more than one (1) hour unless the City Manager is notified that a
breakdown or emergency exists.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.210  TRUCKS — EQUIPMENT  REQUIRED.



   Each truck of a permittee shall at all times have in the cab thereof
the registration of the truck, a copy of the permit, a certificate of
insurance, and an identification card with the name of a person to telephone
in case of an accident or emergency. Each truck shall also be equipped with a
minimum five (5) pound fire extinguisher certified by the California State
Fire Marshal and recharged as needed, but not less than once annually.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.220  SPECIFICATIONS AND  RESTRICTIONS ON SOLID WASTE  COLLECTION
AND SALVAGE TRUCKS.



   All trucks used for solid waste collection or salvage within the city
shall be required:



   A.   To be completely enclosed with a non-absorbent cover while
transporting solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials in or through
the city. “Completely enclosed with a nonabsorbent cover” means that
refuse, trash or rubbish shall not be visible from the street, nor shall any
of the substances be permitted to leak, spill or become deposited along the
public streets;



   B.   All trucks used in the course of solid waste, green waste
and/or recyclable material collection shall be painted in colors approved by
the City Manager and identified by truck numerals, a company logo, and local
telephone number and shall be kept clean and in good repair at all times.



   C.   All trucks shall be maintained in safe mechanical condition.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.230  TRUCK INSPECTION.



   A.   Each of the permittee's trucks shall be made available for
inspection at the discretion of the City Manager at any point of operation.



   B.   A decal may be issued by the city for each truck complying with
provisions of this which shall be placed on the truck in a conspicuous place.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.240  PERMITTEE'S LOCAL TELEPHONE NUMBER.



   Each permittee must maintain a local telephone number which shall be
staffed for personal contact between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on normal
working days, and at all other times with some type of mechanism for the
purpose of taking messages.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.250  PERMITTEE'S EMPLOYEES.



   Each permittee must provide high-quality service to industry standards
and supply competent, qualified, identifiable and uniformed personnel who
serve the residents and businesses of Brea in a courteous, helpful and
impartial manner.



   A.   The city may, at its option, require fingerprinting of the
permittee's employees whose services will cause them to enter onto or work in
close proximity to private property.



   B.   The permittee shall be required to hire employees without
regard to race, religion, color, national origin, sex, political affiliation,
or any other non-merit factor.



   C.   Any employee driving permittee's trucks shall at all times have
in his or her possession a valid and appropriate vehicle operator's license
issued by the state of California.



   D.   The permittee's employees shall be required to wear clean,
identifiable uniforms when engaged in solid waste collection, green waste
and/or salvage service within the city.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.260  PERMIT FOR RUBBISH COLLECTOR OPERATIONS — PREREQUISITES.



   A.   Procedure and required information for rubbish collector
permit. The applicant shall file a letter with the City Manager, executed
under penalty of perjury of the laws of the state of California, containing
the following information:



      1.   Name and description of the applicant;



      2.   Permanent business address and address of local office of
the applicant;



      3.   Trade and firm name;



      4.   If a joint venture or a partnership or limited
partnership, the names of all partners of the firm, and the names of the
officers and their percentage or participation interest and their permanent
addresses;



      5.   Facts indicating that the applicant has arranged for
solid waste disposal in an area where the same may be legally accepted and
disposed of as approved by the city;



      6.   Desired collection area to be served and type of service
to be provided;



      7.   Facts indicating that applicant is qualified to render
efficient refuse collection service;



      8.   Facts indicating that trucks and equipment conform to all
applicable provisions of this chapter.



      9.   Satisfactory evidence that applicant is in existence as a
going concern and that the principals thereof possess not less than two (2)
years actual operating experience in residential and/or commercial refuse
collection and disposal;



      10.   Satisfactory evidence that applicant's experience as a
going concern in residential and/or commercial refuse collection and disposal
derives from operations of comparable size to that contemplated by the
applicant; details shall include length of other contracts, name and size of
municipality, nature of service provided, and the name of the contact person
at the municipality being served;



      11.   Evidence that applicant is in good standing in the state
of California and, in the case of a corporation organized under the laws of
any other state, evidence that applicant is licensed to do business in the
state of California;



      12.   A detailed inventory of the applicant's equipment
available for use in refuse collection area;



      13.   A written statement that applicant has complied, or is
capable of complying, with all regulations imposed by the city, the county of
Orange and the state of California for the collection and disposal of solid
waste.



      14.   Facts indicating that the applicant owns or has under
his or her control, in good mechanical condition, sufficient equipment to
conduct the business of refuse collection adequately if granted a permit, and
that applicant owns or has access to suitable facilities for maintaining his
or her equipment in a safe, clean and sanitary condition.



      15.   Satisfactory evidence that the issuance of a permit is
in the public interest and convenience in that there is an available market
for refuse collection which can be legally served by the applicant.



      16.   Such other pertinent facts or information as the City
Manager may require, including evidence of state certification, if applicable.



      17.   Any of the above provisions in conflict with
certification requirements imposed by state law shall not be required.



   B.   Fees and requirements for permit.



      1.   Upon consideration of the information supplied by the
applicant contained in the above-mentioned letter and following a public
hearing conducted by the City Council upon at least ten (10) days prior
written notice to the applicant, the City Council may issue a permit.



      2.   Each permit granted shall apply to refuse collection for
an area of the city specified therein or, in the case of hazardous waste or
bio-hazardous and/or medical waste operations, specified commercial premises,
and may be exclusive.



      3.   A fee for processing permit applications shall be set by
resolution of the City Council, with review on an annual basis.



   C.   Bonding of permittee.  Before granting a refuse collector
permit under the provisions of this chapter, the Council shall require the
permittee as a condition of the permit, to post with the City Clerk a cash
bond or surety bond in an amount determined by the Council and furnished by a
corporate surety authorized to do business in the state of California,
payable to the city. The bond shall be conditioned upon the full and faithful
performance by the permittee of obligations under the applicable provisions
of this chapter, and shall be kept in full force and effect by the permittee
throughout the life of the permit and all renewals thereof.



   D.   Indemnification by permittee.



      1.   Indemnification of city. Permittee shall agree to
protect, defend with counsel approved by the city, indemnify and hold
harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees
and agents from and against any and all losses, liabilities, fines,
penalties, claims, damages, liabilities or judgments, including attorneys
fees, arising out of or resulting in any way from permittee's exercise of its
responsibilities under this chapter unless such claim is due to the sole
negligence or willful act of the city, its officers, employees, agents or
contractors, including the city's grant of a permit to permittee. Subject to
the scope of this indemnification and upon demand of the city, made by and
through the City Attorney, the permittee shall appear in and defend the city
and its officers, employees and agents in any claims or actions, whether
judicial, administrative or otherwise arising out of the exercise of this
chapter.



      2.   Hazardous materials indemnification. Permittee shall
indemnify, defend with counsel approved by the city, protect and hold
harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees,
agents, assigns and any successor or successors to the city's interest from
and against all claims, actual damages (including, but not limited to special
and consequential damages), natural resources damages, punitive damages,
injuries, costs, response remediation and removal costs, losses, demands,
debts, liens, liabilities, causes of action, suits, legal or administrative
proceedings, interest, fines, charges, penalties and expenses (including but
not limited to attorneys and expert witness fees and costs incurred in
connection with defending against any of the foregoing or in enforcing this
indemnity) of any kind whatsoever paid, incurred or suffered by, or asserted
against, city or its officers, employees, agents or permittee arising from or
attributable to any repair, cleanup or detoxification, or preparation and
implementation of any removal, remedial, response, closure or other plan
(regardless of whether undertaken due to governmental action) concerning any
hazardous substance or hazardous waste at any place where permittee stores or
disposes of municipal solid waste pursuant to this chapter. The foregoing
indemnity is intended to operate as an agreement pursuant to § 107(e) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act,
“CERCLA”, 42 USC § 9607(e) and Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25364, to
insure, protect, hold harmless and indemnify city from liability.



   E.   Liability insurance. The permittee shall obtain, and keep in
force during the term of the permit, public liability and bodily injury
insurance in amounts determined by the City Council, and workers'
compensation insurance covering all employees of the permittee. Copies of
such policies, or endorsements evidencing such policies, shall be filed with
the City Clerk prior to the commencement of activities authorized by the
permit. The city and its officers, elected officials, employees and agents
shall be named as additional insureds on all such policies. All such policies
shall contain at a minimum a provision requiring a thirty (30) day notice to
be given to the city prior to cancellation, modification or reduction of
limits. The amounts of public liability insurance for bodily injury and
property damage shall be subject to review and adjustment by the Council.



   F.   Compliance with federal, state and local laws and
regulations.  The permittee shall agree to perform under the terms of the
permit in such a manner so as to comply with all applicable local and state
laws and regulations pertaining to the collection, storage and transportation
of solid waste. The permittee shall also comply with all other ordinances and
regulations of the city and applicable laws and regulations of the county of
Orange, state of California and the United States, and shall obtain and keep
in force all required permits and business licenses throughout the life of
the permit and all renewals thereof.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.270  PERMIT FOR SALVAGE  OPERATIONS — PREREQUISITES.



   A.   Procedure and required information for salvage operations. The
applicant shall file a letter with the City Manager, executed under penalty
of perjury of the laws of the state of California, containing the following
information:



      1.   Name and description of the applicant;



      2.   Permanent business address and address of local office of
the applicant;



      3.   Trade and firm name;



      4.   If a joint venture or a partnership or limited
partnership, the names of all partners of the firm, and the names of the
officers and their percentage or participation interest and their permanent
addresses;



      5.   Facts indicating that the applicant has arranged for
disposition of recyclable materials as required by this chapter;



      6.   Desired collection area to be served and type of service
to be provided;



      7.   Facts indicating that applicant is qualified to render
efficient salvage collection service;



      8.   Facts indicating that trucks and equipment conform to all
applicable provisions of this chapter;



      9.   Satisfactory evidence that applicant is in existence as a
going concern and that the principals thereof possess not less than two (2)
years actual operating experience in salvage operations;



      10.   Satisfactory evidence that applicant's experience as a
going concern in salvage operations derives from operations of comparable
size to that contemplated by the applicant; details shall include length of
other contracts, name and size of municipality, nature of service provided,
and the name of the contact person at the municipality being served;



      11.   Evidence that applicant is in good standing in the state
of California and, in the case of a corporation organized under the laws of
any other state, evidence that applicant is licensed to do business in the
state of California;



      12.   A detailed inventory of the applicant's equipment
available for salvage operations;



      13.   A written statement that applicant has complied, or is
capable of complying, with all regulations imposed by the city, the county of
Orange and the state of California for salvage operations;



      14.   Facts indicating that the applicant owns or has under
his or her control, in good mechanical condition, sufficient equipment to
conduct the business of salvage adequately if granted a permit, and that
applicant owns or has access to suitable facilities for maintaining his or
her equipment in a safe, clean and sanitary condition.



      15.   Such other pertinent facts or information as the City
Manager may require, including evidence of state certification, if applicable.



      16.   Any of the above provisions in conflict with
certification requirements imposed by state law shall not be required.



   B.   Fees and requirements for permit.



      1.   Upon consideration of the information supplied by the
applicant contained in the above-mentioned letter, and verification thereof,
the City Manager shall issue a permit.



      2.   Each permit granted shall apply to salvage for an area of
or premises within the city specified therein.



      3.   A fee for processing salvage permit applications shall be
set by resolution of the City Council, with review on an annual basis.



   C.   Indemnification by permittee.



      1.   Indemnification of city.  Permittee shall agree to
protect, defend with counsel approved by city, indemnify and hold harmless
the city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and agents
from and against any and all losses, liabilities, fines, penalties, claims,
damages, liabilities or judgments, including attorneys fees, arising out of
or resulting in any way from permittee's exercise of its responsibilities
under this chapter, unless such claim is due to the sole negligence or
willful acts of the city, its officers, employees, agents or contractors, or
from the city's grant of a permit to permittee. Subject to the scope of this
indemnification and upon demand of the city, made by and through the City
Attorney, the permittee shall appear in and defend the city and its officers,
employees and agents in any claims or actions, whether judicial,
administrative or otherwise arising out of the exercise of this chapter.



      2.   Hazardous substances indemnification.  Permittee shall
indemnify, defend with counsel approved by the city, protect and hold
harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees,
agents, assigns and any successor or successors to the city's interest from
and against all claims, actual damages (including, but not limited to special
and consequential damages), natural resources damage, punitive damages,
injuries, costs, response remediation and removal costs, losses, demands,
debts, liens, liabilities, causes of action, suits, legal or administrative
proceedings, interest, fines, charges, penalties and expenses (including but
not limited to attorneys and expert witness fees and costs incurred in
connection with defending against any of the foregoing or in enforcing this
indemnity) of any kind whatsoever paid, incurred or suffered by, or asserted
against the city or its officers, employees, agents or permittee arising from
or attributable to any repair, cleanup or detoxification, or preparation and
implementation of any removal, remedial, response, closure or other plan
(regardless of whether undertaken due to governmental action) concerning any
hazardous substance or hazardous waste at any place where permittee stores or
disposes of municipal solid waste pursuant to this chapter. The foregoing
indemnity is intended to operate as an agreement pursuant to § 107(e) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act,
“CERCLA,” 42 USC § 9607(e) and Cal Health and Safety Code § 25364, to
insure, protect, hold harmless and indemnify the city from liability.



   D.   Liability insurance. The permittee shall obtain, and keep in
force during the term of the permit, public liability and bodily injury
insurance in amounts determined by the City Council, and workers'
compensation insurance covering all employees of the permittee. Copies of
such policies, or endorsements evidencing such policies, shall be filed with
the City Clerk prior to the commencement of activities authorized by the
permit. The city and its officers, elected officials, employees and agents
shall be named as additional insureds on all such policies. All such policies
shall contain at a minimum a provision requiring a thirty (30) day notice to
be given to the city prior to cancellation, modification or reduction of
limits. The amounts of public liability insurance for bodily injury and
property damage shall be subject to review and adjustment by the Council.



   E.   Compliance with federal, state and local laws and regulations.
The permittee shall agree to perform under the terms of the permit in such a
manner so as to comply with all applicable local and state laws and
regulations pertaining to the collection, storage and transportation of solid
waste. The permittee shall also comply with all other ordinances and
regulations of the city and applicable laws and regulations of the county of
Orange, state of California and the United States, and shall obtain and keep
in force all required permits and business licenses throughout the life of
the permit and all renewals thereof.



   F.   Fees and charges. Salvagers shall not be required to obtain
city consent for the fees and charges imposed or otherwise agreed upon
between such permittees and their customers.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.280  PERMIT PROVISIONS.



   A.   Fees.  Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
provide for the payment of permit fees to the city, may contain additional
provisions agreed to by and between the city and permittee, and shall
constitute a written agreement of said parties.



   B.   Assignment or transfer of permit.  No assignment or transfer
of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any right accruing under such
permit shall be made in whole or in part by the permittee without the express
consent of the Council with regard to a refuse collector permit or the City
Manager for a salvager permit. In the event any assignment or transfer is
authorized hereunder, the assignee shall assume, without qualification, the
liability and all other obligations of the permittee. Each permittee shall
file, on or before July 1 of each calendar year, with the City Clerk, a
statement of ownership and shall verify the same as being true and correct
under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California.



   C.   Revocation. 



      1.   A permit may be revoked at the option of the Council in
the event there is a change of ownership of any kind or nature of the
operating company, unless approval therefor has been obtained hereunder. If
it is determined by the City Manager that permittee has not complied with the
provisions of this chapter the permit, and all other applicable statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations, the City Manager shall notify the
permittee in writing of noncompliance and shall order compliance within
thirty (30) days.



      2.   If noncompliance is not corrected within the
above-prescribed thirty (30) day period, the City Council, following a public
hearing upon at least ten (10) days prior written notice to the permittee,
may terminate the permit. The City Council's decision shall be final.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.290  CHARGES FOR REFUSE  COLLECTOR SERVICE.



   A.   Collection charge.  A charge for the collection of solid
waste, green waste and recyclables shall be imposed on the owner or occupant
of each residential unit or commercial premises to which service is made
available. The amount of such charge shall be fixed and changed from time to
time and shall be collected at such time and in such manner as prescribed by
the City Council. The charge so fixed shall be a civil debt due and owing to
the city or permittee from the owner or occupant of the residential unit or
commercial premises to which the service is made available. The City Council
hereby specifically finds and determines that the periodic collection of
solid waste, green waste and recyclables from all residential units and
commercial premises benefits all occupants and residents of the city,
provides for the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the city and,
therefore, all such occupants or owners are liable for the payment of
collection service provided for hereunder, whether or not any such owner or
occupant avails himself or herself of such collection service.



   B.   Rate adjustments.  All revisions in charges levied must be
submitted to the City Council for review and action and must be approved by
resolution of the City Council following a public hearing upon at least ten
(10) days prior written notice to the permittee.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.300  RECYCLABLE MATERIAL AND  GREEN WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES — 
MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   Refuse collectors shall:



   A.   Provide an original and any replacement recyclable materials
receptacle(s) to each customer. The receptacle(s) shall be a rigid plastic
bin, container, or bucket or bag of sufficient strength to contain the
recyclable materials and/or green waste, shall be approved by the City
Council, and not cause health or safety hazards to customers or refuse
collector personnel. The receptacle(s) shall be provided without charge and
remain the refuse collector's property.



   B.   Collect recyclable material and/or green waste at least once a
week, on the same day, and during the hours specified for regular solid waste
collection. No alternate collection schedule is permitted unless approved in
writing by the City Manager. Refuse collectors may collect the receptacles
therefor in the same manner as regular solid waste collection.



   C.   Provide recyclable material and/or green waste collection
services to each location within the area(s) that the refuse collector serves
for regular solid waste collection. Such service shall be provided at
nondiscriminatory rates approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.310  REFUSE COLLECTOR REPORTS.



   Upon issuance of a permit hereunder, the permittee shall submit:



   A.   Annual reports. The permittee shall prepare and submit an
annual report, using a tabular and/or graphic format, or other commonly used
data base management program (e.g., LOTUS 1-2-3, Excel, etc.) as approved by
the city, within sixty (60) days after the close of each calendar year. The
report shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:



      1.   A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the
initial report year, the initial year's) activities including, but not
limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, and the
number of customers for each class of service;



      2.   A report, in a form satisfactory to the city, on the
city's progress in meeting and maintaining its ability to meet its goals
under the Act as applied to the permittee's service area, along with any
recommended changes.



      3.   A revenue statement, setting forth quarterly compliance
fees, and the basis for the calculation thereof, certified for accuracy,
under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state by an officer of the
permittee.



   B.   Monthly reports. Permittee shall prepare monthly reports, using
a tabular and/or graphic format or other commonly used data base management
program (e.g., LOTUS 1-2-3, Excel, etc.) as approved by the city, during the
term of the permit. Monthly reports shall be submitted to the city on a
quarterly basis, within twenty (20) days from the end of the quarter. At a
minimum, the reports shall include:



      1.   Summaries of tonnage collected and disposed of by
generator type, disposal facility used and disposal fees paid.



      2.   Summaries of tonnage of recyclable material collected, by
material, and green waste by route.



      3.   Summaries of tonnages of non-recyclables and contaminants
disposed.



      4.   Summaries of tonnages, using an approved sampling
methodology, of each material sold or otherwise exchanged for processing, by
material type.



      5.   Average market prices for each material sold, and
processing charges or acceptance fees for green waste or other applicable
materials.



      6.   Participation rates for each route in terms of set out
counts and average pounds collected per customer.



      7.   Description of progress in meeting the implementation
schedule, including the problems encountered and how they were resolved.



      8.   Summaries of the number of service complaints by route,
including the date, nature of complaint, and how it was resolved.



   C.   Ad hoc reports.  Permittee shall provide up to six (6) reports
of varying detail and format, as specifically requested by the city, to meet
unforeseeable information queries of the California Integrated Waste
Management Board, Orange County integrated Waste Management Task Force, or
other public agencies.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.320  ADVERSE INFORMATION.



   Permittee shall provide the city two (2) copies of all reports, or
other material adversely affecting the permit, submitted by permittee to the
EPA, the California Integrated Waste Management Board or any other federal or
state agency. Copies shall be submitted to the city simultaneously with
permittee's filing of such matters with said agencies. Permittee's routine
correspondence to said agencies need not be automatically submitted to the
city, but shall be made available to the city upon written request.



   A.   Permittee shall submit to the city copies of all pleadings,
applications, notifications, communications and documents of any kind,
submitted by the permittee to, as well as copies of all decisions,
correspondence and actions by, any federal, state and local courts,
regulatory agencies and other govern-mental bodies relating specifically to
permittee's performance of services pursuant to the permit. Any confidential
data exempt from public disclosure shall be retained in confidence by the
city and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public
inspection.



   B.   Permittee shall submit to the city such other information or
reports in such forms and at such times as the city may reasonably request or
require.



   C.   All reports and records required under this or any other
section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the permittee.



   D.   A copy of each permittee's annual and other periodic public
financial reports and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated
corporations and other entities, as the city requests, shall be submitted to
the city within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.330  FAILURE TO REPORT.



   The refusal, failure or neglect of the permittee to file any of the
reports required, or the inclusion of any materially false or misleading
statement or representation made knowingly by the permittee in such report
shall be deemed a material default under the permit, and shall subject the
permittee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the
city under the permit or otherwise.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.340  SALVAGE REPORTS.



   The permittee shall submit:



   A.   Annual reports.  The permittee shall prepare and submit an
annual report, using a tabular and/or graphic format, or other commonly used
data base management program (e.g., LOTUS 1-2-3, Excel, etc.) as approved by
the city, within sixty (60) days after the close of each calendar year. The
report shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:



      1.   A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the
initial report year, the initial year's) activities including, but not
limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, and the
number of customers serviced.



      2.   A revenue statement, setting forth quarterly compliance
fees, and the basis for the calculation thereof, certified for accuracy under
penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California, by an officer
of the permittee.



   B.   Monthly reports.  Permittee shall prepare monthly reports,
using a tabular and/or graphic format or other commonly used data base
management program (e.g., LOTUS 1-2-3, Excel, etc.) as approved by the city,
during the term of the permit. Monthly reports shall be submitted to the city
on a quarterly basis, within twenty (20) days from the end of the quarter. At
a minimum, the reports shall include:



      1.   Summaries of tonnage of recyclable material collected, by
material, by route and by transferor, and disposition thereof.



      2.   Summaries of tonnages of non-recyclables and contaminants
disposed, if any.



      3.   Average market prices for each recyclable material sold.



      4.   Summaries of the number of service complaints by route,
including the date, nature of complaint, and how it was resolved.



   C.   Ad hoc reports.  Permittee shall provide up to three (3)
reports of varying detail and format, as specifically requested by the city,
to meet unforeseeable information queries of the California Integrated Waste
Management Board, Orange County Integrated Waste Management Task Force, or
other public agencies.



   D.   Adverse information.  Permittee shall provide the city two (2)
copies of all reports, or other material adversely affecting the permit,
submitted by permittee to the EPA, the California Integrated Waste Management
Board or any other federal or state agency. Copies shall be submitted to the
city simultaneously with permittee's filing of such matters with said
agencies. Permittee's routine correspondence to said agencies need not be
automatically submitted to the city, but shall be made available to the city
upon written request.



      1.   Permittee shall submit to the city copies of all
pleading, applications, notifications, communications and documents of any
kind, submitted by the permittee to, as well as copies of all decisions,
correspondence and actions by, any federal, state and local courts,
regulatory agencies and other governmental bodies relating specifically to
permittee's performance of services pursuant to the permit. Any confidential
data exempt from public disclosure shall be retained in confidence by the
city and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public
inspection.



      2.   Permittee shall submit to the city such other information
or reports in such forms and at such times as the city may reasonably request
or require.



      3.   All reports and records required under this or any other
section shall be finished at the sole expense of the permittee.



      4.   A copy of each permittee's annual and other periodic
public financial reports and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated
corporations and other entities, as the City requests, shall be submitted to
the city within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request.



   E.   Failure to report.  The refusal, failure or neglect of the
permittee to file any of the reports required, or the inclusion of any
materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly by
the permittee in such report shall be deemed a material default under the
permit, and shall subject the permittee to all remedies, legal or equitable,
which are available to the city under the permit or otherwise.



   F.   Notwithstanding the obligations imposed upon permittees by this
§ 8.28.340, it shall be the concurrent responsibility and obligation of the
transferor to ensure that all data and reports required hereunder are timely
prepared and submitted to the city.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



§ 8.28.350  RIGHT OF PROVISION  MODIFICATION.



   The city specifically retains the right to repeal, amend, add to, or
modify each and every provision of this chapter.



(Ord. 990, passed 7-23-96)



CHAPTER 8.29:  CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE MANAGEMENT



Section



   8.29.010   Short title



   8.29.020   Purpose



   8.29.030   Definitions



   8.29.040   Application to covered projects



   8.29.050   Required diversion rate



   8.29.060   Projects exempt



   8.29.070   Waste Management Plan requirements



   8.29.080   Review of Waste Management Plan



   8.29.090   Documentation of waste management compliance



   8.29.100   Exception from compliance



   8.29.110   Appeal



   8.29.120   Violation — penalties — civil remedies



§ 8.29.010  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and designated as the “Construction and
Demolition Waste Management Code.”



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.020  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce landfill waste by requiring an
applicant for every covered project, as defined herein, to divert a minimum
of fifty percent (50%) of the construction and demolition debris resulting
from that project, in compliance with state and local statutory goals and
policies, and to create a mechanism to secure compliance with the diversion
requirements.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.030  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   APPLICANT.  Any individual, firm, limited liability company,
association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency,
municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity
whatsoever who applies to the city for any permit, as defined in this
chapter, and who is, therefore, responsible for meeting the requirements of
this chapter.



   CONSTRUCTION.  The building or enlargement of any structure, or any
portion thereof, and includes without limitation alterations or improvements
to an existing structure.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS.  The excess or discarded
materials, which are removed from a site during or after the construction or
demolition of any structure, fence, wall, or paving.



   CONVERSION RATE.  The rate set forth in the standardized conversion
rate table for use in estimating the volume or weight of construction and
demolition debris, approved by the California Integrated Waste Management
Board.



   COVERED PROJECT.  Any project consisting of demolition work regardless
of cost, or any construction or renovation project or competitively bid
public works construction project, in which the total cost is, or is
reasonably estimated to be, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more.



   DECONSTRUCTION.  To disassemble any facility, structure or building,
whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior, piece by piece, in
order to salvage the materials and parts.



   DEMOLITION.  The razing, tearing down or wrecking of any structure,
wall, fence or paving, whether in whole or in part, or interior or exterior.



   DIRECTOR OF MAINTENANCE SERVICES.  The Director of Maintenance
Services for the city, or designee.



   DIVERSION REQUIREMENT.  The diversion rate for construction and
demolition debris generated by a project, as established in this chapter, or
reduced diversion rate authorized pursuant to § 8.29.100, or diversion of
construction and demolition debris generated by a project through the
exclusive use of the city's permitted waste hauler (see § 8.29.050).



   DIVERT AND DIVERSION.  The reuse of construction and demolition debris
to avoid disposal in a landfill.



   PAVING.  Driveways, walkways, parking areas, streets and sidewalks.



   PERMIT.  Any building or demolition PERMIT.



   PERMITTED WASTE HAULER.  A waste hauler holding an exclusive permit to
collect and haul solid waste and/or recyclable materials within the city.



   PROJECT.  Any proposal for new or changed use, or for new
construction, demolition, alteration or enlargement of any structure, that
requires a permit from the city.



   RECYCLING AND REUSE.  The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing,
treating, and reconstituting construction and demolition debris that would
otherwise be disposed of in a landfill for use as raw material for, new,
reused, or reconstituted products which meet industry standards.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected that requires a location
in the ground, including any building, swimming pool, driveway or walkway,
but not including a fence or wall not used to support any other structure.



   WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN.  A written plan for diverting construction
and/or demolition debris submitted to the city, as required by this chapter.



   WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL.  The designated
administrator of the Sanitation Division of the Maintenance Services
Department.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.040  APPLICATION TO COVERED PROJECTS.



   A.   Each covered project shall meet the diversion requirement, and
shall otherwise comply with all provisions of this chapter.



   B.   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be a
prerequisite for issuance of any building or demolition permit for a covered
project.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.050  REQUIRED DIVERSION RATE.



   The applicant/permit holder for a covered project shall divert a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the construction and demolition debris, as
determined based on weight, resulting from the project. The diversion rate
will be presumed to have been met if all construction and demolition debris
is collected and hauled by the city's permitted waste hauler.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.060  PROJECTS EXEMPT.



   The following projects are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:



   A.   Immediate or emergency demolition required to protect the
public health, safety or welfare, as determined in writing by any public
safety official or code compliance officer of the city, prior to demolition.



   B.   Any project in any single-family residential district, which
consists of either a swimming pool, or an accessory structure for which the
total cost, or reasonably estimated cost, is less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000).



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.070  WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   All applicants for covered project permits shall complete and
submit a Waste Management Plan as part of the application packet. The Waste
Management Plan shall include the following information, calculated with the
conversion rate, and shall be attested to by the applicant, under penalty of
perjury, as true and correct for all stated facts and as a best estimate
based on all information reasonably available about the project when all of
the facts cannot be ascertained:



      1.   The estimated volume or weight of construction and
demolition debris, listed for each material;



      2.   The estimated volume or weight of construction and
demolition debris that can be diverted for each material;



      3.   The estimated volume or weight of construction and
demolition debris that will be land- filled as solid waste;



      4.   The identification of the vendor or facility that will
collect or receive the construction or demolition debris or that will
deconstruct the structure; and



      5.   The estimated date on which demolition or construction is
to commence.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.080  REVIEW OF WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   A.   Time for review.  A Waste Management Plan shall be approved or
denied no later than fifteen (15) business days after a completed application
is filed. The approval may include conditions reasonably necessary to meet
the standards of this chapter.



   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no
building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless
and until the Waste Management Plan has been approved. No Waste Management
Plan shall be approved unless the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official
makes the following findings:



      1.   All of the information required by § 8.29.070 has been
provided; and



      2.   The plan establishes a mechanism that will cause the
diversion requirement to be met. Use of the city's permitted waste hauler, or
recycling companies that use their own collection bins and own trucks to haul
construction and demolition recyclable waste, will qualify as a mechanism to
meet the diversion rate. Except as otherwise provided herein, no third party
haulers may be used to satisfy this chapter's waste diversion requirements.
Use of any other non-permitted waste hauler is a violation of the city's
Solid Waste Code and will not be approved.



   C.   If the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official makes the
findings required by this section, then he or she shall mark the Waste
Management Plan "Approved," return a copy of the Waste Management Plan to the
applicant, and notify the Building Official that the Waste Management Plan
has been approved.



   D.   Denial.  If the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official
denies the Waste Management Plan, the grounds for denial shall be set forth
in writing provided to the applicant, along with the advisement that the
denial may be appealed pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.090  DOCUMENTATION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT COMPLIANCE.



   A.   Documentation.  Unless the applicant has been granted a
complete exception pursuant to § 8.29.100, then prior to the completion of
any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the Waste Management Plan
Compliance Official a written statement signed under penalty of perjury,
establishing that the diversion requirement has been met. The diversion
requirement shall be as set forth in § 8.29.050 of this chapter. If the
applicant has been granted a partial exception pursuant to § 8.29.100, the
diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate
established by the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official for the project.
If the applicant has used the city's permitted waste hauler to meet the
diversion requirements of this chapter, then no further documentation shall
be required. For those applicants whose projects do not use the permitted
waste hauler, the documentation shall include the following:



      1.   The dates demolition and construction actually commenced;



      2.   The actual volume or weight of construction and
demolition debris, listed for each material;



      3.   The actual volume or weight of construction and
demolition debris that was diverted for each listed material;



      4.   A specification of the method used to determine the
volume and weight, and a certification



satisfactory to the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official that the method
used was the most accurate, commercially reasonable method available; and



      5.   Original receipts from all vendors and facilities, that
collected or received construction and demolition debris, indicating actual
weights and volumes received by each.



   B.   Weighing of wastes.  Applicants shall make reasonable efforts
to ensure that, whether diverted or land-filled, all construction and
demolition debris is measured and recorded, using the most accurate method of
measurement available unless all construction and demolition debris is
collected and hauled by the city's permitted waste hauler. If not using the
city's permitted waste hauler, then all construction and demolition debris
shall be weighed. In those instances on which, due to small size or other
considerations, weighing construction and demolition debris is not practical,
a volumetric measurement shall be used. To convert volumetric measures to
weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by
the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official for this purpose.



   C.   Determination of compliance and release of building permit. 
Unless the applicant has been granted a complete exception pursuant to §
8.29.100, the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official shall review the
information submitted under subparagraph A. of this section and determines
which of the following compliance levels best describes the extent to which
the applicant has complied with the diversion requirements:



      1.   Full compliance.  If the Waste Management Plan
Compliance Official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the
diversion requirement, he or she shall allow final inspection of the work and
release of the final building permit.



      2.   Good-faith effort to comply.  If the Waste Management
Plan Compliance Official determines that the diversion requirements have not
been achieved, he or she shall determine, on a case- by-case basis, whether
the applicant has made a good- faith effort to comply with the diversion
requirement. In making this determination, the Waste Management Plan
Compliance Official shall consider the availability of markets for the
construction and demolition debris land-filled, the size of the project and
the documented efforts of the applicant to divert construction and demolition
debris. If the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official determines that the
applicant has made a good-faith effort to comply with the diversion
requirement, he or she shall allow final inspection of the work and release
of the final building permit.



      3.   Noncompliance.  If the Waste Management Plan Compliance
Official determines that the applicant has not made a good-faith effort to
comply with the diversion requirement, or if the applicant fails to submit
the documentation required by subparagraph A. of this section within the
required time period, then the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official
shall so notify the applicant and Building Official. The Building Official
shall not allow final inspection of the work or release of the final building
permit until the applicant has been determined to be in full compliance, or
to have made a good-faith effort to comply, with the waste diversion
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.100  EXCEPTION FROM COMPLIANCE.



   Prior to commencing demolition or construction, an applicant may
request a partial or complete exception from the requirements of this chapter
through the following process:



   A.   Initiation.  This exception process shall be initiated by
filing a completed exception application with the Waste Management Plan
Compliance Official. The Waste Management Plan Compliance Official shall
determine the completeness of the exception application within five (5)
business days of filing.



   B.   Decision on application.  The Waste Management Plan Compliance
Official shall either make all of the required findings and grant a partial
or complete exception, or state in writing why all of the findings cannot be
made and deny the application. A decision on the application shall be
rendered within ten (10) business days following determination that the
application is complete.



   C.   Findings.  All of the following findings must be made prior to
the approval of an exception:



      1.   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the project that does not apply generally to similar
projects;



      2.   Granting the application will not constitute a grant of a
special privilege inconsistent with limitations imposed on like projects; and



      3.   Cost to the applicant to strictly comply with this
chapter is not the primary reason for applying for, or granting, an exception.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.110  APPEAL.



   Any person or entity aggrieved by any decision under the provisions of
this chapter with respect to approval or denial of a Waste Management Plan,
or an application for an exception from compliance with this chapter, may
appeal such decision by filing a letter of appeal with the Director of
Maintenance Services briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. The
letter of appeal must be received within five (5) business days of the date
of the appealed decision. A hearing shall be held no more than ten (10)
business days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be
given at least five (5) business days notice by mail of the time and place of
the hearing. A Hearing Officer having no involvement in the decision being
appealed shall be appointed by the City Manager. At the hearing, the
appellant and any other interested party shall have a reasonable opportunity
to be heard and to present evidence as to why the decision should not be
affirmed. The burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there
was no substantial evidence to support the appealed decision. Within three
(3) business days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
affirm, reverse or modify the appealed decision based on written findings,
and shall forward a copy of the written decision to the appellant. The
Hearing Officer's decision shall be final.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



§ 8.29.120  VIOLATION — PENALTIES — CIVIL REMEDIES.



   A.   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to do any
of the following:



      1.   To willfully fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter.



      2.   To provide false or misleading information in any plan,
application, report or document required by this chapter.



      3.   To fail to meet the diversion requirement for any covered
project.



   B.   Penalties.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each and every person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or any portion, thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefore as provided in this chapter.



   C.   Civil remedies.  The violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter hereby adopted shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by
the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or
permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement
of such nuisances.



(Ord. 1097, passed 2-6-07)



CHAPTER 8.30:  LARGE EVENT AND VENUE FACILITY WASTE MANAGEMENT



Section



   8.30.010   Short title



   8.30.020   Purpose



   8.30.030   Definitions



   8.30.040   Application to large events and venue facilities



   8.30.050   Exempt events and venue facilities



   8.30.060   Waste Management Plan requirements



   8.30.070   Review of Waste Management Plan



   8.30.080   Waste Management Plan report



   8.30.090   Auditing



   8.30.100   Appeal



   8.30.110   Violation — penalties — civil remedies



§ 8.30.010  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Large Event and Venue Facility
Waste Management Code.”



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.020  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce landfill waste by requiring
each applicant for a permit to operate a large event or large venue facility
to develop and implement a Waste Management Plan in compliance with state and
local statutory goals and policies and to create a mechanism to report
progress towards compliance with the diversion requirements.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.030  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   APPLICANT.  Includes but is not limited to any individual, firm,
limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision,
government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or
any other entity whatsoever that applies to the city for a permit, as defined
in this section.



   DIRECTOR OF MAINTENANCE SERVICES.  The Director of Maintenance
Services for the city, or designee.



   LARGE EVENT.  An event that:



      1.   Generates any solid waste;



      2.   Is located in or on a public street, publicly owned site
or facility, or within a public park;



      3.   Is conducted for any civic, commercial, recreational or
social purpose;



      4.   Serves more than an average of two thousand (2,000)
persons per day, including employees, of operation of the event; and



      5.   Charges an admission fee, or, if operated by the city,
operates with or without charging an admission fee.



   LARGE VENUE FACILITY.  A permanent venue facility that seats or serves
an average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals within the grounds
of the facility, including employees, per day of operation. A LARGE VENUE
FACILITY includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately
owned or operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park,
conference, convention or civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack,
horse track, performing arts center, fairground, museum, theater, or other
public attraction facility.



   PERMIT.  A use PERMIT or other type of PERMIT, necessary to operate a
large venue facility or conduct a large event in the city. Events operated by
the city are exempt from PERMIT requirements only.



   RECYCLING.  The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating,
and reconstituting items that would otherwise be disposed of in a landfill.



   WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN.  A written strategy, approved by the Director
of Maintenance Services, to reduce waste and increase recycling in accordance
with this chapter.



   WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL.  The designated
administrator of the Sanitation Division of the Maintenance Services
Department.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.040  APPLICATION TO LARGE EVENTS AND VENUE FACILITIES.



   Unless otherwise exempt under § 8.30.050, every large event and large
venue facility shall comply with all requirements of this chapter including
city-operated events or facilities meeting the definitions of large venue
facility or large event.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.050  EXEMPT EVENTS AND VENUE FACILITIES.



   Church services, private events at public parks, schools, and
businesses such as restaurants, hotels or offices, are exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.060  WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Each large event permit applicant shall develop and submit a
Waste Management Plan as part of the permit application. All solid waste
generated as a result of large events shall be subject to the waste reduction
plan. The plan shall include the following information:



      1.   An estimate of the amount and types of waste anticipated
from the event;



      2.   Proposed actions to reduce the amount of waste generation
related to the event;



      3.   Arrangements for separation, collection and diversion
from landfills of reusable and recyclable materials.



   B.   The operator of each large event occurring annually, or more
often, shall, on or before July 1, and biennially thereafter, meet with
recyclers and waste service providers of the large event to discuss plans for
implementation of new or improved waste reduction programs to better meet the
purposes of this chapter.



   C.   Each large venue facility shall develop and submit a Waste
Management Plan as part of the permit application. All solid waste generated
within or upon large venue facilities shall be subject to the waste reduction
plan. The plan shall include the following information:



      1.   Source reduction and recycling programs;



      2.   How solid waste is processed by the franchise hauler;



      3.   Procedures for separation, collection and diversion from
landfills of reusable and recyclable materials.



   D.   Each operator of a large venue facility shall meet with
recyclers and waste service providers of the facility every two (2) years
following approval of the Waste Management Plan to discuss plans for
implementation of new or improved waste reduction programs to better meet the
purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.070  REVIEW OF WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   A.   Time for review.  A Waste Management Plan submitted with a
complete permit application shall be approved or denied no later than ten
(10) business days after submittal. The approval may include conditions
reasonably necessary to meet the standards of this chapter.



   B.   Approval.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, no permit shall be issued for any large event or large venue
facility unless and until the Waste Management Plan has been approved, based
upon the following findings by the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official:



      1.   All of the information required for obtaining a permit
has been provided;



      2.   The plan establishes a mechanism that will reduce the
amount of waste disposed in landfills through waste prevention, reuse, and
recycling of materials at venues facilities and special events, and stimulate
markets for recycled-content materials. The target should be as close to
fifty percent (50%) reduction as is practicable as determined by the types of
materials generated at the special event or venue facility.



   C.   Information issued with permit.  If approved, the city shall
provide information to the operator on programs that can be implemented to
reduce, reuse, and recycle solid waste materials generated at the event or
venue facility, and provide contact information about where solid waste
materials may be donated, recycled, or composted. This information may
include, but is not limited to, providing information directing the operator
of the large venue facility or large event to appropriate web sites or direct
mailings, brochures, or other relevant literature.



   D.   Denial.  If the Waste Management Plan Compliance Official
denies the Waste Management Plan, the grounds for denial shall be clearly
stated, in writing, and shall be provided to the applicant along with the
advisement that the denial may be appealed pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.080  WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN REPORT.



   Final report.  Within thirty (30) days of receiving a written request
for information from the city, the large event or large venue facility
operator shall provide a written report to the Waste Management Plan
Compliance Official containing documentation as follows:



   A.   A list of waste reduction, reuse, recycling and diversion
programs implemented for the event or venue facility;



   B.   The number of tons of waste either reduced, reused, recycled or
diverted; and



   C.   The total number of tons land-filled.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.090  AUDITING.



   Any venue facility or event identified under this chapter as a large
venue facility or large event, that is not participating in recycling
services offered by authorized contract collections may be subject to
periodic audits. Based on such audits, the city may require additional
processing of solid waste generated by the large event or venue facility at
an additional cost to the operator, to meet the diversion goals of the city.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.100  APPEAL.



   Any person or entity aggrieved by any decision or finding under the
provisions of this chapter with respect to approving or to denying a Waste
Management Plan or to granting or denying an application for an exception
from compliance with this chapter, may appeal such decision or finding. An
appeal must be filed within five (5) business days after the date of notice
of any protested decision or finding, by filing with the Director of
Maintenance Services a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for
such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date no more than ten (10) business
days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at
least five (5) business days notice of the time and place of the hearing. A
Hearing Officer having no involvement in the decision being appealed, shall
be appointed by the City Manager. At the hearing, the appellant and any other
interested party, shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order
to show cause why the decision or finding should not be upheld. The burden of
proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no substantial
evidence to support the decision or finding appealed. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a final and conclusive
determination based on written findings.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



§ 8.30.110  VIOLATION — PENALTIES — CIVIL REMEDIES.



   A.   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any
applicant or permit holder to do any of the following:



      1.   To willfully fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter.



      2.   To provide false or misleading information in any plan,
application, report or document required by this chapter.



      3.   To fail to comply with the requirements of any approved
Waste Management Plan for a large event or venue facility.



   B.   Penalties.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this chapter hereby adopted. Any person, firm,
partnership or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing
to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment not exceeding six
(6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every person,
firm, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be
deemed punishable therefore as provided in this chapter.



   C.   Civil remedies.  The violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter hereby adopted shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by
the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or
permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement
of such nuisances.



(Ord. 1096, passed 11-7-06)



CHAPTER 8.32:  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



Section



   8.32.010   Beekeeping prohibited



   8.32.020   Curfew



   8.32.030   Disorderly or riotous house



   8.32.040   Horseracing, automobile racing, etc.



   8.32.050   Obstructing entrance to places of public assemblage



   8.32.060   Trailer court or trailer camp



   8.32.070   Unclaimed property disposal



   8.32.080   Discharge of weapons



   8.32.090   Human waste



   8.32.100   Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited in or upon
city-owned parking structures and lots



§ 8.32.010  BEEKEEPING PROHIBITED.



   All persons are hereby prohibited from keeping bees in the city.



('61 Code, § 15.01)  (Ord. 16, passed - - )



§ 8.32.020  CURFEW.



   It is unlawful for any minor to be in or upon, or for any parent or
legal guardian of a minor to allow, cause or permit a minor in his or her
custody to be in or upon, any public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, public buildings or other places open to the public, places of
amusement, eating establishments, or any vacant buildings, structures or
lots, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and sunrise immediately following. 
This section shall not apply:



   A.   When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal
guardian, or other person having the care or custody of the minor; or



   B.   When the minor is engaged in or going directly to or returning
directly from any lawful activity with the written permission of the minor's
parent or legal guardian; or



   C.   When the minor is traveling directly to or from his or her
place of gainful employment or to or from a medical appointment and the minor
can produce written evidence of same; or



   D.   When, with the approval of the minor's parent, legal guardian
or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor, such minor is
traveling directly to or from a meeting, entertainment, recreational or
school activity, or dance and the minor can produce written evidence of such
approval; or



   E.   During such time as the minor is exercising rights protected by
the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1 of the
California Constitution, including, but not limited to, free exercise of
religion, freedom of speech and/or freedom of assembly, provided such minor
has in his or her possession a form of written consent signed by the minor's
parent or legal guardian.  The form of consent must state the hours during
which the minor is permitted to be away from home, the nature of the
permitted activities involving the exercise of constitutional rights, and the
specific location where the minor is permitted to be during such hours; or



   F.   When the minor is emancipated pursuant to the laws of any
state, provided the minor maintains written evidence of such emancipation in
his or her possession during curfew hours; or



   G.   When the minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate or
intrastate travel provided that in the event the minor is not accompanied by
his or her parent or guardian, the minor possesses a parent's or guardian's
written consent thereto; or



   H.   When the minor is homeless. A violation of this § 8.32.020 by
a minor shall be punishable as an infraction and a violation by a parent or
guardian shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, as provided by this Code.



('61 Code, § 15.1)  (Ord. 401, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 769, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 1006, passed 1-6-98)



§ 8.32.030  DISORDERLY OR RIOTOUS HOUSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a riotous or disorderly
house or to permit any riotous or disorderly conduct or any loud or
unnecessary noise in any house, factory, shop, place of business or on any
premises owned, or controlled by him or her in the city, whereby the peace,
quiet or decency of the neighborhood of such house or premises, or of any
person shall be disturbed.



('61 Code, § 15.3)  (Ord. 16, passed - - )



§ 8.32.040  HORSERACING, AUTOMOBILE RACING, ETC.



   It is unlawful for any person to run any horserace, bicycle or
automobile race, either for a wager or for amusement or to ride or drive any
horse or animal to or ride, drive or propel any bicycle or automobile or any
other vehicle in a fast or reckless manner in the city.



('61 Code, § 15.6)  (Ord. 16, passed - - )



§ 8.32.050  OBSTRUCTING ENTRANCE TO PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or to stand or sit in or
at the entrance of any church, hall, theater or place of public assemblage so
as in any manner to obstruct such entrance.



('61 Code, § 15.8)  (Ord. 156, passed - - )



§ 8.32.060  TRAILER COURT OR TRAILER CAMP.



   Before any trailer court or trailer camp is constructed within the city
the person so constructing or causing the same to be constructed shall obtain
a permit from the city, and such person shall be entitled to a permit upon
complying with all the requirements of the state law pertaining to trailer
courts and trailer camps and paying a permit fee as may be required from time
to time.



('61 Code, § 15.9)  (Ord. 288, passed - - )



§ 8.32.070  UNCLAIMED PROPERTY DISPOSAL.



   The Council hereby elects that the city and its Police Department shall
be governed by the provisions of Cal. Civ. Code §§ 2080, 2080.1, 2080.2,
2080.3 and 2080.5 as the legal provisions governing the disposition of
personal property found or saved on property within the jurisdiction of the
city.



('61 Code, § 15.10)  (Ord. 677, passed - - )



§ 8.32.080  DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than an officer of the law
while on duty to discharge any rifle, pistol or gun of any kind within the
city except in target shooting in a shooting gallery regularly licensed by
the city; and it shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any
air gun, spring gun, slingshot or any other similar device within the city.



('61 Code, § 15.13)  (Ord. 16, passed - - )



§ 8.32.090  HUMAN WASTE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or to evacuate his or
her bowels on private property in any place or area exposed to public view or
on any public street, alleys sidewalk, park, or any other public place,
except in a public restroom.



('61 Code, § 15.14)  (Ord. 779, passed - - )



§ 8.32.100  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED IN OR UPON
CITY-OWNED PARKING STRUCTURES AND LOTS.



   A.   It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to consume any
alcoholic beverage, or to possess any can, bottle or other receptacle
containing any alcoholic beverage that has been opened, or a seal broken, or
the contents of which have been partially removed, while in or upon any
parking structure or parking lot owned by the city.



   B.   This section does not apply where such possession or
consumption occurs within a city-owned area for which a license permitting
on-site sales and consumption of alcohol has been issued, or where such
possession or consumption occurs in connection with an event that is
sponsored, operated or authorized by the city, provided the alcoholic
beverage being consumed is expressly permitted by the city to be provided as
part of such event.



   C.   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any
provision of this section, or failing to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for a first
violation; by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) for a second
violation of the same provision within one (1) year; and by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for each additional violation of the
same provision within one (1) year.



(Ord. 1074, passed 8-3-04)



CHAPTER 8.36:  REGULATION OF AMBULANCES



Section



   8.36.010   Intent and purpose



   8.36.020   Definitions



   8.36.030   County license required



   8.36.040   County regulations adopted



   8.36.050   Agreement with city to provide ambulance service required



   8.36.060   Compliance with county operational rules and regulations
required



   8.36.070   Complaints



   8.36.080   Applicability of chapter to current permittees



§ 8.36.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of this chapter to establish general operating
procedures and standards for ambulance services to be provided within the
city and to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible
private ambulance operators to provide such services as the public interest
requires.



('61 Code, § 1A.1)  (Ord. 933, passed  - - )



§ 8.36.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   AMBULANCE.  A motor vehicle, helicopter, or similar vehicle,
specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged and operated for
the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical
services, excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations
not providing medical care.



   AMBULANCE SERVICE.  The activity, business or service, for hire,
profit, or otherwise, of transporting one (1) or more persons by ambulance;
provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by
ambulance by an employee of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned
and operated by the employer solely for this purpose.



   AMBULANCE SERVICE OPERATOR.  Any person who operates or owns an
ambulance service.



   CITY.  The city of Brea, county of Orange, state of California.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The Brea City Council.



   CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT.  The Brea Fire Department.



   COUNTY.  The county of Orange, state of California.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Emergency Medical Services Agency of the county of
Orange or the Health Care Agency of the county of Orange, or as otherwise
designated by the Board of Supervisors.



   EMERGENCY.  A sudden, unforeseen injury, illness or other medical
event giving rise to a need for immediate ambulance service with basic or
advanced life support services.



   EMERGENCY RESPONSE AREA.  A geographical area in the city specified by
the Fire Chief, within which emergency ambulance services may be provided
pursuant to an agreement entered pursuant to this chapter.



   FIRE CHIEF.  The Director of Fire Services for the City of Brea.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Orange County Health Officer or other official
designated by the Board of Supervisors of Orange County to perform the Health
Officer's functions with respect to the regulation of ambulances.



   LICENSEE.  An ambulance service operator which has been granted a
license by the county of Orange to provide ambulance service.



   PARAMEDIC.  The same as defined in the Cal. Health & Safety Code.



   PATIENT.  A wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise
incapacitated person.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
or other group or combination acting as a unit.



   PHYSICIAN.  A medical doctor or osteopath holding a valid license or
certificate to practice as such issued by the state of California.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY.  Any public law enforcement or fire protection
agency.



('61 Code, § 1A.2)  (Ord. 933, passed  - - )



§ 8.36.030  COUNTY LICENSE REQUIRED.



   A.   No ambulance service operator may operate within the city, nor
may any ambulance service operator be permitted to enter into an agreement
with the city for the provision of ambulance services therein, without first
obtaining a county of Orange ambulance service license. Applications for
licenses are obtained and processed through the office of the County Health
Officer and shall be accompanied by fees set by the County Board of
Supervisors. This license is in addition to and not in lieu of any business
or other license which is required by the city of Brea.



   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      1.   Ambulances operating at the request of a public safety
agency during any “state of war emergency,” as defined in Cal. Gov't Code.



      2.   Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location
outside of Orange County regardless of destination.



      3.   Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed-wing
airplane.



('61 Code, § 1A.3)  (Ord. 933, passed  - - )



§ 8.36.040  COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED.



   A.   The following parts of the codified ordinances of the county of
Orange pertaining to the licensing and regulation of ambulances, together
with all requirements, standards, criteria, definitions and performance
levels therein, are hereby adopted by reference:



   §§ 4-9-2 through 4-9-11, inclusive, §§ 4-9-13(d), and 4-9-14
through 4-9-16, inclusive, as contained in the codified ordinances of the
county of Orange.



   B.   A full, true and correct copy of each of the aforesaid parts of
the codified ordinances of the county of Orange is on file in the office of
the City Clerk of the city of Brea.



('61 Code, § 1A.4)  (Ord. 933, passed  - - )



§ 8.36.050  AGREEMENT WITH CITY TO PROVIDE AMBULANCE SERVICE REQUIRED.



   A.   On a need and necessity basis, the city shall contract with one
(1) or more licensees, following a competitive selection process, for
provision of ambulance services in response to emergencies within the city or
any designated emergency response area therein.  Said contracts shall
provide for one (1) primary contractor per emergency response area, with
secondary or back-up service by other emergency ambulance service operators
as deemed necessary by the city.  In awarding a contract or contracts, the
city shall consider the comparative value of competing proposals in the same
manner as proposals from prospective service providers for other city
services, including consideration of:



      1.   The quality of service proposed to be provided;



      2.   The level of service proposed to be provided;



      3.   The cost, if any, to the city;



      4.   The rates proposed to be charged for services to be
provided;



      5.   Past performance history of prospective ambulance service
operators based upon references and recommendations by the public and/or
other public agencies; and



      6.   Any prior revocations of any licenses or permits
necessary to operate an ambulance service.



   B.   The Fire Chief shall administer the contract or contracts for
ambulance service awarded by the City Council under this section. Unless
sooner terminated as provided therein, the term of each contract shall be
three (3) years and, at the discretion of the Fire Chief with concurrence of
the City Council, such contract may be renewed annually thereafter without
utilizing a competitive selection process. The Fire Chief shall also prepare
and keep a current list specifying the primary and secondary contract
ambulance service operators for the city and any designated emergency
response area therein.



   C.   In the event no proposals acceptable to the city are received
for the city, or any designated emergency response area, following the
competitive selection process referred to in this section, the city may
designate one (1) or more licensees to provide emergency ambulance services
on a need and necessity basis, until an ambulance service agreement is
entered for the affected area(s).



   D.   No person shall provide ambulance service in the city in
response to, or as a result of, an emergency unless that person is a licensee
requested by a physician or public safety agency. A licensee requested by a
physician need not be a contractor selected pursuant to this section. Any
ambulance service operator receiving a request for emergency ambulance
service from other than a public safety agency shall immediately advise a
public safety agency having jurisdiction in the location of such request.



      1.   No licensee responding to an emergency shall transport a
patient unless:



         a.   A paramedic is present at the location of the
patient; or



         b.   A physician is present at the location of the
patient and directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic; or



         c.   A qualified public safety employee of the city Fire
Department, or a duly authorized employee of a public safety agency, requests
transportation in the absence of a paramedic.



      2.   Unless otherwise directed by a physician present at the
location of the patient, a licensee shall transport a patient pursuant to
county operational rules and regulations.



('61 Code, § 1A.6)  (Ord. 933, passed  - - )



§ 8.36.060  COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY OPERATIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS
REQUIRED.



   A.   All ambulance service operators providing ambulance services
within the city shall comply with the operational rules and regulations
promulgated by the department, together with all standards, criteria and
levels of performance therein. All ambulance service operators shall further
comply at all times with such rules and regulations as may be imposed by this
chapter, and/or by the Fire Chief in his or her discretion.



   B.   The Health Officer, the Fire Chief and/or their designee(s) may
inspect the records, facilities, ambulances, equipment and method of
operations of each licensee operating within the city, during normal business
hours.



('61 Code, § 1A.6)  (Ord. 933, passed  - - )



§ 8.36.070  COMPLAINTS.



   The city, the county, the department, any user, subscriber, public
safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that any
person has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received
inadequate services or services provided were not in compliance with the
provision of this chapter, may file a written complaint with the city and/or
department setting forth such allegations. The city and/or department shall
notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance
service operator shall file a written response within fifteen (15) calendar
days after receipt of notification.



('61 Code, § 1A.7)  (Ord. 933, passed  - - )



§ 8.36.080  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER TO CURRENT PERMITTEES.



   Any ambulance service operator currently providing ambulance services
pursuant to a permit granted by the city, may continue to provide such
services following the adoption of this chapter, until such time as the
competitive selection process established herein is completed and an
agreement for the provision of ambulance services is entered into by and
between the city and an ambulance service operator or operators. Upon the
effective date of such agreement or agreements, any previously issued permits
to operate ambulance services within the city shall become null and void.
Current permittees are encouraged to participate in the competitive selection
process established by this chapter.



('61 Code, § 1A.8)  (Ord. 933, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 8.38:  REGULATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   8.38.010   Title



   8.38.020   Purpose



   8.38.030   Definitions



   8.38.040   Alarm system permit



   8.38.050   Required response; silencing alarm systems



   8.38.060   Alarm businesses and agents



   8.38.070   Notice of change



   8.38.080   Alarm system standards



   8.38.090   Maintenance and inspections



   8.38.100   Fee for false alarm responses



   8.38.110   Maintaining a public nuisance alarm



   8.38.120   Exempt alarms



   8.38.130   Automatic dialing device permit



   8.38.140   Prohibited alarm systems



   8.38.150   Penalties and enforcement



   8.38.160   Limitation of liability



   8.38.170   Time for compliance



   8.38.180   Civil remedies



§ 8.38.010  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Public Safety Alarm System
Ordinance.”



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.020  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing
burglary, robbery, fire, and medical assistance alarm systems within the
city; to reduce false alarms; to require registration of alarm systems; and
to provide the authority to establish fees.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.030  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM AGENT. Any person who is registered as an alarm agent with the
Bureau of Collection and Investigative Services, pursuant to the provisions
of the California Alarm Company Act, § 7590, et seq., of the Business and
Professions Code and doing business as such within the corporate limits of
the City of Brea.



   ALARM COMPANY OPERATOR. Any person licensed as an alarm company
operator by the Bureau of Collection and Investigative Services pursuant to
the provisions of the California Alarm Company Act, § 7590, et seq., of the
Business and Professions Code and doing business as such within the corporate
limits of the City of Brea.



   ALARM OFFICER. With regard to burglary or robbery alarm systems, the
Chief of Police of the City of Brea, and with regard to fire or medical
assistance alarms, the Fire Chief of the City of Brea, or their respective
designees.



   ALARM PERMIT COORDINATOR. The officer or employee of the city, or
designee thereof, designated by the City Manager as having direct authority
and responsibility for administration of the provisions of this chapter,
excepting only those functions specifically designated to be performed by the
Alarm Officer.



   ALARM SUBSCRIBER. Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or
otherwise obtains an alarm system or contracts for the servicing or
maintenance of an alarm system.



   ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or
used for the detection of burglary, robbery, fire, or need for medical
assistance within a building, structure, or facility, or for alerting others
to a hazard or to the commission of an unlawful act within a building,
structure or facility, which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message
when actuated, and which is designed to elicit a response from the Police
Department or Fire Department.



      1.   ALARM SYSTEMS include, but are not limited to, automatic
dialing devices, direct-dial telephone devices, audible alarms, and
proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms
that are audible, visible or perceptible outside the protected building,
structure or facility are not included within this definition.



      2.   An ALARM SYSTEM includes all of the necessary equipment
designed and installed for the detection of burglary, robbery, fire, need for
medical assistance, or other hazard in a single building structure, or
facility, or for alerting others to the commission of an unlawful act within
a building, structure, or facility.



   AUDIBLE ALARM. A device designed for the detection of unauthorized
entry on certain premises that generates an audible sound on such premises
when it is actuated.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. An alarm system that automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct or wireless connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or form of signal indicating the existence of an
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.



   EMERGENCY. Any condition which results in, or which could result in,
the response of police or fire personnel or any condition which jeopardizes
or could jeopardize public safety.



   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal activated from any alarm system that is
responded to by personnel of the Police Department or Fire Department and for
which no emergency situation exists or existed as determined by the
responding personnel. FALSE ALARM shall not include an alarm for which
personnel of the Police Department or Fire Department do not actually arrive
at the alarm location, or any alarm caused by earthquakes, severe storms or
other extraordinary circumstances determined by the Alarm Officer to be
clearly beyond the control of the alarm subscriber.



   NON-REPONSE STATUS. That status of police service whereby the Police
Department will not respond to a specified alarm system.



   PROPRIETOR ALARM. An alarm that is not serviced by an alarm agent or
alarm company operator.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 7-20-04)



§ 8.38.040  ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT.



   A.   Permit required. No alarm subscriber shall install, replace,
maintain, or operate an alarm system within the city, excepting government
and public school buildings, without applying for and receiving an alarm
system permit in accordance with the provisions of this section.  Following
thirty (30) days' prior written notification, any alarm system which has been
installed, replaced, maintained, or operated without a valid permit may be
placed on non-response status by the Alarm Officer according to the
procedures set forth in § 8.38.110 of this chapter until a permit has been
issued or renewed. Permits for the installation, use and maintenance of
automatic dialing devices are subject to the provisions of § 8.38.130 of
this chapter.



   B.   Applications. Applications for an alarm system permit shall be
filed with the Alarm Permit Coordinator on forms provided by the Alarm Permit
Coordinator. The application shall be signed and verified by the alarm
subscriber and shall contain such information as the Alarm Permit Coordinator
may deem necessary. If the Alarm Permit Coordinator finds the application is
complete and the information is true and correct, and the applicant is
otherwise in compliance with all provisions of this code, a permit shall be
issued. Permits for alarm systems shall not be transferable. Applications for
alarm system permits and the information contained thereon shall be
confidential and the Alarm Officer and Alarm Permit Coordinator shall not
release such application or the information contained thereon to any person
except as may be necessary in the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, or otherwise as provided by law.



   C.   Fees. An alarm subscriber applying for or renewing an alarm
system permit shall pay the fee established by resolution of the City
Council. Such fee shall not exceed the cost to the city in processing the
application and administering the permit.



   D.   Alarm contact information. The alarm subscriber shall supply on
the application for permit the names, addresses, and phone numbers of at
least three (3) persons to notify in the event of an alarm activation. If the
alarm subscriber has entered into a service contract with an alarm company
operator, or any other service company, which provides responses on a 
24-hour basis, emergency telephone numbers of such company shall be deemed to
satisfy this requirement. The name, address and 24-hour telephone number of
the alarm subscriber’s alarm company operator shall be provided.



   E.   Permit term. Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be valid from the date of issuance through the following June 30, or for such
other period as may be established by the Alarm Permit Coordinator.



   F.   Display of permit. The permit shall be kept on the premises and
posted where the alarm system is located, or elsewhere as required by
regulations promulgated by the Alarm Permit Coordinator.



   G.   Rules and regulations. The Alarm Permit Coordinator may
promulgate additional rules and regulations implementing the provisions of
this chapter. Such rules and regulations may include, but are not limited to,
establishing criteria for the waiver of fees consistent with the intent and
purpose of this chapter.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 7-20-04)



§ 8.38.050  REQUIRED RESPONSE; SILENCING ALARM SYSTEMS.



   Upon notification by the Alarm Officer that an alarm system is
activated, the alarm subscriber, or the representative or alarm agent of the
alarm subscriber, shall immediately proceed to the location and silence the
alarm. The silencing shall be completed within thirty (30) minutes after
notification when the alarm system is protecting a residential structure or
within forty-five (45) minutes when the alarm system is protecting a
commercial or industrial structure. Alternately, the alarm system may be
equipped with an automatic shut-off device which shall silence the alarm
within fifteen (15) minutes after activation when the alarm system is
protecting a residential structure or within thirty (30) minutes of
activation when the alarm system is protecting a commercial or industrial
structure, thus eliminating the need for personal responses otherwise
required by this section.  The failure of an alarm subscriber to comply with
the response and alarm silencing time limits set forth herein shall be
chargeable as a false alarm.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 7-20-04)



§ 8.38.060  ALARM BUSINESSES AND AGENTS.



   All alarm company operators performing services in the City of Brea
shall obtain a city business license, and all such operators and alarm agents
shall register their name and file a copy of their state identification card,
license, or permit with the Alarm Permit Coordinator. Each alarm agent while
engaged in the duties of an alarm agent shall carry on such agent's person at
all times the state identification card, license, or permit and shall display
same to the Alarm Officer when requested. No alarm system may be installed by
anyone other than the owner of the alarm or alarm company operator.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-1-04)



§ 8.38.070  NOTICE OF CHANGE.



   Whenever any change occurs relating to any application or other
information required by this chapter, the person required to provide such
information shall give written notice thereof to the Alarm Permit Coordinator
within ten (10) days of such change.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.080  ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS.



   All alarm systems shall conform with the provisions of Chapter 15.12 of
the Brea Code (California Electrical Code), if applicable. No alarm system,
not including automatic dialing device alarms, shall be operated unless the
alarm subscriber has entered into a service contract with an alarm company
operator providing for service twenty-four (24) hours per day. Every alarm
system shall be equipped so that it shall not activate in the event of a
power outage unless there exists an emergency situation for which the alarm
was designed to detect.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.090  MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTIONS.



   A.   Maintenance.  Each alarm subscriber shall maintain each alarm
system in good working order, and provide the necessary service to prevent
malfunctions.



   B.   Inspections.  The Alarm Officer may, prior to placing an alarm
on non-response status and/or as a condition of re-issuance of an alarm
permit, require an alarm subscriber to have a nuisance alarm system under the
subscriber's control inspected at the subscriber's expense, by the company
providing the alarm subscriber's alarm services, or other person qualified to
inspect and service such equipment.  Inspections shall be complete enough to
detect any likely malfunctions and shall include testing of the equipment. 
Particular attention shall be paid to the conditions that have the potential
of causing falsealarms.  The person making the inspection shall provide a
written report to the alarm subscriber and the Alarm Officer, detailing
measures taken to eliminate the likelihood of further false alarms caused by
the alarm system.  The report shall be kept on the premises for two (2)
years, and shall be subject to inspection by the Alarm Officer upon request.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 7-20-04)



§ 8.38.100 FEE FOR FALSE ALARM RESPONSES.



   A.   Each alarm subscriber shall pay a false alarm fee to reimburse
the city for the cost of the Police or Fire Department personnel and
equipment response to false alarms of the alarm subscriber’s alarm system,
in such amounts as established and amended from time to time by resolution of
the City Council.  It is a violation of this section to fail to pay any such
fee when due.



   B.   False alarm fees are due and payable upon receipt of an invoice
therefore from the city.  Any such fee is delinquent if unpaid thirty (30)
days after the date of the invoice.  Any fee that becomes delinquent shall
be subject to a monetary penalty as follows:



      1.   Thirty-one (31) days after the date of invoice, a penalty
of ten percent (10%) of the fee shall be added, plus, commencing each month
thereafter, an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the original fee
shall be added, up to a maximum penalty amount not to exceed the original
invoiced amount.



      2.   Failure to pay any invoice, with all accrued penalties,
within ninety (90) days of the date of the invoice shall authorize the Alarm
Officer to deem the applicable alarm system to be a public nuisance alarm
subject to the remedies and procedures set forth in § 8.38.110 of this
chapter, including placing of the subject alarm system on nonresponse status
and/or revocation of the alarm permit.



      3.   The city shall be authorized to utilize any and all legal
means available to collect a past due invoice, including accrued penalties,
and the same shall be deemed to be a debt on a written contract.  In the
event the city is required to institute any legal action to recover such
costs, it shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and
all other costs of collection.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 1130, passed 11-17-09)



§ 8.38.110 MAINTAINING A PUBLIC NUISANCE ALARM.



   A.   No alarm subscriber shall operate an alarm system for which no
permit has been issued, or which generates more than three (3) false alarms
in a ninety (90) day period, or four (4) false alarms in a one hundred and
eighty (180) day period, or five (5) or more false alarms in any twelve (12)
month period.



   B.   Any alarm system operated or maintained in violation of this
section shall be deemed a public nuisance.



   C.   In addition to any other remedy available to the city,
including the collection of any false alarm charge fee required or permitted
by this chapter, the Alarm Officer may, in such officer's discretion, place
an alarm system operated or maintained in violation of this section on
non-response status according to the procedures delineated in this section.
Furthermore, the Alarm Officer may, consistent with the procedures herein,
place an alarm system on non- response status when accrued false alarm
charges have been outstanding for over thirty (30) days.



   D.   Notice. The Alarm Officer shall provide the alarm subscriber
ten (10) days written notice of non- response status. The non-response status
shall not become effective unless the notice period has lapsed and no request
for review has timely been made.



   E.   Review. The alarm subscriber may request the Alarm Officer to
review and reconsider the decision to place an alarm system on non-response
status. In the event a request for review is filed during the ten (10) day
notice period, non-response status shall not become effective until the fifth
day following the provision of notice of an adverse decision by the Alarm
Officer. The request for review shall contain all pertinent information and
evidence the alarm subscriber deems appropriate for the Alarm Officer's
consideration.



   F.   Compliance. An alarm system shall remain on non-response status
until such time as the alarm subscriber provides a written report, and such
other evidence as the Alarm Officer deems adequate, describing the causes of
the false alarms which resulted in the alarm system being placed on
non-response status and the action taken to terminate or remedy such causes.
Non-response status shall not terminate until the Alarm Officer finds that
repair and corrective action adequate to remedy the causes for the false
alarms have been effected and the alarm subscriber has paid all required
fees. The Alarm Officer may impose conditions upon reactivation of active
status. Active status may also be restored, with or without conditions that
may include payment of a deposit, upon payment of all delinquent alarm
charges.



   G.   Revocation of alarm permit. In any case where the Alarm Officer
finds, based on substantial evidence, that an alarm subscriber who has been
placed on non-response status within the previous twelve (12) months has not
taken steps sufficient to remedy continued false alarms, or has repeatedly
failed to pay delinquent false alarm charges, or has deliberately activated a
false alarm, the alarm permit may be revoked for up to six (6) months, in
addition to being placed on non- response status, following the provision of
notice and review, if requested, pursuant to the procedures set forth in
subsections D. and E. of this section. Following the period of revocation, an
alarm subscriber may reapply for an alarm system permit in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.120  EXEMPT ALARMS.



   A.   Automobile alarms. The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to audible alarms affixed to automobiles.



   B.   Alarm officer. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any alarm system installed or maintained by the Alarm Officer, or any
alarm that is otherwise exempted by law from the provisions of this chapter.



   C.   Telephone systems. The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to any auxiliary device installed by a telephone company to protect
telephone company systems that might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an
alarm system.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.130  AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE PERMIT.



   A.   Permit. No person shall use or operate an automatic dialing
device without having an alarm system permit.



   B.   Application for permit and permit conditions.



      1.   Applications for permits under this section shall be made
on such forms as may be prescribed by the Alarm Permit Coordinator and shall
be signed by the alarm subscriber and the person who provides or installs
such device;



      2.   The device must be programmed to initiate and deliver the
recorded message or signal only to such city telephone number or numbers as
may be assigned by the Alarm Permit Coordinator;



      3.   The alarm subscriber must notify the Alarm Permit
Coordinator if the use of such device is discontinued; and



      4.   Each user of an automatic dialing device is subject to
payment of reimbursement fees for false alarms pursuant to § 8.38.100.



   C.   Application and inspection fees. Each application shall be
accompanied by an alarm system application fee as established by resolution
of the City Council. If in the opinion of the Alarm Permit Coordinator an
inspection of the premises where such device is to be located is necessary or
desirable, an inspection fee shall be paid. Prior to issuing any such permit,
the Alarm Permit Coordinator may require an applicant to present for
examination and inspection the device which the applicant propose to install
and such other information relating to such device as may be necessary to
establish its adequacy and suitability for the purpose intended.



   D.   Permit. Any permit issued by the Alarm Permit Coordinator
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall specify the city telephone
number or numbers to which any such device may be programmed. It shall be
unlawful for the persons to whom such a permit is issued to utilize any city
telephone number other than the number or numbers specified in such permit.



   E.   Revocation of permit. Any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section may be revoked by the Alarm Permit Coordinator at
any time for any of the following reasons:



      1.   The use of such device or devices substantially impairs
the city's communications facilities.



      2.   Failure to properly maintain and service such device.



      3.   Failure to pay any amounts due by reason of the
malfunctioning of such device.



      4.   Maintaining a public nuisance alarm, as described in §
8.38.110.



   F.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all provisions of
this chapter shall apply to automatic dialing devices.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 7-20-04)



§ 8.38.140  PROHIBITED ALARM SYSTEMS.



   A.   Audible alarm systems similar to sirens. It is unlawful to
install or maintain on the exterior or interior of any building, an alarm
system which upon actuation emits a sound which is similar to sirens in use
on emergency vehicles or vehicles used for civil defense purposes.



   B.   Miscellaneous. It is unlawful to install, use, maintain or
deliberately activate any alarm system designed to detect burglaries or
robberies for any purpose other than reporting such burglaries, robberies, or
other crimes involving risk of personal harm or property damage. Deliberately
activating an alarm for any purpose other than a condition that the alarm is
intended to detect, is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.150  PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   Except as provided in § 8.38.140 B, the first violation of any
provision of this chapter occurring within a one (1) year period shall be
punishable as an infraction. Each violation thereafter within such one (1)
year period shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.



   B.   The conviction of any person for violation of any provision of
this chapter shall not release such person from paying any business taxes,
charges, fees, license fees, or reimbursement for false alarm charges due and
unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment of any fee or
reimbursement for false alarms prevent criminal prosecution for violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative and
the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any
other remedy.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.160 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability on the
part of the City of Brea as to any alarm subscriber or to any other person,
as a result of any defect in an alarm system, failure of the city to receive
an alarm, or failure of the city to respond to any alarm regulated by this
chapter, whether false or not. The City Council declares that it shall be
entirely within the discretion of each police officer receiving a report of
an alarm activation, as to whether or not to respond to such alarm, and that
the City of Brea assumes no duty to respond to any alarm as a result of the
enactment of this chapter or the issuance of any permit hereunder.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.170  TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.



   Owners of alarm systems in existence as of the effective date of this
chapter, shall have ninety (90) days to obtain an alarm system permit in
accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



§ 8.38.180  CIVIL REMEDIES.



   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter hereby adopted
shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil
process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or
in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.



(Ord. 1068, passed 5-18-04)



CHAPTER 8.42:  PIPELINE FRANCHISES



Section



Article I. General Provisions and Definitions



   8.42.010   General conditions



   8.42.020   Applicability of chapter



   8.42.030   Pole lines



   8.42.040   Definitions



   8.42.050   Term



   8.42.060   Acceptance of franchise



   8.42.070   Nonexclusive franchise



   8.42.080   Change in status



   8.42.090   Forfeiture



   8.42.100   Value of franchise



   8.42.110   State highways



   8.42.120   Eminent domain



   8.42.130   Assignment



   8.42.140   Prior franchises



   8.42.150   Council approval of location of facilities



   8.42.160   Release of products or contaminants



   8.42.170   Compliance with applicable law



   8.42.180   Notices and records



   8.42.190   Access to records and property



   8.42.200   Removal or abandonment of facilities



   8.42.210   Appeal



Article II.  Indemnification and Insurance



   8.42.220   Indemnification



   8.42.230   Diminution in property value



   8.42.240   Injuries to third parties



   8.42.250   Insurance



   8.42.260   Faithful performance bond



   8.42.270   Liability



   8.42.280   Attorneys’ fees



   8.42.290   Damage to city property



Article III.  Compensation



   8.42.300   Rates



   8.42.310   Records



Article IV.  Construction



   8.42.320   Construction requirements



   8.42.330   New installation or replacement



   8.42.340   Permits



   8.42.350   Work and restoration of streets



   8.42.360   Failure to timely comply



   8.42.370   Completion statement



   8.42.380   Shoring



   8.42.390   Maps



   8.42.400   Facilities



   8.42.410   Ordinary repair



   8.42.420   Relocation



ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS



§ 8.42.010  GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   Every franchise hereafter granted by the city to lay or construct from
time to time, and to maintain, operate, renew, repair, change the size of,
remove or abandon in place pipes and pipelines for the collection,
transportation or distribution of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas,
hydrocarbon substances, water, waste water, mud, steam, and other liquid and
gaseous substances which are not more hazardous than the aforementioned
substances, together with all manholes, valves, appurtenances and service
connections necessary or convenient for the operation of such pipes or
pipelines including conduits, cathodic protection devices, wires, cables and
other appurtenances necessary or convenient for the exercise of the
franchisee’s business, in, under, along or across any and all streets
within the City of Brea, except as otherwise provided in the ordinance
granting the franchise, shall be granted upon and be subject to the rules,
regulations, restrictions and terms and conditions of this chapter, in
addition to those rules, regulations, restrictions, terms and conditions set
forth in the ordinance granting the franchise.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.020  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall apply to all pipelines as defined in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 51010.5(a) and including those pipelines excluded from the definition
under Cal. Gov’t Code § 51010.5(a)(1), (3), and (6). This chapter shall
not authorize the granting of a franchise for the transportation of a
hazardous liquid substance in a gaseous state, or the use of an existing
pipeline for the transmission of such a substance, unless the ordinance
granting the franchise authorizes transportation of such substances.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.030  POLE LINES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit the franchisee to
construct new poles or other facilities above ground.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.040  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in
the singular number include the plural number.



   APPLICABLE LAW. All present and future federal, state, municipal, or
local laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, codes, orders, permit
requirements, judgments, injunctions, or decrees, or any judgment or order or
decree by a court applicable to the franchisee or any of the franchisee’s
facilities or activities.



   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Brea.



   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Brea.



   CITY PROPERTY. The property or facilities owned by the City of Brea or
property owned by any of the city’s affiliated agencies including but not
limited to the Brea Redevelopment Agency.



   CLAIMS. All claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands,
damages, suits, judgments, debts, costs, contribution or indemnity, expenses
(including but not limited to attorneys’ fees and costs) fines, penalties,
judgments, orders, injunctions and liens of every kind and nature, including,
but not limited to, claims relating to any environmental condition or any
release of any contaminant, claims for personal or bodily injury, wrongful
death, injury to real or personal property, natural resources damages, and
including claims based on active or passive negligence, gross negligence,
contractual, statutory or strict liability, or otherwise, and any claims
seeking judicial or administrative proceedings by any governmental agency,
whether or not any such claim is ultimately defeated.



   CODE. The Municipal Code of the City of Brea.



   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Business plans, investments, trade secrets,
personnel data and assessments of the franchisee’s competitive position and
other records and information not reasonably needed by city to apply or
enforce this chapter. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION does not include orders,
reports, or any other documents concerning any facility that reflect,
describe or relate to:



      (1)   Any governmental enforcement activity;



      (2)   Any violation of any local, state or federal
environmental or safety related law or regulation; or



      (3)   Any environmental condition or release.



   CONTAMINANT. Any material, substance or constituent originating from a
franchisee’s facilities or activities, whether solid, liquid, semisolid, or
gaseous in nature, including any hazardous substance or waste, hazardous
material, chemical compound, petroleum (or fraction thereof), or any
hydrocarbon substance, pollutant or contaminant, as those terms are defined
by any federal, state or local law, rule, regulation or order.



   COUNCIL. City Council of the City of Brea.



   DAY. Calendar day unless otherwise provided.



   DEPARTMENT. Public Works Department of the City of Brea.



   ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITION. The presence or evidence of the likely
presence of any contaminant originating from a franchisee’s facility(ies)
or from franchisee’s activities, or a release, in surface water, ground
water, drinking water supply, soil, land surface, subsurface strata or the
air.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES. All property owned or used by the franchisee in
connection with the franchise, including, but not limited to, pipelines, pump
stations, and service connections with the franchisee’s facilities, whether
installed by the franchisee as named and originally granted under this
franchise or its predecessors and assignors, erected, constructed, laid,
operated or maintained in, upon, over, under, along or across any street
pursuant to any right or privilege granted by the franchise.



   FRANCHISE PAYMENT PERIOD. The time period between the effective date of
the ordinance and December 31 of the same year, and each calendar year
thereafter, during the life of the franchise.



   FRANCHISEE. The person to whom the franchise is granted, and any person
to whom it is lawfully assigned.



   MAJOR STREET. Any street or portion thereof designated as a major
‘secondary highway’ in the Circulation Element of the Brea General Plan.



   MINOR STREET. Any street or portion thereof other than one designated
as a ‘secondary highway’ in the Circulation Element of the Brea General
Plan.



   ORDINANCE. An ordinance granting a franchise to a franchisee unless
some other ordinance is mentioned.



   PERSON. Any individual, person, firm, partnership or corporation.



   RELEASE. Any ‘release’ (as that term is defined in Section 101(22)
of CERCLA [42 U.S.C. Section 9601(22)]), or ‘disposal’ (as that term is
defined in Section 1004(3) of RCRA [42 U.S.C. Section 6903(3)]), or any
discharge, active or passive migration, deposit, storage, burial,
emplacement, seepage, filtration or disposal of a contaminant into the
environment originating from any facility or from franchisee’s activities.



   REMEDIAL WORK. All ‘remedial action,’ as that term is defined in
Section 101(24) of CERCLA [42 U.S.C. Section 9601], and all other actions as
are necessary or required to remediate a release of any contaminant or an
environmental condition to a condition which would allow unimpaired and
unrestricted use and development and would comply with applicable law, and
including but not limited to all actions necessary to ‘respond’ to,
‘remove,’ or ‘remedy,’ as those terms are defined in Section 101(23),
101(24) and 101(25) of CERCLA [42 U.S.C. Section 9601], a release of a
contaminant or environmental condition.



   REMEDIATION COSTS. All costs and expenses, including the city’s
current rate of overhead, incurred by the city in performing and monitoring
any remedial work.



   SHALL is mandatory, MAY is permissive.



   STREET. Any street, road, highway, alley, lane or court or other public
easement, which now exists or may hereafter exist in the City of Brea and in
which the city has the authority to grant a franchise.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.050  TERM.



   Unless the ordinance provides otherwise, the term of each franchise
shall be ten (10) years.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.060  ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE.



   The franchisee shall, within thirty (30) days after the passage of the
ordinance, file with the City Clerk of the City of Brea a written acceptance
of the terms and conditions of such ordinance. The franchise shall be null
and void if the written acceptance is not filed within the prescribed time.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.070  NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.



   The granting of a franchise shall not prevent the city from granting
any identical or similar franchise to any person other than the franchisee.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.080  CHANGE IN STATUS.



   If, after granting the franchise to other than a public utility, the
franchisee qualifies before the Public Utilities Commission of the State of
California as a common carrier, the franchisee shall then have no right to
continue to operate hereunder after the date of such qualification, except
with the consent of the Council granted upon such additional terms and
conditions as the Council may deem proper. Such additional terms and
conditions shall be expressed by ordinance.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.090  FORFEITURE.



   The franchise is granted and shall be held and enjoyed upon each and
every condition contained in this chapter and shall be strictly construed
against the franchisee. The franchise shall grant only those rights that are
stated in plain and unambiguous terms. Failure or refusal to comply with any
of the conditions of the franchise, including the failure to comply with all
applicable law, shall constitute grounds for the suspension or forfeiture of
the franchise. The Council, prior to any suspension or forfeiture of the
franchise, shall give to the franchisee not less than thirty (30) days’
notice in writing of any default thereunder. If the franchisee does not,
within the noticed period, begin the work of compliance or after such
beginning does not prosecute the work with due diligence to completion, the
Council may hold a hearing, at which the franchisee shall have the right to
appear and be heard, and thereupon the Council may determine, in its sole
discretion, whether such conditions are material and essential to the
franchise and whether the franchisee is in default with respect thereto and
may declare the franchise suspended or forfeited. Notice of the hearing shall
be given to the franchisee by certified mail not less than ten (10) days
before the hearing.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.100  VALUE OF FRANCHISE.



   The franchisee of any franchise awarded to a public utility, by
accepting the terms and conditions thereof, stipulates and agrees that in any
proceeding for the purpose of adjusting the rates of the franchisee, no
greater value shall be placed upon the franchise than the actual cash paid
therefor by the franchisee.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.110  STATE HIGHWAYS.



   If any street or portion thereof becomes a state highway, except for
such rights as by law remain with the city, the state shall succeed to all
rights reserved to the city by the franchise. This chapter does not apply to
any change of location in a state highway for a temporary purpose.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.120  EMINENT DOMAIN.



   No franchise granted by the city shall in any way impair or affect the
right of the city or successor in authority to acquire the property of the
franchisee by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent
domain, and nothing contained in such franchise shall be construed to
contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity,
the city’s or the franchisee’s rights of eminent domain before any court
or other public authority in any proceeding of any character.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.130  ASSIGNMENT.



   The franchisee shall not directly or indirectly sell, transfer, assign
or lease the franchise or any part thereof, or allow another person or entity
to operate any pipeline or related facility subject to the franchise, except
with the consent of the Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably
withheld. Such sale, transfer, assignment, lease or agreement shall be made
only by filing with the Council a copy of the duly executed instrument of
such sale, transfer, assignment, lease, or agreement and a written request
for the consent of the Council to such sale, transfer, assignment, lease or
agreement. If such duly executed instrument and such written request are not
filed with the Council before the expiration of sixty (60) days after the
effective date of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, then, upon the
expiration of the sixty (60) days, the franchise shall be subject to
forfeiture and the Council may, without notice, by ordinance, repeal the
franchise. As a condition to the granting of consent to such sale, transfer,
assignment, lease or agreement, the Council may impose such reasonable
additional terms and conditions upon the franchise and upon the franchisee or
assignee, which the Council may deem to be in the public interest. Such
additional terms and conditions shall be expressed by ordinance. The
franchisee shall have no right to sell, transfer, assign or lease the
franchise, or any part thereof, except in the manner aforesaid. This chapter
applies to any assignment, whether by operation of law, by a voluntary act of
the franchisee or otherwise, and includes a transfer of more than fifty
percent (50%) of the voting stock of any corporate grantee or the change in
identity of any general partner of a franchisee which is a partnership,
whether to a third party or to any subsidiary, parent, or affiliated agency
of franchisee.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.140  PRIOR FRANCHISES.



   All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained by
the franchisee in the streets, including services connected with franchisee's
facilities, whether installed by the franchisee or not in the area described
in and by virtue of the authority provided by the ordinance granting the
franchise, prior to the effective date of the ordinance, except those
maintained under prior right other than franchise, shall become subject to
all the terms and conditions of such ordinance upon such effective date
unless the ordinance provided otherwise.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 5- 1-12; Am. Ord. 1160,
passed 5-1-12)



§ 8.42.150  COUNCIL APPROVAL OF LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   A franchisee may not install or operate any facilities in any public
street, highway, road, alley or other public place without first obtaining
the prior approval of the City Council by resolution.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.160  RELEASE OF PRODUCTS OR CONTAMINANTS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, in the event of release of
a contaminant by a franchisee or from any facility of franchisee or the
discovery of an environmental condition caused by franchisee or any facility
of franchisee, the franchisee shall immediately conduct such remedial work or
pay all remediation costs, at its sole expense, as is necessary to fully
mitigate and remediate the same in accordance with all applicable law.  In
the event the franchisee fails within forty-five (45) days after receipt of
written demand for compliance in accordance with all applicable law from the
city for failure, neglect or refusal to immediately initiate necessary
activities toward actual remediation, city may commence a nuisance abatement
action or take any other legal action the city deems appropriate under the
circumstances.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 5- 1-12; Am. Ord. 1160,
passed 5-1-12)



§ 8.42.170  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW.



   Until such time as (1) the franchise terminates; and (2) the franchisee
removes all of its facilities; and (3) completes any necessary remedial work,
franchisee will comply with all applicable law.  Franchisee will perform all
required, regular testing of its facilities in accordance with the provisions
of Cal. Gov’t Code § 51013.5.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.180  NOTICES AND RECORDS.



   Upon request, franchisee will transmit to city copies of all notices,
orders or statements, other than those constituting confidential information
from any governmental agency concerning any facility or any operations
conducted by franchisee in the city pursuant to the franchise. Upon request,
franchisee shall send to the city copies of requested documents as outlined
above concerning any facility or any operations conducted by franchisee
pursuant to the franchise sent to any other governmental agency concurrently
with sending them to the other agency and shall send to city documents
received by franchisee unless providing documents to city would conflict with
applicable law. Franchisee shall inform city in writing if it has withheld
any document as confidential information or pursuant to any applicable law.
This statement shall provide the reason justifying the franchisee to withhold
the information.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.190  ACCESS TO RECORDS AND PROPERTY.



   Upon request, the franchisee shall permit the city or its duly
authorized representative to examine any or all of franchisee’s facilities,
together with any appurtenant property of the franchisee located within the
city, and to examine and transcribe any and all books, accounts, papers,
maps, and other records, other than confidential information, kept or
maintained by the franchisee or under its control which concern the
operations, affairs, transactions or property of the franchisee with respect
thereto. Such records shall be made available to the city at a location in
the County of Orange. Franchisee shall inform city in writing if it has
withheld any document as confidential information and the reason franchisee
believes the information constitutes confidential information.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.200  REMOVAL OR ABANDONMENT OF FACILITIES.



   A.   At the expiration, revocation or termination of the franchise
or upon the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its
facilities, the franchisee shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, make
written application to the City Engineer for authority, as determined by the
franchisee, either: (1) to abandon all or a portion of such facilities in
place; or (2) to remove all or a portion of such facilities. Such application
shall describe the facilities desired to be abandoned or removed by reference
to the map or maps required by § 8.42.390 of this chapter, and shall also
describe with reasonable accuracy the physical condition of such facilities.



   B.   The City Engineer shall determine whether the abandonment or
removal which is thereby proposed may be effected without detriment to the
public interest and under what conditions such proposed abandonment or
removal may be safely effected. The City Engineer shall then notify the
franchisee of his or her determination. The franchisee shall pay to the city
the cost of all tests required to determine whether the facilities shall be
abandoned or removed.



   C.   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the
franchisee shall apply for a permit from the Department to abandon or remove
all or a portion of the facilities and shall pay all fees and costs related
thereto. Such permit shall contain such conditions of abandonment or removal
as may be prescribed by the City Engineer and these conditions shall be fully
complied with to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.



Until so abandoned or removed, fees applicable to the franchise shall
continue to accrue. Any abandonment shall be conditioned, in part, upon
franchisee’s agreement to comply with the provisions of §§ 8.42.220,
8.42.230, 8.42.240 and 8.42.420 of this chapter.



   D.   The franchisee shall, within ninety (90) days after obtaining
such permit, commence and diligently prosecute to completion the work
authorized by the permit.



   E.   If the franchisee applies for authority to abandon all or a
portion of its facilities in place, and the City Engineer determines that
abandonment in place of all or part of the facilities may be effected without
detriment to the public interest, the franchisee shall pay to the city a fee
which shall be computed as follows:



 


Pipelines with an Internal Diameter of

 
Amount per Lineal Foot


0 - 12 inches
 
$15.00


14 - 18 inches
 
$22.00


20 - 30 inches
 
$28.00



 



   F.   Facilities abandoned in place shall be subject to the condition
that if, at any time after the effective date of the abandonment, the City
Engineer determines that the facility may interfere with any public project,
franchisee or its successor in interest must remove the facility at its
expense when requested to do so by the city or pay city for the cost of such
removal. If the franchisee removes the facility or any part thereof, then the
city shall refund to the franchisee its reasonable costs of removal, not to
exceed the abandonment fee, or proportionate portion thereof if not all of
the facilities are removed, that the franchisee paid pursuant to subparagraph
E. of this section. If the city removes the facility, the franchisee shall
promptly reimburse the city for its costs of removal, as specified in
subparagraph H. of this section.



   G.   If any facilities to be abandoned “in place” subject to
prescribed conditions shall not be abandoned in accordance with all such
conditions, the City Engineer may make additional appropriate orders,
including an order that the franchisee shall remove any or all such
facilities. The franchisee shall comply with such additional orders.



   H.   In the event that the franchisee shall fail to comply with the
terms and conditions of abandonment or removal as may be required by this
chapter and within such time as may be prescribed by the City Engineer, then
the city may remove or cause to be removed such facilities at the
franchisee’s expense. The franchisee shall pay to the city the cost of such
work plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the city for
reimbursable work, less the abandonment fee, or portion thereof if less than
all of the facilities are removed, that the franchisee paid pursuant to
subparagraph E. of this section.



   I.   If, at the expiration, revocation or termination of a
franchise, or of the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion
of its facilities, the franchisee shall, within sixty (60) days thereafter,
fail or refuse to make written application for abandonment in place or
removal, the City Council shall make the determination as to whether the
facilities shall be abandoned in place or removed. The City Engineer shall
then notify the franchisee of the City Council’s determination. The
franchisee shall thereafter comply with the provisions of subparagraphs C.,
D. and E. of this section, if the Council approves abandonment of the
facilities. Thereafter, the franchisee shall continue to be subject to all
provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.210  APPEAL.



   Any decision made by the City Engineer pursuant to authority delegated
in this chapter may be appealed by any interested person to the City Council.
For purposes of seeking judicial review, the decision of the City Council
shall be final when notice of the decision is mailed by first-class mail to
the franchisee.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



ARTICLE II. INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE



§ 8.42.220  INDEMNIFICATION.



   A.   The franchisee shall indemnify to the fullest extent permitted
by law, and defend and hold the city, and its Council members, employees,
remediation consultants, environmental consultants, contractors, agents and
attorneys free and harmless from and against all claims arising from or in
any way related to the franchise or activities conducted by or on behalf of
franchisee.  This indemnification obligation shall include payment by
franchisee of any and all attorneys’ fees and experts’ costs incurred by
any of the foregoing indemnitees.



   B.   The city and the other parties indemnified herein shall have
the right to approve the attorneys selected by franchisee to represent them.
In the event franchisee does not provide attorneys acceptable to the
indemnified parties, the indemnified parties may select attorneys of their
choice, so long as the attorney’s rates do not exceed the greater of the
rates the indemnified parties pay for other legal services, or the amounts
the franchisee pays for its legal services in the matter.



   C.   The indemnity provided herein shall survive the expiration or
other termination of the franchise.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.230  DIMINUTION IN PROPERTY VALUE.



   Franchisee shall indemnify any affected property owner for any
reduction or diminution in value in real property occasioned by an
environmental condition or release found to be the result of franchisee's use
and operations of its facilities and the exercising of the rights granted
under this franchise.  Diminution in property value shall be determined by
an independent appraiser.  The selected appraiser shall not be a party to a
contract between the franchisee or property owner.  The selected appraiser
shall be licensed with the California Office of Real Estate Appraisers.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 5- 1-12; Am. Ord. 1160,
passed 5-1-12)



§ 8.42.240  INJURIES TO THIRD PARTIES.



   The franchisee shall indemnify any person for personal injuries caused
by or resulting from any of franchisee’s activities.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.250  INSURANCE.



   On or before commencement of any franchise operations, the franchisee
shall obtain or provide satisfactory evidence of having policies of
comprehensive general liability, automobile liability, general contractor’s
pollution legal liability and worker’s compensation insurance from
companies admitted to transact business in the State of California by the
Insurance Commission of California, and with a Best’s rating of A:VIII or
better.



   A.   The policy of commercial general and automobile liability
insurance shall:



      1.   Be issued to franchisee and name the city, and its
officers, agents, and employees, as additional insureds;



      2.   Defend and indemnify the insureds against all liability
for personal injury, bodily injury, wrongful death and property damage
arising from activities conducted pursuant to the franchise by providing
coverage therefor, including but not limited to, coverage for acts or
omissions of franchisee and the agents, servants and employees thereof,
committed in the conduct of franchise operations;



      3.   Provide combined single limit liability insurance in the
amount of six million dollars ($6,000,000);



      4.   Be noncancelable without thirty (30) days’ prior
written notice thereof provided to the City Clerk.



   B.   The franchisee’s pollution legal liability policy shall:



      1.   Be issued to the franchisee and name the city, and its
officers, agents, and employees, as additional insureds;



      2.   Defend and indemnify the insureds against all liability
for personal injury, bodily injury, wrongful death and property damage
(including but not limited to damages and costs relating to site remediation)
caused by pollution conditions, including, but not limited to, any release or
environmental condition, arising from operations performed by or on behalf of
the franchisee;



      3.   Provide a combined single limit in the amount of ten
million dollars ($10,000,000);



      4.   Provide coverage on an occurrence basis, and not on a
claims made basis;



      5.   Provide coverage for damage to the owned premises of any
insured;



      6.   Be noncancelable without thirty (30) days’ prior
written notice thereof provided to the City Clerk.



   C.   The policy of workers compensation insurance shall:



      1.   Have been previously approved as to substance and form by
the California Insurance Commissioner;



      2.   Cover all employees of franchisee who in the course and
scope of their employment are to conduct or do work pursuant to the franchise
operations;



      3.   Provide for every benefit and payment presently or
hereinafter conferred by Division 4 of the Cal. Labor Code upon an injured
employee, including the vocational rehabilitation and death benefits;



      4.   Be noncancelable without thirty (30) days’ prior
written notice thereof provided directed to the City Clerk.



   D.   The franchisee shall file with the City Clerk certified copies
of such policies of insurance for each of the required policies with required
endorsements executed by the company issuing the policy, certifying that the
policy is in force and providing the following information with respect to
the policy:



      1.   The policy number;



      2.   The date upon which the policy will become effective and
the date upon which it will expire;



      3.   The names of the named insured and any additional insured;



      4.   The subject of the insurance;



      5.   The type of coverage provided by the insurance;



      6.   The amount of limit of coverage provided by the insurance;



      7.   A description of all endorsements that form a part of the
policy.



   E.   As an alternative to commercial insurance from franchisee, the
City Council may approve, in its sole discretion, and based upon satisfactory
evidence of sufficient financial responsibility being provided by franchisee,
a program of self-insurance or self-insured retention, meeting the following
requirements:



      1.   The city shall be provided at least the same defense of
suits and payments of claims as would be provided by the first dollar of
commercial insurance.



      2.   A formal declaration to be self-insured for the type and
amount of coverage indicated in this chapter. This can be in the form of a
corporate resolution or a certified statement from an authorized
representative of the franchisee.



      3.   The exact wording of the program of self-insurance shall
be approved by the City Attorney. The City Council may, in its sole
discretion and upon sixty (60) days’ written notice to the franchisee,
rescind its approval of the program of self-insurance. In such case, the
franchisee shall provide the insurance otherwise required by this section
before expiration of the sixty (60) day notice period.



   F.   The franchisee shall not commence operations until franchisee
has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this chapter. The
franchisee shall immediately cease operations if the franchisee fails to
maintain the policies in full force and effect.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.260  FAITHFUL PERFORMANCE BOND.



   On or before the effective date of the ordinance, the franchisee shall
file and thereafter at all times during the life of the franchise keep on
file with the City Clerk a corporate surety bond approved by the City
Attorney running to the city in the penal sum of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000), with a surety licensed to do business in California and approved
by the City Engineer. The bond shall provide that franchisee shall well and
truly observe, fulfill and perform each condition of the franchise and that
in case of any breach of condition of the bond the whole amount of the penal
sum shall be deemed to be liquidated damages and shall be recoverable from
the principal and sureties of the bond. If the bond is not filed prior to the
effective date of the ordinance, the award of the franchise may be set aside
and the ordinance may be repealed at any time prior to the filing of the bond
and any money paid in consideration for the award of franchise shall be
deemed forfeited. In the event that the bond, after it has been so filed,
shall at any time during the life of the franchise become insufficient, in
the sole opinion of the City Council, the franchisee shall renew said bond
within twenty (20) days after written notice to do so is provided by the City
Engineer. At such time, the bond shall be increased by a rate equal to
adjustments to the Consumer Price Index for the Orange-Anaheim-Riverside
Area, or successor index thereto, since the effective date of the franchise
or the most recent increase to the bond.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.270  LIABILITY.



   The franchisee shall be liable to the city for damage to city property,
including but not limited to, any street, and any other cost incurred by the
city caused by franchisee, any of franchisee’s facilities or by any person
acting on franchisee’s behalf. The franchisee shall be strictly liable to
city for any activity conducted pursuant to or in connection with the
franchise. The franchisee’s strict liability shall extend to any
consequential damages incurred by the city, and to any costs, including
remediation costs, incurred by the city for control or abatement of any
environmental condition, release of contaminants, remedial work or any fire
or explosion resulting from any activity conducted by or on behalf of
franchisee pursuant to the franchise.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.280  ATTORNEYS’ FEES.



   The franchisee shall pay all attorneys’ fees actually incurred by
city to enforce any term of the franchise, including, but not limited to, any
requirement of this chapter.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.290  DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY.



   Any damage done directly or indirectly to property of the City of Brea
or other public agency by franchisee in exercising any right, power, or
privilege under a franchise, or in performing any duty under or pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, shall be promptly repaired by franchisee at
its sole cost and expense to as good a condition as it was before such damage
was incurred, and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. If the
franchisee, within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice from the
city, instructing it to repair such damage, shall fail to commence to comply
with such instructions, or, thereafter, shall fail to diligently prosecute
such work to completion, the city immediately may do work necessary to carry
out said instructions at the cost and expense of the franchisee, which cost
and expense, by the acceptance of the franchise, the franchisee agrees to pay
upon demand. If such damage constitutes an immediate danger to the public
health or safety requiring the immediate repair thereof, the city without
notice may repair such damage and the franchisee shall pay all costs incurred.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



ARTICLE III. COMPENSATION



§ 8.42.300  RATES.



   As consideration for the franchise granted, the franchisee shall pay to
the city in lawful money of the United States the following:



    A.   Public utility not transmitting oil or products thereof. The
franchisee of any franchise awarded to a public utility not transmitting oil
or products thereof, as consideration for such franchise, shall annually pay
to the city in lawful money of the United States, within sixty (60) days
after the end of each calendar year and during the life of the franchise for
each and every year, including the year of granting the franchise, two
percent (2%) of the gross annual receipts of the franchisee arising from the
use, operation or possession of the franchise; provided, however, that such
payment shall in no event be less than one percent (1%) of the gross annual
receipts of applicant derived from the sale within the limits of the
municipality of the utility service for which the franchise is awarded; or
such other amounts as are provided in § 6231 of the Cal. Pub. Util. Code.
The city reserves the right to change its fees at five (5) year intervals
from the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, if following
a public hearing, such action is not in conflict with the law of the State of
California.



   B.   Public utility transmitting oil or products thereof.



      1.   The franchisee of any franchise awarded to a public
utility transmitting oil or products thereof, as consideration for such
franchise, shall, within sixty (60) days after the end of each calendar year
and during the life of the franchise for each and every year, including the
year of granting the franchise, annually pay to the city in lawful money of
the United States, a fee in the following amounts:



 


Pipelines with an Internal Diameter of

 
Base Rate per Lineal Foot




0 - 4 inches
 
$0.088


6
 
$0.132


8
 
$0.176


10
 
$0.220


12
 
$0.264


14
 
$0.308


16
 
$0.352


18
 
$0.396


20
 
$0.440


22
 
$0.484


24
 
$0.528


26
 
$0.572


28
 
$0.616


30
 
$0.660




 



   2.   For pipelines with an internal diameter not listed above, the
fees shall be in the same proportion to the fees of a twelve
(12)-inch-diameter pipe as the diameter of the unlisted pipe is to twelve
(12) inches.



The amount of the fee or charge provided for in this subparagraph B.2. shall
be multiplied by the Consumer Price Index, all Urban Consumers for the
Orange-Anaheim-Riverside Area for the month of September immediately
preceding the month in which payment is due and payable, and divided by the
Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers for the Orange-Anaheim, Riverside
Area for June 30, 1989, (1982-84=100.0.).



   C.   Non-public utility franchises. The franchisee of any franchise
awarded to other than a public utility, as further consideration for such
franchise including the extension, renewal, or continuation of a previously
granted franchise, shall pay to the city in lawful money of the United States
the following fees:



      1.   In the case of an initial grant of franchise, or
franchises which extend, renew, or continue previously granted franchises, a
base granting fee of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) for
pipelines with a total length of one-quarter (1/4) mile or more or three
thousand dollars ($3,000) for pipelines with a total length of less than
one-quarter (1/4) mile shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the
Council adopts the ordinance and prior to signing the written acceptance of
the franchise pursuant to §8.42.060. If at any time during the first five
(5) years following the grant of a franchise, additional pipeline is added
which will result in a total length of pipeline of one-quarter (1/4) mile or
more, an additional four thousand five hundred ($4,500) granting fee shall be
required at the same time the footage is added.



      2.   a.   A base annual fee shall be paid within sixty (60)
days after the end of each calendar year and during the life of the franchise
for each and every year, including the year of granting the franchise,
according to the franchise payment period as defined in this chapter, in the
following amounts:



 


Pipelines with an Internal Diameter of

 

Amount per Linear Foot






0 - 4 inches

 

$0.232




6 inches

 

$0.352




8 inches

 

$0.471




10 inches

 

$0.584




12 inches

 

$0.703




14 inches

 

$0.823




16 inches

 

$0.935




18 inches

 

$1.055




20 inches

 

$1.174




22 inches

 

$1.287




24 inches

 

$1.406




26 inches

 

$1.526




28 inches

 

$1.638




30 inches

 

$1.758



 




 



         b.   The base annual rate applicable to pipelines with
an internal diameter falling between two (2) incremental size categories
shall pay a rate determined by adding the price corresponding to the lower
size to a figure computed by multiplying the difference between the higher
and lower price times the multiplier. The multiplier will be determined by
dividing the difference between the size of the pipe and the lower size
category by the difference between the two (2) size categories. In
determining the number of feet of pipeline upon which the annual fee will be
computed, the greatest number of feet of pipeline covered by the franchise
during the calendar year for which payment is due will be utilized. The base
annual fee shall be paid no later than sixty (60) days following the end of
the calendar year and a penalty at the rate of ten percent (10%) per month or
fraction thereof beyond the payment date shall be charged, but in no event
shall said penalty exceed fifty percent (50%).



      3.   The city reserves the right to adjust the base fees
established hereunder at any time after the effective date of the ordinance,
but the base fees applicable to any one franchise may only be changed five
(5) times during the life of that particular franchise.



   D.   Base construction charges. The holder of the franchise shall
pay at the time of installation, relocation, or replacement of any pipeline
or other facility covered by the franchise, a base construction charge of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for each one-half (1/2) mile of
pipeline or fractional part thereof installed, replaced or relocated on major
streets and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) per one-half (1/2)
mile or fractional part thereof, on minor streets. The city reserves the
right to change the base fees established hereunder at any time after the
effective date of the ordinance, but the base fees applicable to any one
franchise may only be changed five (5) times during the life of that
particular franchise.



   E.   Adjustments.



      1.   The amount of each base fee specified in subparagraphs C.
and D. of this section shall be adjusted at the time payment is due by the
percentage change in the Consumer Price Index, all Urban Consumers for the
Orange-Anaheim-Riverside area (1982-84 = 100), for the period January 1, 2011
to the date which is sixty (60) days prior to the due date of the fee.



      2.   In no event shall any fee be charged which is less than
the base fee amount established by subparagraphs C. and D. of this section.



      3.   The indices specified in subparagraphs A. and E.1. of
this section, are calculated and published by the United States Department of
Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the Bureau discontinues the calculation
or publication of the Consumer Price Index, all Urban Consumers for the
Orange-Anaheim-Riverside area (1982-84 = 100), and no transposition table is
available to convert to another index, then the amount of each annual
adjustment in base fees shall be computed by using a comparable governmental
index.



   F.   Publication and administrative issuance costs. The franchisee
shall pay to the city within thirty (30) days after receiving a statement
therefore, all administrative, legal and other costs incurred by the city in
processing the application for a franchise, including but not limited to the
preparation of any reports, statements or studies pursuant to the California
Environmental Quality Act (Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.) and any
similar federal statute, or any successor statute, and for any and all
advertising and publishing costs, including the cost of publishing the
ordinance, if necessary, incurred in connection with the granting of the
franchise.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.310  RECORDS.



   The franchisee shall keep and preserve for a period of five (5) years
subsequent to the date of the most recent franchise fee determination all the
records necessary to determine the amount of such franchise fee.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



ARTICLE IV. CONSTRUCTION



§ 8.42.320  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   Pipelines and all other facilities shall be constructed and maintained
in a good workerlike manner in conformity with applicable law.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.330  NEW INSTALLATION OR REPLACEMENT.



   New installation or replacement of pipelines and all other facilities
necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance, and safety of
pipelines and conduits shall be laid and maintained pursuant to applicable
law. All such installations or replacements shall be reviewed by the City
Engineer as to the most desirable location in the streets of the city and his
or her decision shall be final and binding on the franchisee subject to
appeal as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.340  PERMITS.



   Where the provisions of any applicable law, which shall be in force at
the time, require the issuance of an excavation, encroachment or other type
of permit, the franchisee shall not commence any excavation or encroachment
work under the franchise until it shall have obtained such permits, except in
cases of emergency affecting public health, safety or welfare or the
preservation of life or property, in which case the franchisee shall apply
for such permits not later than the next business day. The franchisee’s
application for a permit under applicable law shall show the length and
proposed location of the pipeline and/or other facility intended to be
installed, and such other facts as the Department may require. The franchisee
shall pay any and all permit inspection fees to the Department.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.350  WORK AND RESTORATION OF STREETS.



   A.   The work of constructing, laying, replacing, maintaining,
repairing or removing all pipelines and other facilities authorized under the
provisions of this chapter in, over, under, along or across any street shall
be conducted to minimize hindrance to the use of the street for purposes of
travel, and as soon as such work is completed, all portions of the street
which have been excavated or otherwise damaged thereby shall promptly and in
a workerlike manner be repaired, replaced or restored and placed in as good
condition as the same as before the commencement of such work. For streets
that have been rehabilitated within five (5) years prior to the work the city
shall require the resurfacing, or other treatment, of the entire width of the
street or streets as directed by the City Engineer. For those streets that
have not been rehabilitated by the city within five (5) years prior to the
work the restoration shall be in full compliance with the City of Brea
excavation requirements. All restoration, repair, or replacement work shall
be done to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department at the expense of
the franchisee in accordance with all applicable law.



   B.   In the event that the franchisee shall fail or neglect to make
such highway repair, replacement, or restoration work, then ten (10) days
after notice therefor has been given franchisee by the City Engineer, the
city may repair, replace or restore the highway at the expense of franchisee.
The franchisee shall pay to the city the cost of performing such work. The
amount so chargeable shall be the direct cost of such work plus the current
rate of overhead being charged by the city for reimbursable work.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.360  FAILURE TO TIMELY COMPLY.



   A.   In the event that the franchisee fails to perform the work
within the time specified in the permit, the city may require the franchisee
to pay to the city five hundred dollars ($500) per day as liquidated damages
for each day construction extends beyond the time specified in the permit.
This provision shall not apply should the franchisee establish to the
reasonable satisfaction of the City Engineer that the franchisee was
prevented from performing by reason of the adverse effects of an act of God,
war, riot, civil commotion, strikes, fire, flood, earthquake, extreme
weather, or other similar cause beyond the reasonable control of franchisee.
In such case, the required date for performance shall be extended for a
period equal to the delay caused by such adverse effects, unless otherwise
agreed. Such extension of time shall be documented in writing by the City
Engineer.



   B.   Whenever the franchisee fails to complete any work required by
the terms and conditions of the franchise, and the permits issued thereunder,
within the time limits required thereby, the city may complete or cause to be
completed the work, to the extent permitted by and in compliance with
applicable law, at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee agrees to
pay to the city the cost of performing such work. The amount so chargeable to
franchisee shall be the reasonable direct cost of said work plus the current
rate of overhead being charged by the city for reimbursable work.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.370  COMPLETION STATEMENT.



   Upon the completion of the construction of any pipelines or other
facilities constructed pursuant to the franchise, the franchisee shall submit
a statement to the City Engineer, identifying the permit or permits issued by
the Department, the total length of pipeline, pipeline material, diameter of
pipeline, the construction of which was authorized under such permit or
permits, the total length of pipeline or other facility actually laid, and
as-built drawings.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.380  SHORING.



   The franchisee will provide at its sole cost such shoring or other
support as shall be reasonably required to support, maintain, and protect
franchisee’s facility in connection with any storm drain or sewer
constructed by the County of Orange, Los Angeles County Flood Control
District or Orange County Sanitation District or in connection with any
facility constructed by city, or by any successor agency of any of these
agencies.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.390  MAPS.



   Within ninety (90) days following the date in which any facilities have
been laid, removed or abandoned under the franchise, the franchisee shall
file a map or maps with the Department showing the location, depth, and size
of the facilities so laid, removed or abandoned.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.400  FACILITIES.



   The franchisee shall have the right to construct, maintain and repair
such traps, manholes, conduits, valves, appliances, attachments and other
facilities as authorized in the ordinance granting the franchise and as may
be necessary or convenient for the proper maintenance and operation of the
pipelines under said franchise, and the facilities shall be kept flush with
the existing grade and/or surface of the street and so located as to conform
to applicable law, including any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city,
or of any permit issued by the Department in regard thereto and shall not
interfere with the use of the street for travel. The franchisee shall have
the right, subject to such ordinances, rules or regulations as are now or may
hereafter be in force, to make all necessary excavations in said streets for
the construction, maintenance and repair of the facilities; provided,
however, that the franchisee shall first obtain an excavation permit from the
Department for doing any such work.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.410  ORDINARY REPAIR.



   The franchisee shall obtain an excavation permit from the Department to
perform repair work. In the event of a condition that could cause a threat to
public health or safety and requires emergency repair work, the franchisee
shall proceed with the repairs and notify the Department as soon as possible,
not later that the next business day.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



§ 8.42.420  RELOCATION.



   If, in the sole discretion of the City Engineer, subject to appeal to
the Council pursuant to this chapter, the franchisee’s facilities conflict
in any way with the construction, relocation or repair of any city facility
or storm drain or sewer owned by the County of Orange, Orange County Flood
Control District or Orange County Sanitation District, or any successor
agency of any of these entities, the franchisee shall relocate its facility
to the reasonably nearest alternative location or other location mutually
agreeable to the city and the franchisee necessary to accommodate the
relocation or repair of the storm drain, sewer or city facility, either
permanently or temporarily, as is determined by the City Engineer to be
required within the time required by the City Engineer. Such relocation shall
be accomplished at the franchisee’s sole expense. If the franchisee fails
to relocate its facility within the required time, or to pave, surface, grade
repave, resurface or regrade, the city, to the extent permitted by and in
compliance with applicable law, may cause the work to be done and shall keep
an itemized account of the entire cost thereof, and the franchisee shall
reimburse the city or other public entity for such cost within thirty (30)
days after presentation to the franchisee of an itemized account of such
costs. The franchisee shall hold harmless and indemnify the city, its
officers and employees and other public agency, if any, from any liability
which may arise or be claimed to arise from the moving, relocation, cutting,
or alteration of any of the franchisee’s facilities, or the turning on or
off of water, oil, or other liquid, gas, or electricity required to be
accomplished by city or any other public agency as a result of the
franchisee’s failure to relocate the facility by the date established by
the city or other public agency. The franchisee shall also be liable for any
consequential damages incurred by the city or other public agency arising
from the franchisee’s failure to timely complete the work required by this
chapter.



(Ord. 1152, passed 5-17-11)



CHAPTER 8.44: STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC AREAS



Section



   8.44.010   Purpose and intent



   8.44.020   Definitions



   8.44.030   Storage of personal property in public areas prohibited



   8.44.040   Chief of Police to receive stored personal property



   8.44.050   Notice prior to impoundment



   8.44.060   Notice upon impoundment



   8.44.070   Holding and disposal of stored personal property



   8.44.080   Owner may claim personal property



   8.44.090   Unclaimed personal property to be used by city or sold at
auction-notice



   8.44.100   Conduct of auction



   8.44.110   Proceeds to be deposited in general fund



   8.44.120   Unsalable and unusable personal property



   8.44.130   Dangerous or perishable personal property; evidence



   8.44.140   Provisions not applicable



   8.44.150   Violations, penalties and enforcement



§ 8.44.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The public parks, public streets and alleys, public parking lots,
public rights-of-way, parkways, public sidewalks, recreational areas and
other publicly-owned or controlled property described in § 8.44.020J.,
within the city, should be readily accessible and available to residents,
businesses and the public at large for their intended purposes. The use of
these public areas for the storage of personal property interferes with the
rights of others to use and enjoy these public areas as they are intended.
Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard which
adversely impacts public offices, facilities and services, neighborhoods and
commercial areas. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain these public
areas within the city in a clean, sanitary, safe and accessible condition, to
adequately protect the health, safety, environment and general welfare of the
community, and to ensure that these public areas are used for their intended
purposes and remain accessible to all citizens, businesses and visitors in
the city. Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise
lawful and ordinary uses of public property.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.020  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning
and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.



   ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY. Personal property as to which it
reasonably appears that the owner surrenders, relinquishes or disclaims all
right, title, claim and possession, with intention of not reclaiming it or
resuming its ownership, possession or enjoyment.



   ALLEY.  Shall have the meaning set forth in § 110 of the California
Vehicle Code.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the City of Brea, or his or
her designee.



   CITY CLERK.  The City Clerk of the City of Brea, or his or her
designee.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the City of Brea, and shall include
his or her designee.



   COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR. The Community Services Director of the
City of Brea, or his or her designee.



   PARK. Shall have the same meaning as defined in § 12.00.020 of this
Code.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Tangible personal belongings or possessions, which
shall include any movable or tangible thing that is subject to ownership;
property or chattels that can be seen, weighed, measured, felt, or touched,
including, but not limited to, furniture, appliances, camping equipment or
paraphernalia, money, books, and “shopping carts” or “carts” as
defined in this section.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT.  The Brea Police Department.



   PUBLIC AREA.  A publicly owned or controlled place, including, but not
limited to, any public street, alley, public parking lot, public park, public
rights-of-way, public parkway, public sidewalk, public recreational area,
public recreational facility, the Brea Civic and Cultural Center and all
public areas adjacent thereto, the Brea Library and all public areas adjacent
thereto, the Curtis Theater and all public areas adjacent thereto, the Brea
Community Center and all public areas adjacent thereto, the Brea Senior
Center and all public areas adjacent thereto, and/or any and all other
publicly-owned or controlled property in the city. “Public Area” shall
not include any area designated as a public campground pursuant to federal,
state or local statute, ordinance or resolution.



   SHOPPING CARTS or CARTS.  Shall have the meaning set forth in Business
and Professions Code § 22435.



   STORE, STORED or STORAGE.  To place or put aside personal property in
a public area or accumulate it for use when needed; to place personal
property in a public area for safekeeping; and/or to leave personal property
unattended in a public area.



   STREET.  Shall have the meaning set forth in § 590 of the California
Vehicle Code.



   UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY. Personal property that has been turned in
to the Chief of Police pursuant to § 8.44.040 and/or impounded pursuant to
§ 8.44.050, and that has not been claimed within a period of ninety (90)
days by its owner.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.030  STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC AREAS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store
personal property in any public area, except as otherwise approved by the
Chief of Police, the Community Services Director or by resolution of the City
Council. Personal property stored in public areas in violation of this
section shall be impounded pursuant to §§ 8.44.040 through 8.44.150 of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.040  CHIEF OF POLICE TO RECEIVE STORED PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   The Chief of Police is authorized to impound personal property pursuant
to the provisions of  §§ 8.44.040 through 8.44.150 of this chapter, and
shall make provisions for the receipt and safekeeping of personal property
coming into his or her possession pursuant to this chapter. A receipt shall
be issued to the person delivering such personal property, unless the
personal property was found in the course of employment by an employee of the
city. The Chief of Police shall notify the owner of the personal property, in
writing, if his or her identity is reasonably ascertainable, or, if the
identity of the owner is not reasonably ascertainable, cause a written notice
to be left in a prominent place at or near where the personal property was
located prior to removal, for any personal property impounded pursuant to §
8.44.030, advising that the Chief of Police is in possession of the personal
property and the location where it may be claimed.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.050  NOTICE PRIOR TO IMPOUNDMENT.



   A.   Stored personal property may be impounded without notice if
there is a reasonable belief that it is abandoned, presents an immediate
threat to public health or safety, is evidence of a crime, is evidence in a
criminal investigation, or is contraband.



   B.   The city may erect signs in any public area or areas
conspicuously stating that any personal property stored in those areas is
subject to immediate impoundment. Those signs shall serve to provide the
prior notice otherwise required by § 8.44.050C. Personal property unlawfully
stored where any such sign has been posted may be immediately impounded.



   C.   If neither subparagraph A. nor subparagraph B. apply, personal
property unlawfully stored in public areas shall be impounded only after a
notice is left on, or at or near the location of the personal property,
advising that the personal property will be impounded if it is not removed.
This notice will specify a time when the personal property will be impounded
if it is not removed. Such time shall not be less than forty-eight (48) hours
after the notice is left.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.060  NOTICE UPON IMPOUNDMENT.



   If, after any notice required by § 8.44.050 is given, personal
property remains unlawfully stored in any public area, that personal property
may be impounded. The person impounding the personal property shall leave a
notice in a conspicuous place at or near where the personal property was
located prior to being impounded, advising where the personal property is
being kept and when and where it may be claimed by its owner.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.070  HOLDING AND DISPOSAL OF STORED PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   Personal property coming into possession of the Chief of Police
pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a safe place for a period of
at least ninety (90) days. If the personal property consists of money, it
shall be deposited with the City's Director of Finance for a period of not
less than ninety (90) days, unless sooner claimed by its owner. In the event
the personal property or money is not claimed within ninety (90) days, it
shall be deemed to be abandoned personal property, subject to disposition as
provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.080  OWNER MAY CLAIM PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   During the time that any personal property is held by the city, it may
be delivered or paid to its owner as follows:



   A.   The personal property shall be delivered upon proof of
ownership satisfactory to the Chief of Police after ten (10) days' notice by
mail to any other person(s) who have asserted a claim of ownership at any
address given by such person(s).



   B.   If the personal property consists of money, it shall be paid to
the owner upon written order from the Chief of Police to the Director of
Finance. The Chief of Police shall make such order upon the same proof of
ownership and with the same notice as prescribed in the case of personal
property.



   C.   If ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the
Chief of Police, he or she may refuse to deliver the personal property or
refuse to order the payment of such money to anyone until ordered to do so by
a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.090  UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY TO BE USED BY CITY OR SOLD AT
AUCTION-NOTICE.



   A.   Upon expiration of the ninety (90)-day period, any personal
property received by the city and not delivered to the owner may be
appropriated for the use of the city upon order of the City Manager on his or
her finding that the personal property is needed for a public use, and any
personal property not appropriated for city use may be sold at public auction
to the highest bidder or, if determined to be of de minimus or no apparent
monetary value, such property may be disposed of in any lawful manner.



   B.   All unclaimed money received by the Chief of Police, and not
delivered to the owner during the ninety (90)-day period, shall thereafter be
deposited in the general fund.



   C.   Notice of the sale at auction of unclaimed personal property
shall be given by the City Clerk at the direction of the Chief of Police at
least five (5) days before the time fixed therefor by publication at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.100  CONDUCT OF AUCTION.



   An auction for the sale of unclaimed personal property shall be
conducted by the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.110  PROCEEDS TO BE DEPOSITED IN GENERAL FUND.



   After any auction for unclaimed personal property is completed, the
proceeds of the auction shall be delivered to the Director of Finance for
deposit in the general fund.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.120  UNSALABLE AND UNUSABLE PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   Any personal property advertised and offered for sale but not sold and
not suitable for appropriation for the use of the city shall be deemed to be
of no value and shall be disposed of in such manner as the City Manager deems
appropriate.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.130  DANGEROUS OR PERISHABLE PERSONAL PROPERTY; EVIDENCE.



   Subject to the provisions of § 8.44.140 below, any personal property
coming into the possession of the Chief of Police may be disposed of
immediately and without notice, in a manner that the Chief of Police
determines to be in the public interest and otherwise as provided by law,
when such personal property is perishable, contraband, evidence of a crime,
evidence in a criminal investigation, or is reasonably believed to constitute
an immediate threat to the public health or safety.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.140  PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE.



   A.   The provisions of §§ 8.44.040 through 8.44.110 shall not
apply to real property, or personal property or money that is subject to
confiscation pursuant to state or federal law; or to personal property that
constitutes evidence of a crime, evidence in an ongoing criminal
investigation and/or civil proceeding pursuant to state or federal law. The
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle. Personal
property found or saved on private property shall be subject to the
provisions of § 8.32.070 of this code.



   B.   The provisions/of this chapter shall not apply to abandoned
personal property, which shall be disposed of forthwith.



   C.   “Shopping carts” or “carts” shall be subject to release
to the owners and operators of businesses which provide shopping carts for
the convenience of their customers or abatement and/or disposal thereof as
may be permitted by law.



   D.   Notwithstanding the regulations set forth in this chapter, the
City Manager and/or Chief of Police are hereby authorized to promulgate
additional rules and policies for the implementation of this chapter in a
manner consistent with state and federal law.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



§ 8.44.150  VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, each violation of the
provisions of this chapter may be enforced as follows:



   A.   A violation of this chapter may be punishable alternatively as
a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney or City
Prosecutor. The penalty for an infraction and/or misdemeanor shall be as set
forth in Chapter 1.04 of this code.



   B.   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter hereby
adopted shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through
civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent
injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such
nuisances.



(Ord. 1185, passed 10-4-16)



CHAPTER 8.48:  CANNABIS PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS



Section



   8.48.010   Definitions



   8.48.020   Prohibited activities



   8.48.030   Exceptions



   8.48.040   Violation and penalty



§ 8.48.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings set forth in the MAUCRSA and otherwise as set forth below:



   CANNABIS.  all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis
indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the
resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds, or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether
crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. CANNABIS includes cannabis that is
used for medical, non-medical, or other purposes. CANNABIS does not include
the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the
plant which is incapable of germination. CANNABIS also does not include
industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section
11018.5.



   CANNABIS PRODUCT.  cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not
limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing
cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.



   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY.  the cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing,
packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and
cannabis product for medical, non-medical, or any other purpose and includes
the activities of any business licensed by the State or other government
entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, or
any provision of State law that regulates the licensing of cannabis
businesses. COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY does not include the cultivation,
possession, storage, manufacturing, or transportation of cannabis by a
qualified patient for his or her personal medical use so long as the
qualified patient does not provide, donate, sell or distribute cannabis to
any other person. COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY also does not include the
cultivation, possession, storage, manufacturing, transportation, donation or
provision of cannabis by a primary caregiver, exclusively for the personal
medical purposes of no more than five specified qualified patients for whom
he or she is the primary caregiver, but who does not receive remuneration for
these activities except for compensation in full compliance with California
Health and Safety Code section 11362.765.



   CONCENTRATED CANNABIS.  Manufactured cannabis that has undergone a
process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing
the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is
a concentrate.



   CULTIVATION.  any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.



   DELIVERY.  The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to
a customer. DELIVERY also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform.



   DISTRIBUTION.  The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and
cannabis products between entities licensed under Division 10 of the
California Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from
time to time.



   MANUFACTURE.  To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make
or prepare a cannabis product.



   MAUCRSA.  The Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety
Act as codified in Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, and any
successor provisions thereto, as the same may be amended from time to time.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, firm, corporation, association, club,
society, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, sole
proprietorship, collective, cooperative, coop, non-profit, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other organization, group or entity or
combination of organizations or entities of any kind whatsoever, however
formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, and/or
assigns, and shall also include any owner, operator, manager, proprietor,
employee, agent, officer, volunteer, salesperson, trustees, heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns. The term PERSON shall also include all persons
who have an ownership or leasehold interest in any real property, premises
and/or structures in which commercial cannabis activity is occurring.



   PRIMARY CAREGIVER.  Shall have the same meaning as is defined in
California Health and Safety Code section 11362.7(d), as the same may be
amended from time to time.



   QUALIFIED PATIENT.  A person who is entitled to the protections of
California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, as the same may be amended
from time to time.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)



§ 8.48.020  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   A.   Commercial cannabis activity, whether or not for profit, is
prohibited in the city. No person shall establish, operate, maintain,
conduct, allow, or engage in commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the
city.



   B.   A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any
person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy
real property in the city. A property owner shall not allow any person or
business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial
cannabis activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property
owner that is located in the city.



   C.   Subsection A. above shall prohibit all activities for which a
State license is required pursuant to the MAUCRSA, or successor provisions
thereto, as the same may be amended from time to time.



   D.   Subject to the exceptions set forth in Section 8.48.030 below,
and to the extent not already prohibited by subsection A above, all
deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products, to or from any location in the
city are expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any
delivery of any cannabis or cannabis products, which delivery either
originates or terminates within the city.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 8.48.040



§ 8.48.030  EXCEPTIONS.



   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person from
transporting cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the city for
delivery or distribution to a person located outside the city, where such
transport does not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional
limits of the city and is otherwise in compliance with state law.



   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person 21 years of age
or older from engaging in any activities authorized under California Health
and Safety Code section 11362.1.



   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any commercial cannabis
activity that the city is required by state law to permit within its
jurisdiction pursuant Business and Professions Code section 26054(c) and (d),
as the same may be amended from time to time, or any other provision of the
MAUCRSA.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)



§ 8.48.040  VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this Chapter 8.48 of
the Brea Municipal Code, the city attorney or city prosecutor may bring a
civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or
entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to
this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable
attorneys' fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1.04 of the Brea Municipal Code, no provision
of this chapter authorizes a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty
inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code section 11362.71,
et seq., or section 11362.1, et seq., as the same may be amended from time to
time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under
Chapter 1.04 of the Brea Municipal Code and any penalties set forth in State
law, the maximum penalties allowable under State law shall govern.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)



TITLE 9:  RESERVED



TITLE 10:  VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



   Chapter



      10.00   DEFINITIONS



      10.04   TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION



      10.08   ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      10.12   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND ENFORCEMENT CONDITIONS



      10.16   DRIVING RULES AND TURNING MOVEMENTS



      10.20   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



      10.24   PARKING LIMITS



      10.28   LOADING AND UNLOADING



      10.32   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES



      10.36   MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



      10.40   TRUCK ROUTES AND TERMINALS



      10.44   BICYCLES



      10.48   PEDESTRIANS



      10.52   FOOD VENDING VEHICLES



CHAPTER 10.00:  DEFINITIONS



Section



   10.00.010   Definitions



§ 10.00.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein,
but are now defined in the California Vehicle Code, such definitions are
incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein and as though set forth herein in full.



   ALLEY.  Any unnamed street less than twenty-five (25) feet in width
between property lines.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to a public street, when
fifty percent (50%) or more of the property fronting on one (1) side of such
street for a distance of six hundred (600) feet, or where fifty percent (50%)
or more of the property fronting on both sides collectively of such street
for a distance of three hundred (300) feet, is occupied by buildings in use
for business.



   CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT.  All streets and portions of streets within
the city.



   LOADING ZONE.  The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.  All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS.  Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop
and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official
having jurisdiction.



   PARK.  To stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or
not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading of passengers or materials.



   PARKWAY.  That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.



   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE.  The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the Police Department of this city.



   STOP.  When required means complete cessation of movement.



   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of
travel.



('61 Code, § 14.1)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 10.04:  TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION



Section



   10.04.010   City Traffic Engineer



   10.04.020   Traffic Division



   10.04.030   Duties of Traffic Division



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to uniformity of state traffic laws and applicability
to municipalities, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 21



   As to powers of local authorities to regulate traffic, see Cal. Veh.
Code, §§ 21100 to 21116



§ 10.04.010  CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER.



   A.   The office of the City Traffic Engineer is hereby established.



('61 Code, § 14.19)



   B.   The City Traffic Engineer shall be appointed by and hold office
at the pleasure of the City Council. The Council may, by resolution, require
him or her to furnish a performance bond in favor of the city.



('61 Code, § 14.20)



   C.   It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to
determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of
traffic-control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of
traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering
investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city
officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions,
and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this code and
other ordinances of this city.



('61 Code, § 14.21)



(Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 702, passed  - -  )



§ 10.04.020  TRAFFIC DIVISION.



   There is hereby established in the Police Department a Traffic Division
to be under the control of a police officer appointed by and directly
responsible to the Chief of Police.



('61 Code, § 14.22)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.04.030  DUTIES OF TRAFFIC DIVISION.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division with such aid as
may be rendered by other members of the Police Department to enforce the
street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws
applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic
violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the City
Traffic Engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions,
and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this
code and the traffic ordinances of this city.



('61 Code, § 14.23)



   B.   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become
numerous, the Traffic Division shall cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer
in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.



('61 Code, § 14.24)



   C.   The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports.  Accident reports or cards referring to them shall
be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the
use and information of the City Traffic Engineer.



('61 Code, § 14.25)



   D.   The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report
which shall be filed with the City Council. Such report shall contain
information on traffic matters in this city as follows:



      1.   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons
killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident
data.



      2.   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other
pertinent data on the safety activities of the police.



      3.   The plans and recommendations of the division for future
traffic safety activities.



('61 Code, § 14.26)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 10.08:  ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   10.08.010   Authority of police officers and Fire Department officers



   10.08.020   Obedience to police officers and Fire Department
officials



   10.08.030   Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons prohibited



   10.08.040   Public employees to obey traffic regulations



   10.08.050   Application to authorized emergency vehicles



§ 10.08.010  AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department
or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce the
provisions of this title, all street traffic laws of this city and all of the
state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.



   B.   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are
assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in
the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



   C.   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



('61 Code, § 14.27)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.08.020  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.



   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
of a Police Department or Fire Department official when directing traffic.



('61 Code, § 14.28)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to obedience to police, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 2800



§ 10.08.030  DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS PROHIBITED.



   No person other than an officer of the Police Department or a person
deputized by the Chief of Police or person authorized by law shall direct or
attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal (except that persons
may operate when and as herein provided any mechanical pushbutton signal
erected by order of the City Traffic Engineer).



('61 Code, § 14.29)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.08.040  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state,
any county or city and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate
any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this
title or by state statute.



('61 Code, § 14.30)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to applicability of traffic laws to operators in
course of public employment, see Cal. Veh. Code, §§ 21052 to 21054



§ 10.08.050  APPLICATION TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   A.   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the Police or Fire
Department. Any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private
ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as
an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section
is operated in the manner specified in the California Vehicle Code in
response to an emergency call.



   B.   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver
of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her willful disregard of
the safety of others.



   C.   The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing
of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public
utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any
vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection,
transportation or delivery of United States mail.



('61 Code, § 14.31)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to authorized emergency vehicles, see Cal. Veh. Code,
§§ 21055 and 21056



CHAPTER 10.12:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND ENFORCEMENT CONDITIONS



Section



   10.12.010   City Traffic Engineer given power to install and maintain



   10.12.020   Hours of operation



   10.12.030   Removal, relocation and discontinuance of devices



   10.12.040   Regulation of speed by traffic signals



   10.12.050   Traffic signals at intersections



   10.12.060   Marking traffic lanes



   10.12.070   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   10.12.080   Signs to be in place and legible prior to enforcement of
chapter



   10.12.090   Signs, markers indicating course at intersections



   10.12.100   Signs prohibiting turns



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to requirement that signs conform to uniform
standards, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 21405



§ 10.12.010  CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER GIVEN POWER TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN.



   A.   The City Traffic Engineer shall have the exclusive power and
duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official
traffic-control devices when and as required under the provisions of this
chapter to make effective such provisions.



   B.   Whenever the California Vehicle Code requires for the
effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be
installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the
City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to install the necessary devices
subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable
thereto.



   C.   The City Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain such
additional traffic-control devices as he or she may deem necessary to
regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such
determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and
traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and
rules as may be set forth in the traffic ordinances of this city or as may be
determined by ordinance or resolution of the legislative body of this city.



('61 Code, § 14.32)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law authorizing local authorities to regulate traffic by
means of signaling devices, see Cal. Veh. Code, §§ 21100 to 21104



§ 10.12.020  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during
which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect,
except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title.



('61 Code, § 14.33)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.12.030  REMOVAL, RELOCATION AND DISCONTINUANCE OF DEVICES.



   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or
discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically
required by state law or this title whenever he or she shall determine in any
particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the
installation no longer exist or obtain.



('61 Code, § 14.34)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.12.040  REGULATION OF SPEED BY TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of
traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and
safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise
applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof.



('61 Code, § 14.35)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to speed generally, see Cal. Veh. Code, §§ 22350 et
seq.



§ 10.12.050  TRAFFIC SIGNALS AT INTERSECTIONS.



   A.   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and
maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places
where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be
alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic
congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.



('61 Code, § 14.36)



   B.   The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the
locations where such signals are required by resort to field observation,
traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his or
her determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic
engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California
Traffic Manual issued by the State Department of Transportation.



('61 Code, § 14.37)



   C.   Whenever the City Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an
official traffic signal at any intersection, he or she shall likewise erect
and maintain at such intersection street name signs visible to the principle
flow of traffic unless such street name signs have previously been placed and
are maintained at any such intersection.



('61 Code, § 14.38)



(Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.12.060  MARKING TRAFFIC LANES.



   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and
lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be
traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be
used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center
line of the highway. When authorized signs have been placed designating
off-center traffic lanes, no person shall disobey the instructions given by
such signs.



('61 Code, § 14.39)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.12.070  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this title and the traffic ordinances of this city unless
otherwise directed by a police officer subject to the exceptions granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls.



('61 Code, § 14.40)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.12.080  SIGNS TO BE IN PLACE AND LEGIBLE PRIOR TO ENFORCEMENT OF
CHAPTER.



   No provision of the California Vehicle Code or of this title for which
signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless
appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic
laws.



('61 Code, § 14.41)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.12.090  SIGNS, MARKERS INDICATING COURSE AT INTERSECTIONS.



   A.   The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place markers,
buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections, and the City Traffic
Engineer is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one (1) lane of
traffic from which drivers of vehicles may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law or ordinance.



('61 Code, § 14.42)



   B.   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of such indications.



('61 Code, § 14.43)



(Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law prohibiting turning in streets, see Cal. Veh. Code, §§
22102 and 22103



§ 10.12.100  SIGNS PROHIBITING TURNING.



   A.   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine
those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right,
left, or “U” turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections.
The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day
and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly
indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.



('61 Code, § 14.44)



   B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or “U” turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of any such sign.



('61 Code, § 14.45)



(Ord. 223, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 10.16:  DRIVING RULES AND
TURNING MOVEMENTS



Section



   10.16.010   Driving through funeral processions



   10.16.020   Driving on private property



   10.16.030   Driving vehicles on sidewalks or parkway



   10.16.040   Driving on new pavements or freshly-painted markings



   10.16.050   Driving onto or from limited-access roadway



   10.16.060   Driving on freeways



   10.16.070   Riding on handle bars, etc. of bicycles and motorcycles
prohibited



   10.16.080   Riding on fender or running board



   10.16.090   Use of roller skates, coasters, skateboards, restricted



   10.16.100   Yielding the right-of-way



   10.16.110   Attaching to moving object prohibited



   10.16.120   Skateboarding prohibited on private property in
commercial zones



   10.16.130   Skateboards, bicycles, and the like prohibited on posted
public property



   10.16.140   Report of damage to public property or public utility
property



   10.16.150   Vehicles emerging from alleys, driveways or buildings



   10.16.160   Regulation of traffic on state highways



   10.16.170   Stopping at railroad crossings



   10.16.180   Advertising vehicles prohibited in central traffic
district



   10.16.190   One-way streets and alleys



§ 10.16.010  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a
funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such
processions are conspicuously so designated.



('61 Code, § 14.2)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to power of local authorities to regulate processions,
see Cal. Veh. Code, §§ 21100 to 21104



§ 10.16.020  DRIVING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful to operate or drive any motor vehicle in the city across
private property or driveways to evade traffic regulations or the use of
established public ways.



('61 Code, § 14.3)  (Ord. 678, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.030  DRIVING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS OR PARKWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or any
parkway except at a permanent or temporary driveway.



('61 Code, § 14.4)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.040  DRIVING ON NEW PAVEMENTS OR FRESHLY-PAINTED MARKINGS.



   No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across
any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a
barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such
pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or
any portion thereof is closed.



('61 Code, § 14.5)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.050  DRIVING ONTO OR FROM LIMITED-ACCESS ROADWAY.



   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.



('61 Code, § 14.6)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.060  DRIVING ON FREEWAYS.



   No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or
any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established
as a freeway, as defined by Cal. Veh. Code § 332, provided official signs
are in place giving notice of such restrictions.



('61 Code, § 14.7)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.070  RIDING ON HANDLEBARS, ETC. OF BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle or motorcycle when
upon a street to carry any other person upon the bar, fender, handle or tank
of any such vehicle, or for any person to so ride any such vehicle.



('61 Code, § 14.8)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.080  RIDING ON FENDER OR RUNNING BOARD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fender or running
board of any vehicle.



('61 Code, § 14.9)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.090  USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, SKATEBOARDS, RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or
by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device to go upon
any roadway, other than in pedestrian crosswalks, in accordance with any and
all other provisions of law.



('61 Code, § 14.10)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 612, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.100  YIELDING THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   A.   The driver of a motor vehicle, prior to driving over or upon
any sidewalk or public crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any person
riding in, on, or by means of any skateboard, toy vehicle, roller skates,
coaster or similar device.



   B.   Whenever any person is riding in, on or by means of a
skateboard, roller skates, toy vehicle, coaster or similar device on a public
sidewalk or public crosswalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian.



('61 Code, § 14.10-1)  (Ord. 612, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.110  ATTACHING TO MOVING OBJECT PROHIBITED.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person riding a skateboard, toy
vehicle or similar coaster device to attach to any moving object, including
but not limited to persons, bicycles, animals or motor vehicles.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a moving vehicle
to permit any person riding in, on or by means of a skateboard, toy vehicle,
coaster or similar device to attach to the motor vehicle while the motor
vehicle is in motion.



('61 Code, § 14.10-2)  (Ord. 612, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.120  SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN COMMERCIAL
ZONES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard or similar
coaster device upon private property located in any commercially zoned area
in the city, so long as such property is posted so as to give reasonable
notice of such prohibition.



('61 Code, § 14.10-3)  (Ord. 612, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.130  SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES, AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED ON POSTED
PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any skateboard, toy
vehicle, bicycle, or any other coaster device, motorized bicycle, moped or
scooter upon any public property within the city where notice of such
prohibition has been posted.



('61 Code, § 14.10-4)  (Ord. 805, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.140  REPORT OF DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY OR PUBLIC UTILITY PROPERTY.



   A.   The driver of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal
involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned
or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant,
ornamental lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or
resulting in damage to any ornamental shade tree, traffic-control device of
other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within
twenty-four (24) hours after such accident make a written report of such
accident to the Police Department of this city.



   B.   Every such report shall state the time when and the place where
the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the
person driving or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of
every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damaged in such
accident.



   C.   A driver involved in an accident shall not be subject to the
requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time such driver
is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event such driver
shall make a report as required in paragraph A. within twenty-four (24) hours
after regaining ability to make such report.



('61 Code, § 14.11)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.150  VEHICLES EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS OR BUILDINGS.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building,
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into
the sidewalk area extending across any alley way.



('61 Code, § 14.12)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to vehicles emerging from private roads or driveways,
see Cal. Veh. Code, § 21804



§ 10.16.160  REGULATION OF TRAFFIC ON STATE HIGHWAYS.



   A.   Whenever the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance
delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the City
Council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by state
law requires the prior approval of the Department of Public Works, no such
officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the City
Council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior
approval in writing of the Department of Public Works in and to the extent
required by Cal. Veh. Code, Division 9 and Division 11.



('61 Code, § 14.13)



   B.   Any provisions of this chapter which regulate traffic or
delegate the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which
the approval of the Department of Public Works is required by state law,
shall cease to be operative six (6) months after receipt by the City Council
of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the Department of Public Works.



('61 Code, § 14.14)



(Ord. 258, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.170  STOPPING AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS.



   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.



('61 Code, § 14.15)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.180  ADVERTISING VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT.



   No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising
purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound amplifying or
loud-speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the central
traffic district.



('61 Code, § 14.17)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.16.190  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any
one-way street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain
signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective
unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful
traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.



('61 Code, § 14.18)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 10.20:  STOPPING, STANDING
AND PARKING



Section



   10.20.010   Stop signs generally



   10.20.020   Application of title



   10.20.030   Regulating stopping, standing and parking in specific
places



   10.20.040   Stopping or parking in parkway



   10.20.050   Parallel parking on streets and roadways; limitations



   10.20.060   Parking for seventy-two (72) or more hours prohibited



   10.20.070   Designation and marking places for angle parking



   10.20.080   Parking adjacent to schools



   10.20.090   Parking prohibited on narrow streets



   10.20.100   Parking on hills



   10.20.110   Curb markings to indicate parking regulations



   10.20.120   Parking to display vehicle for sale



   10.20.130   Repairing, cleaning vehicle in street or city-owned
off-street parking facilities



   10.20.140   Reserved



   10.20.150   Vending from nonmotorized vehicles prohibited



   10.20.160   Permit to stand vehicle transporting property for hire



   10.20.170   Revocation of permits



   10.20.180   Emergency no parking signs



   10.20.190   Display of warning devices when commercial vehicle
disabled



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to power of local authorities to prohibit, and the
like, parking, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 22507



   As to stopping, standing or parking generally, see Cal. Veh. Code, §§
22500 to 22520



§ 10.20.010  STOP SIGNS GENERALLY.



   Whenever any provision of this code or other ordinance or resolution of
this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through
street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one (1)
or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles
are required to stop, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain stop
signs as follows:



   A stop sign shall be erected on each street intersecting such through
street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other
intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so
designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as
provided in Cal. Veh. Code, § 21352. It shall be unlawful for any person
operating a motor vehicle to fail to stop upon approaching any such stop sign.



('61 Code, § 14.51)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law description of stop signs, see Cal. Veh. Code, §§ 21400
and 21401



§ 10.20.020  APPLICATION OF TITLE.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping,
standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times
herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or official traffic-control device.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on
standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe
other and more restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code or the
ordinances of this city, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.



('61 Code, § 14.52)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.030  REGULATING STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING IN SPECIFIC PLACES.



   The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to  appropriately sign or mark
the following places and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle in any of such places.



   A.   At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb
immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone.



   B.   At any place within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersection in
the central traffic district or in any business district except that a bus
may stop at a designated bus stop.



   C.   Within twenty-five (25) feet of the approach to any traffic
signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device.



   D.   At any place where the City Traffic Engineer determines that it
is necessary in order to eliminate unusual traffic hazard.



('61 Code, § 14.53)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1142, passed
10-5-10)



§ 10.20.040  STOPPING OR PARKING IN PARKWAY.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway.



('61 Code, § 14.54)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law authorizing removal of a vehicle illegally parked so as
to block the entrance to a private driveway, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 22651



§ 10.20.050  PARALLEL PARKING ON STREETS AND ROADWAYS; LIMITATIONS.



   A.   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle
may be stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the curb facing in
the direction of traffic movement upon any street unless signs or markings
are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.



   B.   In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate
roadways and traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such
roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of
such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or
parking.



   C.   The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when
standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any
one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the
left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two (2) or more
separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.



('61 Code, § 14.55)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1142, passed
10-5-10)



Statutory reference:



   For state law specifying manner of parking in relation to curb, see
Cal. Veh. Code, §§ 22502 and 22503



§ 10.20.060  PARKING FOR SEVENTY-TWO (72) OR MORE HOURS PROHIBITED.



   A.   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any
vehicle shall park or leave standing such vehicle upon any street or alley
for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours.



   B.   In the event that a vehicle is parked or left standing upon any
street or alley for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours, any member of
the Police Department authorized by the Chief of Police may remove such
vehicle from said street or alley.



('61 Code, § 14.56)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 553, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.070  DESIGNATION AND MARKING PLACES FOR ANGLE PARKING.



   A.   Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of this city designates
and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking shall be
permitted, the City Traffic Engineer shall mark or sign such street
indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked.



   B.   When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as
herein provided, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.



   C.   Angle parking is permitted on the west side of Walnut Avenue
from 135 feet north of the centerline of Birch Street to 490 feet north of
the centerline of Birch Street.



   D.   Angle parking is permitted on the east side of Madrona Avenue
from 125 feet north of the centerline of Birch Street to 360 feet north of
the centerline of Birch Street and on the west side of Madrona Avenue from
125 feet north of the centerline of Birch Street to 350 feet north of the
centerline of Birch Street.



('61 Code, § 14.57)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1030, passed
12-7-99)



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to power of local authorities to permit angle parking,
see Cal. Veh. Code, § 22503



§ 10.20.080  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   A.   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with
traffic or create a hazardous situation.



   B.   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that
side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a
vehicle in any such designated place.



('61 Code, § 14.58)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.090  PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS.



   A.   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place signs
or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the
roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as
indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not
exceed thirty (30) feet.



   B.   When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected
upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon
any such street in violation of any such sign or marking.



('61 Code, § 14.59)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.100  PARKING ON HILLS.



   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a
highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (3%) within any business
or residence district without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning
them against the curb or by other means.



('61 Code, § 14.60)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.110  CURB MARKINGS TO INDICATE PARKING REGULATIONS.



   A.   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the
provisions and limitations of this chapter to place, and when required herein
shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing
regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set
forth:



      1.   RED.  No stopping, standing or parking at any time
except as permitted by the California Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may
stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.



      2.   YELLOW.  No stopping, standing or parking for any
purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials,
provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more
than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than
twenty (20) minutes.



      3.   WHITE.  No stopping, standing or parking for any purpose
other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three
(3) minutes.



      4.   GREEN.  No standing or parking for longer than the time
designated by signs or markings at the location.



      5.   BLUE.  Parking limited exclusively to vehicles of
physically disabled persons as defined in Cal. Veh. Code, § 22511.5; such
restrictions to be applicable at all times.



   B.   When the City Traffic Engineer as authorized under this chapter
has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the
provisions of this section.



('61 Code, § 14.61)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 746, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 1142, passed 10-5-10)



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to curb markings to indicate parking regulations, see
Cal. Veh. Code, § 21458



§ 10.20.120  PARKING TO DISPLAY VEHICLE FOR SALE.



   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale.



('61 Code, § 14.62)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.130  REPAIRING, CLEANING VEHICLE IN STREET OR CITY-OWNED OFF-STREET
PARKING FACILITIES.



   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or in any city-owned
off-street parking facility for the purpose of washing, greasing or repairing
such vehicle, excepting repairs necessitated by an emergency.



('61 Code, § 14.63)



(Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 606, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.140  RESERVED.



§ 10.20.150  VENDING FROM NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   A.   No person shall utilize a nonmotorized cart, pushcart or wagon
upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleyways, parks or public grounds to
conduct the sale or offer for sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, fruits,
vegetables or foodstuffs.



   B.   The vending of such goods, merchandise or food stuffs from a
nonmotorized cart on public streets, sidewalks or parks may be permitted in
conjunction with special activities or events for a limited time and in a
limited location subject to the authorization regulation of temporary uses as
set forth in this code.



   C.   Nothing herein shall prohibit the commercial or noncommercial
sale or distribution of newspapers, books, handbills or other printed
materials upon such public streets, sidewalks or parks in the city.



('61 Code, § 14.65)  (Ord. 814, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.160  PERMIT TO STAND VEHICLE TRANSPORTING PROPERTY FOR HIRE.



   No person shall park or stand any vehicle, or wagon used or intended to
be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while
awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a
written permit to do so from the legislative body which shall designate the
specific location where such vehicle may stand.



('61 Code, § 14.66)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.170  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this chapter and
a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall
park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as
designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is
convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the
provisions of this chapter, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the
legislative body upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the
legislative body, and no permit shall there-after be issued to such person
until six (6) months have elapsed from the date of such revocation.



('61 Code, § 14.67)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.180  EMERGENCY NO PARKING SIGNS.



   A.   Whenever the City Traffic Engineer shall determine that an
emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public
or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the
City Traffic Engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs
to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of
vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Traffic
Engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such
signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and
the City Traffic Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly
thereafter.



   B.   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in
place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any
vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.



('61 Code, § 14.68)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.20.190  DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES WHEN COMMERCIAL VEHICLE DISABLED.



   Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand (4,000)
pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated
upon any street or highway during the time specified in Cal. Veh. Code § 280
shall be equipped with and carry at least two (2) flares or two (2) red
lanterns, or two (2) warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be
of a type approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any
vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon
streets or highways outside of any business or residential district within
the city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street
lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred (200) feet during
any time mentioned in Cal. Veh. Code § 280, a warning signal of the
character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of
approximately one hundred (100) feet in advance of, and one hundred (100)
feet to the rear of such disabled vehicle, by the driver thereof. The warning
signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during the times
mentioned in Cal. Veh. Code § 280 while such vehicle remains disabled upon
such street or highway.



('61 Code, § 14.69)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 10.24:  PARKING LIMITS



Section



   10.24.010   Establishment of time limits



   10.24.020   No parking zones



   10.24.030   Permit required for extended overnight on-street parking



   10.24.040   Parking for longer than twelve (12) hours prohibited in
city and city redevelopment agency-owned or operated off-street parking
facility



   10.24.050   Parking or standing of commercial vehicles in city-owned
or operated off-street parking facilities



   10.24.060   Parking of vehicles in city and city redevelopment
agency-owned or operated off-street parking facilities



§ 10.24.010  ESTABLISHMENT OF TIME LIMITS.



   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish time limits for
parking on any city street and within any city or city redevelopment
agency-owned or operated off-street parking facility, and to post signs
and/or mark curbs or pavement to indicate such time limits.  When authorized
signs or markings are in place giving notice of the parking time limits, no
person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any city street or within
any city or city redevelopment agency-owned or operated off-street parking
facility so posted, for a period longer than the time indicated on the sign
or marking.



('61 Code, § 14.83)  (Ord. 223, passed  - -; Am. Ord. 1054, passed 4-2-02;
Am. Ord. 1142, passed 10-5-10)



§ 10.24.020  NO PARKING ZONES.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets of the city.



('61 Code, § 14.84)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.24.030  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXTENDED OVERNIGHT ON-STREET PARKING.



   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle on any street
for a period of time longer than thirty (30) consecutive minutes between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.



   B.    Any resident of the city may apply for an annual, temporary,
or twenty-four (24) hour overnight parking permit, in accordance with the
city Overnight Parking Permit Policy and Procedure Manual, as the same may be
amended from time to time. Applicants for annual and temporary overnight
parking permits shall be required to pay a nonrefundable administrative fee
in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, a refundable deposit, and
if found necessary by the permit officer, a bond or other security
guaranteeing compliance with any conditions imposed in connection with the
issuance of an annual permit shall also be required.



   C.   The provisions of paragraph A. above shall not apply to any
vehicle bearing a valid annual, temporary or twenty-four (24) hour overnight
parking permit provided the permittee is in compliance with all requirements
necessary to the issuance and use of the permit.



   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to affix an annual or
temporary overnight parking permit to any vehicle other than that vehicle to
which such permit was issued.



('61 Code, § 14.85)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 623, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 951, passed  - - )



§ 10.24.040  PARKING FOR LONGER THAN TWELVE (12) HOURS PROHIBITED IN CITY
AND CITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY- OWNED OR OPERATED OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY.



   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a
city-owned vehicle, in any city or city redevelopment agency-owned or
operated off-street parking facility for a period of time longer than twelve
(12) hours.



   B.   This section shall not apply to vehicles displaying a
city-issued reserved parking space permit applicable to the parking structure
or facility in which the vehicle is parked.



('61 Code, § 14.85.1)  (Ord. 606, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1027, passed
9-7-99)



§ 10.24.050  PARKING OR STANDING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN CITY-OWNED OR
OPERATED OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.



   A.   Definitions.



      1.    COMMERCIAL VEHICLE as utilized in this section shall
refer to commercial vehicles as defined in Cal. Veh. Code, § 260, as amended
from time to time, or any successor provision or provisions thereof.



      2.    TRAILER as utilized in this section shall refer to
trailers as defined in Cal. Veh. Code, § 630, as amended from time to time,
or any successor provision or provisions thereof.



      3.    SEMITRAILER as utilized in this section shall refer to
semitrailers as defined in Cal. Veh. Code, § 550, as amended from time to
time, or any successor provision or provisions thereof.



   B.   No person shall park or stand any commercial vehicle weighing
in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds, or any trailer or semi-trailer, in
any city-owned or operated off-street parking facility or portion thereof,
except while loading or unloading property, necessary to perform a service to
or upon property immediately adjacent to such parking facility. Under no
circumstances shall commercial vehicles weighing in excess of six thousand
(6,000) pounds be parked, as authorized in this paragraph B., longer than is
necessary to complete such loading, unloading or service.



   C.   No person shall park or stand any trailer or semitrailer in any
city-owned or operated parking facility unless such trailer or semitrailer is
then attached to a motor vehicle capable of drawing or carrying it upon the
public streets and highways.



   D.   No person shall park or stand any vehicle in any city-owned or
operated parking facility except within marked parking spaces.



('61 Code, § 14.85.2)  (Ord. 797, passed  - - )



§ 10.24.060  PARKING OF VEHICLES IN CITY AND CITY REDEVELOPMENT
AGENCY-OWNED OR OPERATED OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.



   A.   The parking or standing of vehicles in city and city
redevelopment agency-owned or operated off- street parking facilities is
hereby prohibited as follows:



      1.   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle
except within a marked parking stall.



      2.   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle
in any parking stall or area designated and posted for the exclusive parking
of city employees, residents with city-issued reserved parking space permits
and/or city-owned vehicles.



      3.   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle
in an area designated and posted for loading, parking/no stopping, fire lane,
and the like.



      4.   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle
in excess of specified time limits designated and posted for any parking
stall or area.



      5.   Any vehicle left parked or standing in violation of the
terms of this section shall be subject to being towed and removed pursuant to
the regula-tions set forth in the California Vehicle Code pertaining to the
towing of vehicles from public streets and property.



   B.   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish and
post signs and/or mark curbs or pavement designating parking regulations and
time limits for off-street  facilities regulated by this section.



('61 Code, § 14.85.3)  (Ord. 921, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1027, passed
9-7-99; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 10-5-10)



CHAPTER 10.28:  LOADING AND UNLOADING



Section



   10.28.010   Authority to determine and mark zones; permissible
locations for zones



   10.28.030   Curb markings to indicate loading zones



   10.28.040   Restrictions and time limits upon permission to load or
unload



   10.28.050   Restrictions on use of loading zones



   10.28.060   Stopping or parking in passenger loading zones



   10.28.070   Stopping or parking in alleys



   10.28.080   Permits to allow backing of vehicles to curb



   10.28.090   Bus zones



§ 10.28.010  AUTHORITY TO DETERMINE AND MARK ZONES; PERMISSIBLE LOCATIONS
FOR ZONES.



   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark
loading zones as follows:



   A.   At any place in the central traffic district or any business
district.



   B.   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or
in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.



('61 Code, § 14.70)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.28.030  CURB MARKINGS TO INDICATE LOADING ZONES.



   A.   Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line
stenciled with black letters, “LOADING ONLY,” upon the top of all curbs
within such zones or by posted signs indicating the limits of such zones.



   B.   Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white paint
line stenciled with black letters, “PASSENGER LOADING ONLY,” upon the top
of all curbs in such zones or by posted signs indicating the limits of such
zones.



('61 Code, § 14.72)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1030, passed
12-7-99)



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to the colors to be used in indicating loading zones,
see Cal. Veh. Code, § 21458



§ 10.28.040  RESTRICTIONS AND TIME LIMITS UPON PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD.



   A.   Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for
purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no
event for more than twenty (20) minutes.



   B.   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to
commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post
packages and United States mail.



   C.   Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of
loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of
personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and
in no event for more than three (3) minutes.



   D.   Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of
this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable
loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby
granted.



('61 Code, § 14.73)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.28.050  RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF LOADING ZONES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading
zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material
for such time as is permitted in the preceding section.



('61 Code, § 14.74)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.28.060  STOPPING OR PARKING IN PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading
zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for
such time as is specified in § 10.28.040.



('61 Code, § 14.75)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.28.070  STOPPING OR PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other
than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley.



('61 Code, § 14.76)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.28.080  PERMITS TO ALLOW BACKING OF VEHICLE TO CURB.



   The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to
permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of
such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real
property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the
privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful
for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or
conditions of any such permit.



('61 Code, § 14.77)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.28.090  BUS ZONES.



   A.   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus
zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common
carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the
directives and limitations set forth herein. The word BUS, as used in this
section, shall mean any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley coach, or
passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.



('61 Code, § 14.78)



   B.   Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an
intersection.



('61 Code, § 14.79)



   C.   No bus zone shall be established opposite and to the right of a
safety zone.



('61 Code, § 14.80)



   D.   No bus zone shall exceed eighty (80) feet in length, except
that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the City Traffic
Engineer showing the necessity therefor, the City Traffic Engineer may extend
bus zones not to exceed a total length of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet.



('61 Code, § 14.81)



   E.   The City Traffic Engineer shall paint a red line stencil with
white letters “NO STANDING,” together with the words “BUS ZONE” upon
the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone. No person
shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone.



('61 Code, § 14.82)



(Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to authority of city to license and regulate bus
stands, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 21112



   For state law as to the colors to be used in indicating bus zones, see
Cal. Veh. Code, § 21458



CHAPTER 10.32:  SPECIAL SPEED ZONES



Section



   10.32.000   Findings applicable to entire chapter; authorization and
direction to install proper signs



   10.32.010   Prima facie speed limit on Associated Road



   10.32.020   Prima facie speed limit on Berry Street



   10.32.030   Prima facie speed limit on Birch Street



   10.32.040   Prima facie speed limit on Brea Boulevard



   10.32.050   Prima facie speed limit on Carmichael Drive



   10.32.060   Prima facie speed limit on Central Avenue



   10.32.070   Prima facie speed limit on Country Hills Road



   10.32.080   Prima facie speed limit on Elm Street



   10.32.090   Prima facie speed limit on Kraemer Boulevard



   10.32.100   Prima facie speed limit on Lambert Road



   10.32.110   Prima facie speed limit on Northwood Avenue



   10.32.120   Prima facie speed limit on Palm Street



   10.32.125   Prima facie speed limit on Placentia Street



   10.32.130   Prima facie speed limit on Puente Street



   10.32.140   Prima facie speed limit on Randolph Avenue



   10.32.150   Prima facie speed limit on Rose Drive



   10.32.155   Prima facie speed limit on Santa Fe Road



   10.32.160   Prima facie speed limit on Site Drive



   10.32.170   Prima facie speed limit on State College Boulevard



   10.32.180   Prima facie speed limit on Steele Drive



   10.32.190   Prima facie speed limit on Tamarack Avenue



   10.32.200   Prima facie speed limit on Valencia Avenue



   10.32.210   Prima facie speed limit on Wandering Lane



   10.32.220   Prima facie speed limit on Whittier Boulevard



   10.32.230   Prima facie speed limit on Wildcat Way



§ 10.32.000  FINDINGS APPLICABLE TO ENTIRE CHAPTER; AUTHORIZATION AND
DIRECTION TO INSTALL PROPER SIGNS.



   A.   Both sixty-five (65) miles per hour and fifty-five (55) miles
per hour are speeds which are more than are reasonable and safe on each and
all of the streets, or portions of streets, specified in this chapter.



   B.   The Director of Maintenance Services hereby is authorized and
directed to install appropriate signs upon such streets, or portions of
streets, giving notice of the prima facie speed limit declared hereinbelow.



§ 10.32.010  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON ASSOCIATED ROAD.



   A.   Between Imperial Highway and Birch Street:



      1.   Forty (40)  miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is the speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street;



      2.   Forty (40) miles per hour is declared to be the prima
facie speed limit on such portion of such street; and



   B.   Between Birch Street and Lambert Road:



         1.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie
speed limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of
traffic and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of
such street; and



         2.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared
to be the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



(‘61 Code, § 14.1-1)  (Ord. 383, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 466, passed  -
- ; Am. Ord. 564, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1000,
passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 11-1-16)



§ 10.32.020  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON BERRY STREET.



   Between Imperial Highway and Northwood Avenue:



   A.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit which
is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is a
speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street; and



   B.   Forty (40) miles per hour is declared to be the prima facie
speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-2)  (Ord. 460, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  - - )



§ 10.32.030  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON BIRCH STREET.



   A.   Between the westerly terminus and Brea Boulevard:



      1.   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is the speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between Brea Boulevard and State College Boulevard:



      1.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   C.   Between State College Boulevard and Associated Road East:



      1.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   D.   Between Associated Road East and Valencia Avenue:



      1.   Fifty (50) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate  the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Fifty (50) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-3) (Ord. 461, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 743, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 908, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 928, passed  --; Am. Ord. 1127, passed
9-15-09)



§ 10.32.040  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON BREA BOULEVARD.



   A.   Between the southerly city limit line and Imperial Highway:



      1.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is the speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty (40) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between Imperial Highway and Lambert Road:



      1.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   C.   Between Lambert Road and Central Avenue:



      1.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Forty (40) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   D.   Between Central Avenue and the northerly city limit line:



      1.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-4)  (Ord. 554, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  - -
; Am. Ord. 831, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 880, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1015,
passed 8-18-98; Am. Ord. 1058, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. 1127, passed 9-15-09)



§ 10.32.050  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON CARMICHAEL DRIVE.



   Between Balsa Avenue and the northerly terminus:



   A.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit which
is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is a
speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street; and



   B.   Thirty (30) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the prima
facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-21)  (Ord. 880, passed  - - )



§ 10.32.060  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON CENTRAL AVENUE.



   Between the westerly city limit line and Brea Boulevard:



   A.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit which
is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is a
speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street; and



   B.   Forty (40) miles per hour is declared to be the prima facie
speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-5)  (Ord. 552, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  - - )



§ 10.32.070  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON COUNTRY HILLS ROAD.



   Between Associated Road and Kraemer Boulevard:



   A.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is the speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



   B.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



(‘61 Code, § 14.1-6)  (Ord. 554, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  -
- ; Am. Ord. 1058, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 11-1-16)



§ 10.32.080  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON ELM STREET.



   Between Brea Boulevard and State College Boulevard:



   A.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit which
is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is a
speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street; and



   B.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is declared to be the prima facie
speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-7)  (Ord. 559, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 607, passed  - -
; Am. Ord. 736, passed  - - )



§ 10.32.090  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON KRAEMER BOULEVARD.



   A.   Between the southerly city limit line and Imperial Highway:



      1.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is the speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between Imperial Highway and Birch Street:



      1.   Fifty (50) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Fifty (50) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   C.   Between Birch Street and Lambert Road:



      1.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-8)  (Ord. 561, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  - -
; Am. Ord. 743, passed  --; Am. Ord. 1127, passed 9-15-09)



§ 10.32.100  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON LAMBERT ROAD.



   A.   Between the Westerly City limit line and Berry Street.



      1.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is the speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between Berry Street and Associated Road/Wildcat Way:



      1.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Forty (40) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   C.   Between Associated Road/Wildcat Way and the easterly city limit
line:



      1.   Fifty (50)  miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Fifty (50)  miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



(‘61 Code, § 14.1-9)  (Ord. 562, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  -
- ; Am. Ord. 1000, passed 10-7-97  - ; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 11-1-16)



§ 10.32.110  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON NORTHWOOD AVENUE.



   A.   Between Puente Street and North Dorothy Drive:



      1.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is declared to be the prima
facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between North Dorothy Drive and Berry Street:



      1.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-17)  (Ord. 747, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1127, passed
9-15-09; Am. Ord. 1143, passed 10-5-10)



§ 10.32.120  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON PALM STREET.



   A.   Between Central Avenue and the south city limit:



      1.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between Lambert Road and the south city limit:



      1.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-22)  (Ord. 928, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1000, passed
10-7-97)



§ 10.32.125  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT - PLACENTIA AVENUE.



   A.   Between Imperial Highway and the south city limit line:



      1.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Forty (40) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



(Ord. 1000, passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. 1058, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. 1127,
passed 9-15-09)



§ 10.32.130  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON PUENTE STREET.



   A.   Between the southerly city limit line and Imperial Highway:



      1.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is the speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between Imperial Highway and Central Avenue:



      1.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Forty (40) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   C.   Between Central Avenue and Whittier Avenue:



      1.   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   D.   Between Whittier Avenue and the northerly city limit line:



      1.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of street; and



      2.   Thirty (30) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



(‘61 Code, § 14.1-10)  (Ord. 563, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  -
- ; Am. Ord. 831, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1127, passed 9-15-09; Am. Ord.
1186, passed 11-1-16)



§ 10.32.140  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON RANDOLPH AVENUE.



   A.   Between Birch Street and Imperial Highway:



      1.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Forty (40) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-18)  (Ord. 831, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 908, passed  -
-; Am. Ord. 1127, passed 9-15-09)



§ 10.32.150  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON ROSE DRIVE.



   Between Valencia Avenue and the south city limit:



   A.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



   B.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-11)  (Ord. 565, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  - -
; Am. Ord. 928, passed  - - )



§ 10.32.155  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON SANTA FE ROAD.



   Between Lambert Road and Carbon Canyon Road:



   A.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit which
is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is a
speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street; and



   B.   Forty (40) miles per hour is declared to be the prima facie
limit on such portion of such street.



(Ord. 1069, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 1127, passed 9-15-09; Am. Ord. 1168,
passed 8-20-13; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 11-1-16)



§ 10.32.160  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON SITE DRIVE.



   Between north city limit and Central Avenue:



   A.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit which
is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is a
speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street; and



   B.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is declared to be the prima facie
speed limit on such portion of such street.



(‘61 Code, § 14.1-12)  (Ord. 570, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  -
- ; Am. Ord. 1058, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 11-1-16; Am. Ord.
1207, passed 1-15-19)



§ 10.32.170  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON STATE COLLEGE BOULEVARD.



   A.   Between the southerly city limit line and Imperial Highway:



      1.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is the speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   BetweenImperial Highway and Brea Boulevard:



      1.   Forty (40) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Forty (40) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



(‘61 Code, § 14.1-13)  (Ord. 608, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 736, passed  -
- ; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 11-1-16)



§ 10.32.180  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON STEELE DRIVE.



   Between Central Avenue and Carlson Drive:



   A.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit which
is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is a
speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street; and



   B.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is declared to be the prima facie
speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-14)  (Ord. 736, passed  - - )



§ 10.32.190  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON TAMARACK AVENUE.



   A.   Between Lambert Road and Central Avenue:



      1.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between Central Avenue and Mariposa Drive:



      1.   Thirty (30) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



      2.   Thirty (30) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



(‘61 Code, § 14.1-19)  (Ord. 831, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1058, passed
9-17-02; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 11-1-16)



§ 10.32.200  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON VALENCIA AVENUE.



   A.   Between the southerly city limit line and Imperial Highway:



      1.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared to be
the prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



   B.   Between Lambert Road/Carbon Canyon Road and the northerly city
limit line:



      1.   Forty-five (45) miles per hour is the prima facie speed
limit which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such
street; and



      2.   Forty-five miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-16)  (Ord. 736, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 831, passed  - -
; Am. Ord. 1055, passed 8-6-02)



§ 10.32.210  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON WANDERING LANE.



   Between Country Hills Road and Lambert Road:



   A.   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



   B.   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour is declared to be the prima
facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-16)  (Ord. 743, passed  - - )



§ 10.32.220  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON WHITTIER BOULEVARD.



   Between the westerly city limit line and Puente Avenue:



   A.   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



   B.   Twenty-five (15) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-23)  (Ord. 928, passed  - - )



§ 10.32.230  PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT ON WILDCAT WAY.



   Between Lambert Road and the northerly terminus:



   A.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour is the prima facie speed limit
which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and
is a speed limit which is reasonable and safe on such portion of such street;
and



   B.   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour hereby is declared to be the
prima facie speed limit on such portion of such street.



('61 Code, § 14.1-20)  (Ord. 874, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 10.36:  MOTOR VEHICLES ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY



Section



   10.36.010   Consent of landowner



   10.36.020   Consent of neighbors



   10.36.030   Display of consent



   10.36.040   Condition of vehicle



   10.36.050   Exclusions



   10.36.060   Private roads open to vehicular traffic; statutory
authority



   10.36.070   Private roads open to vehicular traffic; certain roads
designated



   10.36.080   Enforcement of state traffic provisions



   10.36.090   Applicability of California Vehicle Code to private
roads open for public use



§ 10.36.010  CONSENT OF LANDOWNER.



   No person shall start or run the motor of, or drive any self-propelled
vehicle, including any motorcycle, motordriven cycle, minibike, trail bike,
motor scooter, jeep and dune buggy, upon any privately owned land, unoccupied
or without any structure or paving thereon, in the city, not owned by him or
her or in his or her lawful possession, without then having upon his or her
person the written consent to do so executed and acknowledged before a notary
public by the lessee of, or the holder of the record title to, such land or a
certified copy of the notice of consent to so use such land made and recorded
pursuant to Cal. Civ. Code, § 813. No person shall so use any land in the
city after the receiving of a notice of revocation of such recorded notice of
consent in the event of use by the general public or after the recording and
service by registered mail upon such person of the notice of revocation in
the event of use by other than the general public, or after the service upon
such person personally or by registered mail of any notice in writing
executed by the lessee of, or the holder of the record title to, such land
that any consent to such use theretofore given is terminated.



('61 Code, § 14A.1)  (Ord. 492, passed  - - )



§ 10.36.020  CONSENT OF NEIGHBORS.



   No person shall start or run the motor of, or drive, any self-propelled
vehicle upon any privately owned land, unoccupied or without any structure or
paving thereon, in the city, not owned by him or her or in his or her lawful
possession, within one hundred (100) feet of any dwelling, church, school or
place of assembly, not owned by him, or under his or her control, without
then having upon his or her person the written consent to do so signed by an
adult occupant of each of such dwellings, and by a person having control of
each of such churches, schools or places of assembly. No person shall so use
any such land after being served personally or by registered mail with a
notice executed by any adult occupant of any such dwelling or by any person
in control of any such church, school or place of assembly, stating that such
consent is terminated.



('61 Code, § 14A.2)  (Ord. 492, passed  - - )



§ 10.36.030  DISPLAY OF CONSENT.



   No person shall fail or refuse upon the request of any police officer
to deliver to him or her for inspection any consent required by this chapter.



('61 Code, § 14A.3)  (Ord. 492, passed  - - )



§ 10.36.040  CONDITION OF VEHICLE.



   No person shall start or run the motor of or drive, any self-propelled
vehicle upon any privately owned land in the city unless such vehicle is then
equipped and functioning with all noise inhibitors sufficient for it to be
then lawfully driven upon a public highway in the city.



('61 Code, § 14A.4)  (Ord. 492, passed  - - )



§ 10.36.050  EXCLUSIONS.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall permit any use of any public
park land or other publicly owned land. The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to any such land or to the use of lawnmowers, edgers or other
landscaping equipment or to the use of any excavating, grading or weed
eradicating equipment or to the starting or running of the motor or to the
driving, of any self-propelled vehicle at any place one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet or more from the nearest dwelling, church, school or place of
assembly or to any property permitted by law to be used for the business of
repairing or selling any self-propelled vehicle.



('61 Code, § 14A.5)  (Ord. 492, passed  - - )



§ 10.36.060  PRIVATE ROADS OPEN TO VEHICULAR TRAFFIC; STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   The Recitals, Part A, of Ordinance 1005, on file in the office of the
City Clerk, are in all respects found, determined and ordained by the City
Council.



('61 Code, § 14A.6)  (Ord. 1005, passed 12-1-97)



§ 10.36.070  PRIVATE ROADS OPEN TO VEHICULAR TRAFFIC; CERTAIN ROADS
DESIGNATED.



   The City Council specifically finds, declares and ordains that certain
roads encircling the:  (1) Brea Financial Center, 220 - 290 S. State
College, (2) Brea Plaza, 411 - 477 S. Associated and 1500 - 1700 E. Imperial,
(3) Brea West Shopping Center, 1211 - 1289 W. Central, (4) Imperial Plaza
Shopping Center, 700 - 812 E. Imperial, (5) Brea Center/Vons, 720 - 796 N.
Brea, (6) Brea Mall, 100 - 2199 Brea Mall, (7) Brea Village North, 1001 -
1033 E. Imperial, (8) Brea Towne Center, 100 - 1050 E. Imperial, (9) Brea
Marketplace, 735 - 975 E. Birch, (10) Lucky Center, 2500 E. Imperial, (11)
Brea Ranch Center, 900 - 956 E. Imperial, (12) Brea Heights Shopping Center,
600 - 670 S. Brea, (13) Gateway Center, N/W Imperial and Brea, (14) Brea
Village South, S/W Imperial and Randolph, (15) Brea Union Plaza, N/W Imperial
and Kraemer, are privately owned and maintained and are generally held open
to the public for purposes of vehicular travel to serve commercial
establishments. These roads serve as the primary access roads on the
properties and are more fully described and depicted in Exhibits “A”
through “O” attached to Ordinance 1005, on file in the office of the City
Clerk, and incorporated herein by reference.



('61 Code, § 14A.7)  (Ord. 1005, passed 12-1-97)



§ 10.36.080  ENFORCEMENT OF STATE TRAFFIC PROVISIONS.



   Upon the ordinance codified in §§ 10.36.060 through this section
becoming effective, the provisions of the California Vehicle Code shall apply
to the roads referred to in § 10.36.070 and the city may enforce such
provisions as permitted by law.



('61 Code, § 14A.8) (Ord.1005, passed 12-1-97)



§ 10.36.090  APPLICABILITY OF CALIFORNIA VEHICLE CODE TO PRIVATE ROADS OPEN
FOR PUBLIC USE.



   A.   Santa Fe Road.



      1.   In accordance with the provisions of Cal. Veh. Code §
21107.5, the City Council finds and declares that Santa Fe Road, from its
intersection to the east with Valencia Avenue, to its intersection to the
west with North Kraemer Boulevard ('Santa Fe Road' hereinafter), is a
privately owned and maintained road, generally held open for use by the
public for vehicular traffic, which so connects with public highways that the
public cannot determine that Santa Fe Road is not a public highway.  Subject
to the provisions of this section, the City Council further declares that
Santa Fe Road shall be subject to all provisions of the California Vehicle
Code as would otherwise be applicable if Santa Fe Road was a public highway. 



      2.   Any and all provisions of the California Vehicle Code
applicable to the establishment and enforcement of speed zones and
restrictions shall apply to Santa Fe Road.



      3.   Nothing in this section shall create any duty on the part
of the city, or require the city to provide maintenance or other services,
with respect to Santa Fe Road, unless otherwise provided by the California
Vehicle Code.



      4.   Nothing in this section shall give rise to, create, or
impose any liability with respect to the City of Brea.



      5.   Any and all penalties and fines, including their
disposition, for violations of the California Vehicle Code occurring on
public highways in the City of Brea, as set forth in any applicable bail
schedule or as are otherwise established by law, shall be applicable to
violations of the code occurring on Santa Fe Road.



(Ord. 1165, passed 7-2-13)



CHAPTER 10.40:  TRUCK ROUTES AND TERMINALS



Section



Article I.  Truck Routes



   10.40.010   Designation; signs



   10.40.020   Use of truck routes required by vehicles exceeding
certain weight; buses excepted



   10.40.030   Commercial vehicles; signs to be erected on prohibited
streets



   10.40.040   Parking or standing of commercial vehicles prohibited



   10.40.050   Weights and routes designated



Article II.  Interstate Truck Routes and Terminals



   10.40.100   Purpose



   10.40.110   Definitions



   10.40.120   Application and public hearing



   10.40.130   Fees



   10.40.140   Retrofitting



   10.40.150   Revocation of approval



   10.40.160   Reapplication



   10.40.170   Prohibition and penalties



ARTICLE I.  TRUCK ROUTES



§ 10.40.010  DESIGNATION; SIGNS.



   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and
describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is
prohibited by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six
thousand (6,000) pounds, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to designate
such street or streets by appropriate signs.



('61 Code, § 14.86)  (Ord. 233, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.020  USE OF TRUCK ROUTES REQUIRED BY VEHICLES EXCEEDING CERTAIN
WEIGHT; BUSES EXCEPTED.



   When any road, highway, street or streets are established and
designated by appropriate signs as truck routes, the operator of any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six thousand (6,000) pounds shall
not drive within the city on any route, street, or highway not so designated,
except when necessary to traverse a street or streets to a destination for
the purpose of loading or unloading, but then only by such deviation from the
nearest truck route as is reasonably necessary. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to passenger buses owned or operated by any public
entity.



('61 Code, § 14.87)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 837, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.030  COMMERCIAL VEHICLES; SIGNS TO BE ERECTED ON PROHIBITED STREETS.



   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and
describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is
prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect
and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance or
resolution.



('61 Code, § 14.88)  (Ord. 23, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.040  PARKING OR STANDING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   A.   Definitions.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, as utilized in this section, shall mean any vehicle
which fits the definition of commercial vehicles set forth in Cal. Veh. Code,
§ 260, as amended from time to time, or any successor provision or
provisions thereof.



   SEMITRAILER, as utilized in this section, shall mean any vehicle which
fits the definition of semitrailer set forth in Cal. Veh. Code, § 550, as
amended from time to time, or any successor provision or provisions thereof.



   TRAILER, as utilized in this section, shall mean any vehicle which fits
the definition of trailer set forth in Cal. Veh. Code, § 630, as amended
from time to time, or any successor provision or provisions thereof.



   B.   No person shall park or stand any commercial vehicle for more
than one (1) hour on any street located within the city in a commercial or
industrial zone, except while loading or unloading property, for such time in
addition to such one (1) hour period as is necessary to complete such work,
or when such vehicle is parked in connection with and in aid of the
performance of a service to or on property in the block in which such vehicle
is parked for such time in addition to such one (1) hour period as is
reasonably necessary to complete such service.



   C.   No person shall park or stand any commercial vehicle having a
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or
more on any street, or portion thereof, located in a residential district
within the city, except for such time as is reasonably necessary to make
pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building
or structure located on the street or for such time as is reasonably
necessary for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual
and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building
or structure upon the street for which a building permit has been previously
obtained from the city.



   D.   No person shall park or stand any trailer or semitrailer on any
street, highway or alley located within the city unless such trailer or
semitrailer is then attached to a motor vehicle capable of drawing or
carrying it upon the public streets and highways.



   E.   The prohibition contained in § 10.24.30 of this code shall not
apply to areas designated by resolutions of the Council pursuant to paragraph
B. of this section.



('61 Code, § 14.89) 



(Ord. 614, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 690, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.050  WEIGHTS AND ROUTES DESIGNATED.



   A.   No vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of six thousand
(6,000) pounds shall be used on any street within the city except a vehicle
subject to the provisions of Cal. Pub. Util. Code, §§ 1031 to 1036,
inclusive, any vehicle otherwise exempted by any provision or provisions of
state law, any vehicle complying with § 10.40.020 of this code and except as
provided in paragraphs B. and C. of this section.



   B.   The following truck routes are established for use by vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds during all
hours of the day:



Central Avenue, West City Limit to Berry Street



Lambert Road, West City Limit to Berry Street



Imperial Highway, West City Limit to East City Limit



Carbon Canyon Road, Valencia Avenue to East City Limit



Puente Street, Central Avenue to Imperial Highway



Berry Street, Central Avenue to Imperial Highway



Brea Boulevard, North City Limit to South City Limit



State College Boulevard, Birch Street to South City Limit



Kraemer Boulevard, Imperial Highway to South City Limit



Valencia Avenue, Lambert Road/Carbon Canyon Road to Imperial Highway



Route 57 Freeway, North City Limit to South City Limit



Birch Street, Voyager Avenue to Valencia Avenue



Enterprise Street, Ranger Avenue to Surveyor Avenue



Voyager Avenue, Birch Street to Enterprise Street



Surveyor Street, Enterprise Street to Nasa Street



Nasa Street, Westerly Terminus to Valencia Avenue



   C.   In addition to the truck routes established in paragraph B.,
the following truck route is established for use by vehicles exceeding a
maximum gross weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. during any day:



Central Avenue, Berry Street to Brea Boulevard



State College Boulevard, Brea Boulevard to Birch Street



Lambert Road, Berry Street to Route 57 Freeway



Valencia Avenue, Northerly Terminus to Lambert Road/Carbon Canyon Road



   D.   Attached to Ord. No 1177 as Exhibit A, incorporated by
reference herein and on file in the City Clerk's office, is a plat
delineating the truck routes established by this section.



(‘61 Code, § 14.90)  (Ord. 718, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 729, passed
6-1-82; Am. Ord. 769, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 771, passed  - - ; Am. Ord.
881, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 1177, passed 1-20-15)



ARTICLE II.  INTERSTATE TRUCK ROUTES AND TERMINALS



§ 10.40.100  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for terminal
designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks
operating on federally designated highway systems and to promote the general
health, safety and welfare of the public.



('61 Code, § 14B.1)  (Ord. 796, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.110  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CALTRANS.  The State Department of Transportation or its successor
agency.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Development Services for the city.



   INTERSTATE TRUCK.  A truck, tractor and semi-trailer or truck tractor,
semi-trailer and trailer, or combination thereof, with unlimited length,
operated pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code, § 35401.5(a), or its successor
provisions.



   RETROFIT.  A change in design and construction of existing roads and
intersections to allow the safe operation of interstate trucks and other
vehicles.



   TERMINAL.  Any facility at which freight is consolidated to be dipped
or where full load consignments may be loaded and off-loaded or at which
interstate trucks carrying such freight are regularly maintained, stored or
manufactured.



   TERMINAL SIGN.  A sign which has a legend format in accordance with
specifications of the city installed in public right-of-way in front of each
approved terminal.



   TRAFFIC ENGINEER.  The Traffic Engineer of the city or his or her
designee.



   TRAILBLAZER SIGNS.  Signs applicable to interstate trucks which have a
legend format in conformance with applicable CalTrans specifications and
which are installed along approved terminal access routes.



('61 Code, § 14B.2)  (Ord. 796, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.120  APPLICATION AND PUBLIC HEARING.



   A.   The owner or operator of a terminal requiring terminal access
for interstate trucks from federally designated highway systems, which
interstate trucks will utilize any city streets in traveling to, or from such
terminal, shall submit a completed application, on a form as provided by the
city, and make payment of fees as required by this chapter.



   B.   The application shall be filed with the Department. The
application shall include:



      1.   The name and address of the applicant;



      2.   The location of the terminal;



      3.   A written description of the proposed route(s);



      4.   A map showing the proposed route(s);



      5.   The terminal and the intersection of the route(s) with
the federally designated highway(s);



      6.   Evidence satisfactory to the Department that such
proposed route(s), including any route(s) proposed to be “retrofitted” as
hereinafter provided, is “adequate” as that term is used in this section;



      7.   Evidence that the terminal meets or will meet the
definition of a terminal as set forth herein;



      8.   That with respect to terminals located within the city,
the terminal's parking and all other physical aspects of the terminal or
proposed terminal satisfy all applicable state and local regulations; and



      9.   Such further information as the Department may require.



   C.   The applicant shall submit all environmental documentation in
accordance with city's rules and regulations, all in compliance with the
California Environmental Quality Act and the National Environmental Policy
Act, if applicable.



   D.   The application will not be deemed complete except upon
submittal of all required environmental documentation.



   E.   Upon receipt of the completed application, the Traffic Engineer
will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the
terminal is, or within a reasonable period of time not to exceed ninety (90)
days, will be, an operating terminal as defined herein. If the Traffic
Engineer determines that it is not and will not within a reasonable period
become such a terminal, he or she shall deny the application. If the Traffic
Engineer determines that the facility is or will within a reasonable period
of time become such a terminal, he or she shall forward copies of the
application to all affected departments of the city, including, but not
limited to, the Fire, Police, Planning and Engineering Departments for review
and input. The Traffic Engineer shall, within twenty (20) business days of
receipt of a completed application, forward the completed application to the
City Council which shall schedule a public hearing to occur before said
Council within sixty (60) days thereafter. The City Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall further cause written notice of such hearing to be served by
mail upon all affected owners of real property within the city whose
boundaries legally abut the proposed terminal route(s), using for this
purpose, the names and addresses of such owners as shown upon the last
equalized assessment roll of the County Assessor of the county. The City
Clerk, or his or her designee, shall also cause notice of said public hearing
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation one (1) time, no less
than ten (10) days prior to said public hearing.



   F.   Prior to the public hearing to be conducted, the Traffic
Engineer shall investigate the proposed route(s), including any route
proposed to be “retro-fitted,” as hereinafter provided, in order to
ascertain whether said route(s) appears to be adequate to accommodate
interstate trucks. The Traffic Engineer shall present the results of the
investigation at the scheduled public hearing before the City Council. In
determining adequacy, the Traffic Engineer shall consider whether or not said
route(s), whether retrofitted or not, meets the following criteria:



      1.   All ramps, intersections, streets and highways have
turning lane radii sufficiently wide to permit interstate trucks to safely
negotiate the entire route within traffic lanes and without danger to other
users of the public streets; and



      2.    There exist no physical conditions, including but not
limited to, overpass clearance, weight capacity of bridges, overcrossings or
other artificially supported roadways, and power or other overhead line
clearance, which would preclude the safe operation of interstate trucks on
any proposed route.



   G.   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall
approve, subject to certain specified conditions, or deny the application,
subject to CalTrans approval as hereinafter provided, and shall support said
approval or denial with written findings showing whether or not each
requirement for approval, as specified in this section, is satisfied.
However, should CalTrans deny the proposed route(s), the City Council shall
deny the application.



   H.   If, after conducting the public hearing, the City Council
determines that no proposed route(s), whether modified or retrofitted, or
not, is “adequate” as defined herein, or that any requirement for
approval has not been satisfied, the City Council shall deny the application.
If a proposed route is determined to be adequate as modified or retrofitted
in accordance with the requirements herein, as necessary, and all other
requirements imposed herein have been satisfied, including environmental
studies and submittal to city of all required documentation, the City Council
may conditionally approve the application and shall forward the application,
along with a certified copy of its resolution so approving, to CalTrans. No
access from any federally designated highway system within the city will be
approved without the written concurrence of CalTrans. If such approval by
CalTrans is not issued within one (1) year after the date of approval by the
City Council, the City Council's conditional approval shall be automatically
revoked.



      1.   All other conditions of approval shall be satisfied
within one (1) year after approval by the City Council, unless otherwise
expressly provided by the City Council, or the City Council's conditional
approval shall be automatically revoked.



      2.   Failure to exercise any approval granted hereunder within
one (1) year after such approval's effective date shall cause said approval
to be automatically revoked.



   I.   Should the requested route(s) pass through the city to a
terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall obtain route
approval in accordance with this article from the city and from all other
affected jurisdictions, prior to operating on said route(s) within the city.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant and the public entity
approving the terminal land use, if such terminal is not located within the
city, to coordinate route approval with the city.



('61 Code, § 14B.3)  (Ord. 796, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.130  FEES.



   A.   Application fee.  The application fee to be paid upon filing
the application shall be in accordance with a schedule of fees set by City
Council resolution.



   B.   Sign fee.  If an application is approved, a sign fee shall be
required to be paid by applicant prior to applicant utilizing any approval
granted hereunder. The sign fee to be paid shall be in an amount estimated by
the city to be equal to the cost of acquiring and installing appropriate
trailblazer signs marking the approved terminal route. Upon the completion of
the sign installation, the actual cost to the city shall be computed by the
city and any difference between the estimated cost and the actual cost shall
be paid by or refunded to the applicant, as the case may be. COSTS, as used
in this paragraph B., shall include, but are not limited to,  actual sign
costs, plus the labor, overhead and administrative costs incurred by city in
acquiring and installing said signs.



('61 Code, § 14B.4)  (Ord. 796, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.140  RETROFITTING.



   A.   Should a proposed route which is otherwise inadequate be
determined to be adequate if modified or “retrofitted,” the applicant may
propose such route, together with a proposed plan for retrofitting, as part
of the completed application. Applicant shall comply with all conditions
herein with respect to the route proposed to be retrofitted. Any approval
granted by city with respect to a route proposed to be retrofitted, shall be
conditional, pending approval by CalTrans and subsequent construction of such
modifications in accordance with all local and state requirements and
construction standards, including those imposed by the California
Environmental Quality Act and/or the National Environmental Policy Act, if
applicable. In all cases where such conditional approval is granted,
applicant shall be required to submit plans and specifications concerning
said modifications to the City Engineer, whose approval thereof shall be
obtained, in addition to the applicant's satisfying all other applicable
state and local requirements, prior to any construction of such modifications
commencing.



   B.   City may subject the proposed plan for retrofitting to the
city's bid process, complete the retrofitting as a city project using
contractors selected by city, and thereafter require payment, pursuant to a
written agreement between city and applicant of the entire cost of such
retrofitting. Alternatively, city may authorize applicant to conduct and
complete said retrofitting, whereupon the applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining all necessary permits and for bearing all costs of engineering,
construction and inspection of such modifications. All such modifications
shall be done by a validly licensed contractor acceptable to city, carrying
public liability insurance in a form and amount acceptable to city, and shall
be completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. In either case, the
applicant shall be required to indemnify, defend, and hold the city, its
elected officials, officers, employees and agents free and harmless from any
and all claims and lawsuits arising out of or connected with the construction
of such modifications.



('61 Code, § 14B.5)  (Ord. 796, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.150  REVOCATION OF APPROVAL.



   A.   The City Council may revoke any approval granted hereunder if
the terminal located within city, or the approved route, causes traffic
safety problems, including but not limited in, inability of interstate trucks
to safely negotiate the entire route within existing traffic lanes,
interstate trucks creating unsafe driving conditions for other vehicles or
pedestrians, or if due to changed conditions the route is deemed to be no
longer “adequate,” as the term is used in § 10.40.120.



   B.   The City Council may also revoke any approval issued hereunder
should the terminal cease to comply with all applicable city, county, state
or federal rules and regulations, or cease to be used as a terminal for a
period of ninety (90) consecutive days.



   C.   Should CalTrans or any other public agency approving a terminal
route, any portion of which has been approved by city, revoke its approval
with respect to any of the approval holder's activities occurring on said
terminal route, the approval given hereunder shall be deemed to be revoked
automatically as of the effective date of the underlying revocation.



   D.   Unless immediate revocation is deemed warranted by the city's
Traffic Engineer based upon an immediate and urgent need to protect the
health, safety or welfare of citizens within the city, or due to any
subsequently enacted legislation making any of the activities permitted
hereunder violative of law, all revocations shall be conducted in accordance
with the procedural provisions of the city's zoning ordinance, as the same
may be amended from time to time.



('61 Code, § 14B.6)  (Ord. 796, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.160  REAPPLICATION.



   If denial, revocation or intent to revoke by the City Council is based
upon a denial or revocation of any approval issued by CalTrans or other
public agency for the operation of interstate trucks, the decision of the
City Council shall be final, no findings shall be required, and the aggrieved
applicant/approval holder must appeal to CalTrans or other applicable public
agency. Upon submission of evidence that CalTrans or the other public agency
has reissued its approval with respect to the route(s) previously denied or
revoked, the applicant/approval holder may re-apply for route approval in
accordance with the provisions herein. In such cases, the City Council may
waive any or all requirements imposed herein and may immediately approve a
route which it had formerly approved, subject to any and all conditions
imposed by CalTrans and/or the City Council.



('61 Code, § 14B.7)  (Ord. 796, passed  - - )



§ 10.40.170  PROHIBITION AND PENALTIES.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any interstate truck to operate on any
public street in the city which has not been approved as an interstate truck
route, in accordance with the provisions of this article, except as otherwise
provided by law.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or
corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its
requirements shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.



CHAPTER 10.44:  BICYCLES



Section



   10.44.010   Definitions



   10.44.020   Yielding the right-of-way



   10.44.030   License required



   10.44.040   License receipt and bicycle plate issuance



   10.44.050   Sale or transfer of bicycle



   10.44.060   Address change



   10.44.070   Lost or stolen license receipt



   10.44.080   Tampering with bicycle plate prohibited



   10.44.090   Impounding of bicycles in violation



   10.44.100   Name of owner and registration number to be furnished
police officers upon request



   10.44.110   Purpose of registration



Cross-reference:



   Skateboards, bicycles and the like prohibited on posted public
property, see § 10.16.130



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to operation of bicycles, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 21200
et seq.



§ 10.44.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  Any device upon which a person may ride which is propelled
by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears, having two (2) or
three (3) wheels, one (1) of which is at least twenty (20) inches in
diameter, in tandem or tricycle arrangement or a frame size of at least
fourteen (14) inches.



   BICYCLE LICENSE RECEIPT.  That ownership card issued by the Police
Department of the city.



   BICYCLE PLATE.  The license tag or decal designated by the code, to be
permanently affixed to the bicycle and which bears a unique number
permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state.



('61 Code, § 5.1)  (Ord. 195, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.020  YIELDING THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   A.   The driver of a motor vehicle, prior to driving over or upon
any sidewalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any bicycle rider thereon.



   B.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle on a public sidewalk,
such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and, when
overtaking or passing a pedestrian, shall give an audible alarm.



('61 Code, § 5.2-1)  (Ord. 550, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.030  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall ride or propel any bicycle upon any public street,
sidewalk, alley, bicycle lane or path, or any other public property, or have
in his or her possession within the city any bicycle which has not been
licensed or which does not bear a bicycle plate as specified in Cal. Veh.
Code, Division 16.7. Residents of the city shall obtain such license and
plate from the Police Department of the city in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 5.3)  (Ord. 195, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.040  LICENSE RECEIPT AND BICYCLE PLATE ISSUANCE.



   At the time that any person submits adequate proof of ownership
thereof, the Police Department shall provide him or her with a license
receipt bearing the owner's name, address, telephone number, bicycle plate
number, the bicycle manufacturer, type and frame number and any other
descriptive material concerning the bicycle deemed necessary by the Police
Department for identification purposes, and provisions for the transfer of
ownership of such bicycle. The bicycle owner also shall be issued a permanent
bicycle plate bearing the unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle
by the state. The bicycle license shall remain in effect for an initial
period expiring December 31, 1978, and may thereafter be renewed for
successive periods of three (3) years each.



('61 Code, § 5.4)  (Ord. 195, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 489, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.050  SALE OR TRANSFER OF BICYCLE.



   Whenever any person sells, trades, disposes of or transfers any bicycle
licensed pursuant to this chapter, he or she shall endorse upon the license
receipt previously issued for such bicycle a written transfer of such,
setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the transferee, the
date of transfer and the signature of the transferor, and shall deliver such
license receipt, so endorsed, to the Police Department at the time of
transfer. The transferee shall, within ten (10) days after such transfer,
apply to the Police Department for a transfer of the license receipt.



('61 Code, § 5.5)  (Ord. 195, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 489, passed  - - ;
Am. Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.060  ADDRESS CHANGE.



   Whenever any bicycle licensee changes his or her place of residence, he
or she shall notify the Police Department of such change of address within
ten (10) days.



('61 Code, § 5.5-1)  (Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.070  LOST OR STOLEN LICENSE RECEIPT.



   In the event that any license receipt issued pursuant to this chapter
is lost or stolen, the licensee of such bicycle shall immediately notify the
Police Department and within ten (10) days after such notification shall
apply to the Police Department for a duplicate license receipt.



('61 Code, § 5.5-2)  (Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.080  TAMPERING WITH BICYCLE PLATE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or in any way alter or tamper
with any bicycle plate issued pursuant to this chapter.



('61 Code, § 5.6)  (Ord. 195, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.090  IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES IN VIOLATION.



   The Police Department may impound and retain possession of any bicycle
owned or possessed by a resident of the city and not licensed in compliance
with this chapter, and may retain possession of such bicycle until the
licensing provisions of this chapter are complied with in full.



('61 Code, § 5.7)  (Ord. 604, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.100  NAME OF OWNER AND REGISTRATION NUMBER TO BE FURNISHED POLICE
OFFICERS UPON REQUEST.



   It shall be unlawful to fail to furnish and display to the police
officers, or other parties properly entitled thereto, the name of the owner
of the bicycle and the registration number thereof at all reasonable times.



('61 Code, § 5.8)  (Ord. 195, passed  - - )



§ 10.44.110  PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION.



   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter that bicycles shall be
licensed for the purpose of their reasonable regulation and to more
conveniently ascertain the ownership of the bicycles for the benefit of the
owners as well as the public generally.



('61 Code, § 5.9)  (Ord. 195, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 10.48:  PEDESTRIANS



Section



   10.48.010   Establishment, designation and maintenance of crosswalks



   10.48.020   Use of crosswalks required



   10.48.030   Crossing roadways at right angles



   10.48.040   Standing in roadways



   10.48.050   Walking across or along freeways



   10.48.060   Standing or sitting on, or occupying center medians
prohibited



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to pedestrians, see Cal. Veh. Code, §§ 21950 et seq.



§ 10.48.010  ESTABLISHMENT, DESIGNATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CROSSWALKS.



   The City Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain
crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway in accordance with the California
Department of Transportation's Uniform Traffic Manual.



('61 Code, § 14.46)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to power of local authorities to establish crosswalks,
see Cal. Veh. Code, § 21106



§ 10.48.020  USE OF CROSSWALKS REQUIRED.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the
central traffic district or in any business district.



('61 Code, § 14.47)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.48.030  CROSSING ROADWAYS AT RIGHT ANGLES.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route
at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb
except in a marked crosswalk.



('61 Code, § 14.48)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.48.040  STANDING IN ROADWAYS.



   No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in
a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.
This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or employee
of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty.



('61 Code, § 14.49)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to standing in roadways for purpose of soliciting
rides, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 21957



§ 10.48.050  WALKING ACROSS OR ALONG FREEWAYS.



   No pedestrian shall walk across or along any street established as a
freeway, as defined by Cal. Veh. Code, § 21960, except in space set aside
for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving
notice of such restrictions.



('61 Code, § 14.50)  (Ord. 223, passed  - - )



§ 10.48.060  STANDING OR SITTING ON, OR OCCUPYING CENTER MEDIANS PROHIBITED.



   A.   No person shall stand or sit upon, or otherwise occupy a center
median for any purpose other than to do so temporarily while lawfully
crossing any roadway. For purposes of this section “center median” shall
mean and refer to that portion of a highway, not less than two (2) feet in
width, which is painted or raised, and which separates the roadway for
traffic in opposite directions.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision,
or fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this section. Any person
violating any provision of this section or failing to comply with any of its
requirements shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred ($100) for a
first violation; a fine not exceeding two hundred ($200) dollars for a second
violation within one (1) year; and a fine not exceeding five hundred ($500)
dollars for each additional violation within one (1) year.



   C.   A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by
means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any
other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance.



(Ord. 962, passed 12-6-94)



CHAPTER 10.52:  FOOD VENDING VEHICLES



Section



   10.52.010   Purpose



   10.52.020   Definitions



   10.52.030   Operational requirements



   10.52.040   Exemptions



   10.52.050   Penalty for violation



§ 10.52.010  PURPOSE.



   The City Council of the City of Brea expressly finds that parking of
vehicles for food vending purposes poses traffic hazards and special dangers
to the safety and welfare of children and other residents in the city. 
Furthermore, food vending vehicles often create noise and other disturbances
to the peace, quiet, and enjoyment of residents and businesses in
neighborhoods where public or private schools are located, during times that
operators of such vehicles do business with school children.  It is the
purpose and intent of this chapter to establish fair, clear and concise
regulations applicable to businesses and persons who engage in the operation
of food vending from vehicles in the city.  These regulations are intended
to provide for greater public health and safety by preventing traffic-related
safety hazards, especially hazards to school children buying food or other
products from food vending vehicles.  The regulations are also intended to
more fully preserve the peace, safety and welfare of the community by
minimizing unreasonable and disruptive noise.  In adopting these
regulations, it is the City Council’s intent to allow vending from food
vending vehicles, subject to reasonable regulations designed to more fully
protect the public health and safety.



(Ord. 1169, passed 10-1-13)



§ 10.52.020  DEFINITIONS.



   FOOD VENDING VEHICLE.  Any vehicle, as that term is defined in the
California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or primarily used for retail sales
of produce and/or prepared, pre-packaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or
foodstuffs of any kind, on any public street, alley or highway or private
street or alley within the city.  The inventory of these vehicles is not
necessarily limited to edible items and may include non-food sundries.



   OPERATOR.  Any person or entity that:



      1.   Owns, controls, manages, and/or leases a food vending
vehicle; and/or



      2.   Contracts with any person(s) to drive, operate, prepare
food in, and/or vend from, a food vending vehicle; and/or



      3.   Drives, operates, prepares food in, or vends from, a food
vending vehicle.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or other legal entity of any kind or nature.



   PERMIT.  A business license or permit required under any other chapter
of this code.



   SCHOOL.  Any public and/or private school in which instruction is
given in any or all grades through grade twelve (12).



   RESTOCKING.  The transfer of food, goods or merchandise to a food
vending vehicle from any other person or vehicle and includes, but is not
limited to, loading and delivery of food, goods and merchandise.



   VEND or VENDING.  Soliciting, displaying, or offering produce,
prepared or unprepared food, pre-packaged food and/or non-food sundries of
any kind for sale or barter or exchange from a food vending vehicle on a
public or private street, alley, highway or public place within the city. 
VEND or VENDING includes the movement or standing of a food vending vehicle
for the purpose of searching for, obtaining and/or soliciting retail sales or
produce, prepared food, pre-packaged food or non-food sundries, including,
but not limited to, goods, wares, or merchandise.



(Ord. 1169, passed 10-1-13)



§ 10.52.030  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   No person shall own, control, operate, manage, lease, or
contract with any other person for the operation of, a food vending vehicle
in the city without a valid business license issued, in addition to any other
license or permit required under any other chapter of this code, for each and
every food vending vehicle.



   B.   All operators shall comply with the following regulations:



      1.   Each operator vending any produce or other food item for
which a food handling permit or other health permit is required by law, shall
possess and at all times display such permit in conspicuous view upon each
such vehicle.



      2.   Each operator shall possess and at all times display in
conspicuous view upon each such vehicle, a City of Brea business license.



      3.   No vending from a food vending vehicle shall be permitted
within one hundred (100) feet of any intersection of two (2) or more public
streets, nor within seven hundred (700) feet of any public or private school,
or any park or playground facilities.



      4.   No food vending vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left
standing in any manner which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any
driveway or restricts the free movement of other vehicles upon any public or
private street.



      5.   All food vending vehicles shall be equipped with refuse
containers large enough to contain all trash and refuse generated by the
operation of such vehicle.  The operator of the food vending vehicle shall
pick up all trash and refuse generated by the operator’s vending during the
time the vehicle is stopped, that is within not less than a twenty-five (25)
foot radius of the vehicle, before such vehicle is moved.



      6.   No vending shall be permitted except after the food
vending vehicle has been brought to a complete stop and parked adjacent to
the curb in a lawful manner.



      7.   Every food vending vehicle shall have the name, address,
and telephone number of the holder of the business license permanently
affixed on both the left and right sides of the vehicle.  Such information
shall be in letters and numerals not less than four (4) inches in height and
shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which the letters
are placed.



      8.   No operator of a food vending vehicle shall operate any
sound amplification systems or other sound making devices or music systems,
to advertise, draw attention to, or announce the presence of any such vehicle
while such vehicle is moving, stopped, standing, or parked upon any public or
private street immediately contiguous to any residentially zoned property
within the city.



      9.   No operator of a food vending vehicle shall use any
non-amplified sounds or sound making device while the vehicle is stopped,
parked, or otherwise in a stationary position upon any public or private
street immediately contiguous to any residentially-zoned property within the
city.  Any such sounds emanating from a food vending vehicle shall not be
audible to a person with normal hearing for a distance of more than two
hundred (200) feet from the vehicle.



      10.   Restocking of a food vending vehicle is prohibited while
the vehicle is on any public or private street or alley.



      11.   No food vending vehicle shall attach to or receive any
electrical power or other utilities from any public or private property,
while the vehicle is located on any private or public street or alley.



      12.   No person shall vend from a food vending vehicle which
is stopped, parked or standing on any public street, alley or highway when
any prospective customer is sitting or standing in another vehicle.



      13.   No food vending vehicle shall be parked, stopped or
standing on any public street, alley or highway when any prospective customer
is located in any portion of the street, alley or highway which is open to
vehicular traffic.



      14.   Vending from a food vending vehicle while the vehicle is
parked, stopped or standing on any public or private street, alley or
highway, is permitted only when that part of the food vending vehicle open to
prospective customers is on the side of the vehicle immediately next to the
right side of the public or private street, alley or highway.



(Ord. 1169, passed 10-1-13)



§ 10.52.040  EXEMPTIONS.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to food vending
vehicles providing food, meals or snacks to employees of businesses located
on private property and stopped for a period of thirty (30) minutes or less.



   B.   This chapter shall not apply to any city sponsored event where
the operator of the food vending vehicle is operating pursuant to a valid
contract with the city.



(Ord. 1169, passed 10-1-13)



§ 10.52.050  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as an
infraction and/or by administrative citation and penalty, as set forth in
Chapter 1.04 of this code.



(Ord. 1169, passed 10-1-13)



TITLE 11:  RESERVED



TITLE 12:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY



   Chapter



      12.00   PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES



      12.04   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      12.08   CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS



      12.12   EXCAVATIONS



      12.16   NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS



      12.20   STREET TREES



      12.24   REGULATION OF NEWSPAPER RACKS



      12.28   REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY



CHAPTER 12.00:  PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES



Section



   12.00.010   Parental responsibility



   12.00.020   Compliance with official rules and regulations



   12.00.030   Compliance with signs and notices



   12.00.040   Temporary closure of parks, trails or recreational
facilities



   12.00.050   Prohibited conduct generally



   12.00.060   Use of sound systems



   12.00.070   Entry during closed hours prohibited



   12.00.080   Use of restrooms and washrooms



   12.00.090   Dogs within parks, trails or recreational facilities



   12.00.095   Rules and regulations applicable to dog parks



   12.00.100   Animals within parks, trails or recreational facilities



   12.00.110   Tennis courts; prohibited activities



   12.00.120   Scheduled use of sports fields, parks, trails and
recreational facilities



   12.00.130   Skate parks



   12.00.140   Posting of printed materials



   12.00.150   Use of vehicles, bicycles, skateboards, roller skates,
and in-line skates



   12.00.160   Possession and consumption of alcohol



   12.00.170   Exceptions to enforcement



§ 12.00.010  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   No parent, guardian or custodian of a minor shall knowingly permit or
knowingly allow such minor to do any act or thing in any park, trail or
recreational facility, or any part of portion thereof, prohibited by any
provision of this chapter. No parent, guardian or custodian shall allow or
permit any person under the age of six (6) to remain in or upon a city park,
trail or recreational facility, unless accompanied by a capable person at
least twelve (12) years of age.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.020  COMPLIANCE WITH OFFICIAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey or violate any
provision of the city facility use and allocation policy, governing use by
the public of any city park, trail or recreational facility, or any
structure, equipment, apparatus or appliance within any city park or
recreational facility, or upon any trail, as adopted and/or amended from time
to time by resolution of the City Council; provided such person has first
been provided written notice that his or her conduct is in violation of the
city facility use and allocation policy. 



   B.   For purposes of this chapter, the terms PARK, TRAIL and
RECREATIONAL FACILITY shall mean, respectively, any city-owned or controlled
park, trail and/or facility designed for recreational purposes, including, as
the context permits or requires, any city-owned structure, building, sports
field, equipment, apparatus and/or appliance located within any city-owned or
controlled park or recreational facility, or upon any city-owned or
controlled trail. The Brea Community Center is a RECREATIONAL FACILITY for
purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.030  COMPLIANCE WITH SIGNS AND NOTICES.



   A.   No person shall disobey any city-posted instruction, sign or
notice, in or upon, and pertaining to use of, any park, trail or recreational
facility.



   B.   No person shall fail or refuse to follow or comply with any
lawful order or direction of any Community Services, Maintenance Services or
Police Department employee concerning the use of any park, trail or
recreational facility.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.040  TEMPORARY CLOSURE OF PARKS, TRAILS OR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.



   The City Manager, or a designee thereof (“City Manager” hereinafter
in this chapter), may close any park, trail or recreational facility, or any
portion thereof, to the public, when deemed necessary to protect the public
health and safety, or for the purpose of repair or maintenance, restoration
of plant life, or protection of animal habitat, or when usage would otherwise
be damaging to the park, trail or recreational facility. When it is deemed
necessary to temporarily close a park, trail or recreational facility, the
City Manager shall cause signs or notices to be placed giving notice that
such park, trail or recreational facility is closed and entry is unlawful.
Whenever any such sign has been so posted, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to enter or be within or upon such park, trail or
recreational facility, or closed portion thereof.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.050  PROHIBITED CONDUCT GENERALLY.



   A.   Within any park or recreational facility, or upon any trail, it
shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:



      1.   Throw or cause to be launched rocks, stones or any other
object or projectile, with intent to cause serious injury to any person or
animal, or damage to property.



      2.   Make any fire or utilize a lit barbecue, except at places
designated by a sign, or by the provision of a fire ring or barbeque
equipment, for such purpose.  No person starting or maintaining a fire or
barbecue shall leave the area where the fire/barbecue is located without
first completely extinguishing such fire or barbecue such that no embers
exist and no other combustion is occurring.



      3.   Conduct or cause to be conducted any business. For
purposes of this subsection, the term BUSINESS shall mean the sale or
purchase, or solicitation or offer to sell or purchase, for any form of
consideration, any goods, product, thing of value, or service, or the
delivery of any goods, product or thing of value, or provision of any
service, following the sale thereof, whether such sale occurred on or off
city property.  Prohibited BUSINESS includes providing lessons or
instruction for any form of compensation, regardless of where payment is
made. This subsection shall not apply to any city-operated or permitted (by
written permit) activity. 



      4.   Climb upon any wall, fence, shelter, seat, building,
structure, tree, shrub, device or other equipment, excepting play equipment
posted or otherwise designated by the city for such use.



      5.   Bring, land, or cause to descend or alight any aircraft,
balloon, toy plane, parachute or other instrumentality, machine or apparatus
for human aviation or flight, without written permission of the Community
Services or Maintenance Services Department, or City Manager, excluding any
emergency personnel, i.e., helicopter, from this provision.



      6.   Damage, deface, alter, injure, destroy, paint, graffiti,
tamper with, or remove any equipment, pathway, building, facility, tree,
wood, bush, turf, flower, plant, grass, soil, rock, or any tangible thing or
part of any park, trail or recreational facility.



      7.   Frighten, molest, chase, tease, injure, kill or remove
any animal. This subsection shall not apply to any city, county, state or
federal government employee whose official duty includes control of animals,
while such employee is engaged in such duty.



      8.   Place, pile, deposit, leave or cause to be deposited any
building material, soil, solid waste, refuse, hazardous material, or any
other thing or material, except as permitted by the Maintenance Services
Department or the Community Services Department, or in an area or receptacle
posted or designated by the Maintenance Services Department for such purpose.



      9.   Swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the waters of any water
feature not posted for such use, including but not limited to, any flood
control channel, fountain, stream, lake, marsh or fishpond. 



      10.   Operate any remote-controlled vehicle, including model
cars, or motorized and self-propelled flying vehicles, including model
airplanes, except in areas posted for such use.



      11.   Operate inflatable “bounce houses” and/or generators
of any kind. This subsection shall not apply to official city functions.



      12.   Feed or cause to be fed any wild animals, including but
not limited to, opossums, skunks, raccoons, and  squirrels, ducks, geese,
pigeons, or other wild animals or fowl, except where specifically allowed as
part of a city-sponsored or permitted event.



      13.   Play or engage in the game of golf, or to hit any golf
ball with a golf club, in any area not posted or otherwise specifically
designated for such activity.



      14.   To camp or stay overnight without possessing written
consent of the Community Services Department.



      15.   Leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse
other than in trash receptacles.



      16.   Bring garbage or refuse from outside the limits of the
park, trail or recreational facility, and deposit the same in garbage cans or
receptacles at a city park, trail or recreational facility.



      17.   Change into bathing clothes from street clothes or from
street clothes to bathing clothes, except in a locker room, bath house or
other structure posted or otherwise designated for such use.



      18.   Assemble, collect, gather together in or upon, or
occupy, any walk, passageway or pathway, or any other place designated or
posted for travel of persons, in any manner to prevent or obstruct any
person's free passage thereon or use thereof.



      19.   Fire, discharge or carry any dangerous weapon. As used
in this subsection, the term DANGEROUS WEAPON includes, but is not limited
to, any paintball gun, bow and arrow, slingshot, or any other type of device,
other than a firearm, capable of propelling a projectile and causing injury,
and not otherwise prohibited from being possessed in a park, recreational
facility or on any trail, by any other chapter of this code, or any state or
federal law. Violations of any other chapter of this code, or state or
federal law, pertaining to the possession or discharge of any firearm or
other dangerous weapon, shall be prosecuted under such chapter, or state or
federal law.



      20.   Urinate or defecate except in urinals and/or toilets
within a restroom open to the public.



      21.   Smoke any cigarette or cigar within twenty-five (25)
feet of any playground or tot lot area, or leave or deposit any cigarette or
cigar butt outside of a trash receptacle.



   B.   Any person who commits any of the acts set forth in this
section shall be subject to punishment as provided in this chapter and/or
ejection by a Police Officer.



   C.   Nothing in this section or chapter shall be deemed to authorize
any conduct otherwise prohibited by any other provision of this code.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.060  USE OF SOUND SYSTEMS.



   A.   Prohibition.  No person shall play or utilize any
sound-amplifying system within or upon a park, trail or recreational facility
that is not posted or designated for such purposes.



   B.   Definition.  For purposes of this section, SOUND-AMPLIFYING
SYSTEM means and includes any system of electrical hook-up or connection,
equipment, sound-amplifying system, loudspeaker, public address system, and
any apparatus, equipment, device, instrument or machine capable of, designed
for, or intended to be used for the purpose of amplifying the sound or
increasing the volume of the human voice, musical tone, vibration or sound
wave. 



   C.   Exceptions.  This section shall not apply to:



      1.   Official city functions;



      2.   Any person possessing a written city permit or consent
that specifically authorizes use of a sound-amplifying system when and where
it is being used; or



      3.   The regular and customary use of portable radios, music
players, televisions, or tape recorders played or operated so as not to
unreasonably disturb or interfere with another person's permitted use of the
park, trail or recreational facility.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.070  ENTRY DURING CLOSED HOURS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain, or to leave any motor
vehicle or personal property, in any park or recreational facility, or upon
any trail, at any time during posted hours of closure, without possessing
written permission from the Community Services Department. If hours of
closure are not posted, then such hours are from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
daily. This section shall not apply during scheduled events and/or rentals
that take place at the Brea Museum and Heritage Center or the Brea Lions
Scout Center located within City Hall Park.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.080  USE OF RESTROOMS AND WASHROOMS.



   It is unlawful for any person over the age of eight (8) years to enter
or use any public restroom or washroom facilities posted or designated for
use of persons of the opposite sex. It is unlawful for any person to use any
public restroom for the purpose of bathing oneself or any other individual,
or any animal, or to change clothes.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.090  DOGS WITHIN PARKS, TRAILS OR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.



   A.   All dogs within or upon public parks, trails or recreational
facilities must be licensed as required by law, and be restrained by a chain
or leash not more than six (6) feet in length, unless such dog is within a
city-established and posted “dog park” or “leash-optional” area. 



   B.   It is unlawful for any person having charge of a dog to fail to
promptly remove any feces deposited by such dog within any park or
recreational facility, or upon any trail.



   C.   It is unlawful for any person having charge of a dog to allow
such dog to enter or remain within any area of any park, trail or
recreational facility designated or posted for use by children, or to enter
any sand box or play apparatus area.



   D.   It is unlawful to tether any dog to any tree or other fixed
object within any park or recreational facility, or upon any trail.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.095  RULES AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO DOG PARKS.



   A.   For purposes of this section, the term DOG PARK shall mean and
include a ‘park’ as defined in § 12.00.020.B of this chapter that is
designated by signage as a DOG PARK, and is a fenced in area where dogs are
permitted off-leash for exercise and other recreational purposes.  In
addition to the rules and regulations governing use of city parks, trails and
recreational facilities set forth in this Chapter 12.00, any and all use of
and/or presence within any dog park is subject to the following rules and
regulations:



      1.   The City of Brea does not actively or regularly provide
police or other protection, or monitor activities of persons present in any
dog park and, therefore, the city disclaims any and all duty of care to
prevent injuries by dogs within any dog park, to the maximum extent permitted
by law.  Dog owners (‘owners’) assume all liability and risk related to
their use of the dog park.  The city shall not be liable for any injury or
damage caused by any dog brought into the dog park.



      2.   Owners must clean up after their dogs.  Owners must
remove and properly dispose of all dog waste in the provided receptacles.



      3.   Owners may never leave their dog unattended.



      4.   Female dogs in heat and dogs with communicable illnesses
are prohibited in all areas.



      5.   Dogs required by law must have current licenses and
required vaccinations, and be wearing a flat collar with visible
county-registered dog tag.



      6.   Dogs showing aggression toward people or other animals
shall be immediately removed from the park by the handler.  Dogs known to
exhibit aggressive behavior are not permitted.



      7.   Puppies under four (4) months of age are prohibited.



      8.   Owners must carry a six (6) foot or shorter leash at all
times and keep their dogs on leashes going to and from any enclosed area of
the dog park.



      9.   No person may bring more than three (3) dogs at one (1)
time into a dog park, or have more than three (3) dogs in their possession or
under their control or attempted control, at any time while in a dog park.



      10.   Toys of any size or shape are prohibited in the dog
park, excluding frisbees and balls.



      11.   Children under sixteen (16) years of age must be
accompanied and supervised by an adult at all times in all areas.



      12.   Owners are responsible for damages caused by any
unprovoked injuries to other dogs and/or persons present in a dog park caused
by their dogs or by a failure of the owner to comply with any of the
provisions of this § 12.00.095.  Owners are also responsible for all
damages caused by any unprovoked injuries to other dogs and/or persons
present in a dog park, attributable to a failure of any minor child of such
owner to control their dog, or to comply with any of the provisions of this
§ 12.00.095, to the maximum extent permitted by law.



      13.   Smoking is prohibited in the dog park.



      14.   No human or dog food or treats of any kind are permitted.



      15.   Commercial/professional dog activities are not permitted.



      16.   Use of any area designated as a ‘small dog park
area’ is limited to dogs weighing twenty-five (25) pounds and under.



      17.   Use of any area designated as a ‘large dog park
area’ is limited to dogs weighing over twenty-five (25) pounds.



      18.   Certified service dogs, of any size, are exempt from dog
size restrictions and are allowed in any part of the park.  Certified
service dogs, because of the training and testing they receive, are allowed
to be with and stay with their owner at all times - anywhere the person is
allowed to be.



   B.   Rattlesnakes, coyotes and/or other potentially dangerous
wildlife may be present in any dog park located next to areas of open
space.  The city shall have no obligation to provide any further warning,
including posting of signs, concerning such dangers.  Owners must exercise
caution, and are deemed to assume all risks inherent as a result of the
presence of such animals.



   C.   Each person entering a dog park must review and thereafter
comply with any and all additional rules and/or regulations set forth in
signage posted at entrances to the dog park.



   D.   Any person violating any provision of this § 12.00.095 is
guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.04
of this code.  Alternatively, violators may be punished by issuance of an
administrative citation.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the rights of any
person to enter or use any dog park, after such person is convicted of
violating any provision of this chapter more than three (3) times in any
thirty (30) day period, may be suspended temporarily or permanently,
following written notice to the violator and a hearing opportunity.  No
person who, after a final decision following a hearing, is denied access to
any dog park shall thereafter enter a dog park during the period such right
of access is suspended.



(Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-13)



§ 12.00.100  ANIMALS WITHIN PARKS, TRAILS OR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.



   It is unlawful to allow any animal to run loose, swim or be at large in
any public park or recreational facility, or upon any trail, within the city,
not posted or designated for such purpose. No person shall bring into any
public park or recreational facility, or onto any trail, any animal that
constitutes a safety hazard or otherwise presents a risk to the public health
and safety, without possessing written consent of the Community Services
Department. Animals may be brought into a park or recreational facility for
the purpose of providing an animal show, exhibit, fair or similar kind of
activity, provided the person responsible possesses written consent of the
Community Services Department. Horses are prohibited in any park or
recreational facility, or on any trail; provided, however, that horses may be
ridden or walked in areas posted for equestrian use.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.110  TENNIS COURTS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person in or upon any city-owned or
controlled tennis court to engage in any activity other than playing or
practicing tennis. Prohibited activities include, but are not limited to,
wiffle ball, skating or riding upon a skateboard, scooter, unicycle, bicycle
or other wheeled device, without possessing written permission from the
Community Services Department.



   B.   The Community Services Department may authorize, by posting a
sign or by issuing a written permit, the use of tennis courts owned or
controlled by the city for an activity other than playing or practicing
tennis.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.120  SCHEDULED USE OF SPORTS FIELDS, PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATIONAL
FACILITIES.



   A.   Certain sports fields, parks, trails and/or recreational
facilities, and/or areas therein, may be designated for scheduled use by
individuals and/or organized sports league teams, in accordance with a
written scheduled use program created and administered by the Community
Services Department. Such areas shall be posted as being subject to scheduled
use.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person or sports team to refuse or
fail to surrender the use of any scheduled use sports field, park, trail or
recreational facility, or area therein, to any person and/or organized sports
league team possessing a written permit or field assignment from the
Community Services Department, authorizing the use thereof, for the period
specified in such permit or field assignment. Permitted use of scheduled use
areas shall be subject to the city facility use and allocation policy.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.130  SKATE PARKS.



   A.   Skateboarding, in-line skating and/or roller skating is deemed
to be a hazardous activity, and the city shall not be liable for injuries
incurred by persons who participate in any such hazardous activity.



   B.   City skate parks are designed and maintained, and are hereby
designated as, skate parks in which skateboarding, in-line skating and/or
roller skating is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this section.



      1.   Use of any city skate park for any purpose not expressly
permitted by this section is prohibited, unless such user is in possession of
written permission from the Community Services Department. 



      2.   Any person utilizing any city skate park for
skateboarding, in-line skating and/or roller skating is deemed to be
knowledgeable of its inherent dangers. 



      3.   Having such knowledge, each such person is further deemed
to have expressly assumed all risks of injury, to the fullest extent
permitted by law.



   C.   Every person riding a skateboard, or utilizing in-line skates
or roller skates in any city skate park, must:



      1.   Wear a fully-functional helmet, elbow pads, and knee
pads; 



      2.   Be supervised by an adult if under the age of fourteen
(14); and



      3.   Comply with all posted rules and regulations.



   D.   The Community Services Department is authorized to establish,
post and/or revise rules and regulations deemed appropriate for any city
skate park. It shall be unlawful and a citable offense for any person to
violate any provision of this section, or any such posted rule or regulation.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.140  POSTING OF PRINTED MATERIALS.



   A.   Prohibited.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code,
no person shall display, post, attach or affix, or cause to be posted,
attached or otherwise affixed, to any tree, shrub, plant, grass, fence,
building, structure, ornament, wall, apparatus, post, bridge, bench, gate,
property or other physical object, any handbill, banner, circular, booklet,
card, sign, pamphlet, sheet or other written or printed material, within any
park or recreational facility, or upon any trail.



   B.   Exceptions.



      1.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
area designated or posted to permit the posting of written materials, or to
posting of printed materials expressly permitted by this code, or state or
federal law. 



      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
area of any park or recreational facility that is rented by the city, or is
subject to a city reservation program; provided the terms of the rental
agreement or reservation program rules permit the posting of written
materials, and any such posting is in compliance with such agreement or
program rules. In such case, however, the person or entity renting or
reserving must remove all printed materials upon completion of authorized use.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.150  USE OF VEHICLES, BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, AND
IN-LINE SKATES.



   A.   Only currently licensed and registered motor vehicles are
permitted to be operated within any park or recreational facility. Currently
licensed and registered motor vehicles may only be operated upon roads,
driveways, pathways and/or parking lots posted or otherwise designated for
public vehicular use; provided, however, motorized carts may be utilized for
sports field preparation in accordance with the city facility use and
allocation policy, by persons possessing a valid drivers license, pursuant to
a scheduled use permit or field assignment (see § 12.00.120).



   B.   No person shall park any vehicle on any lawn, planted area or
pedestrian walkway, within any marked fire lane, or any other area not posted
or designated by distinctive markings for public parking, within any park or
recreational facility, or on or adjacent to any trail. No person shall wash,
polish, grease or repair any vehicle within any public park or recreational
facility.



   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in any vehicle
within or upon any park, trail or recreational facility at any time between
dusk and dawn the next day, or at any time during closed hours.



   D.   In accordance with the provisions of California Vehicle Code §
21113, the provisions of the California Vehicle Code are applicable to all
streets and roadways within city parks, recreational facilities and adjoining
city-owned or operated parking areas. Violations of the California Vehicle
Code may be enforced and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions thereof.



   E.   No person shall recklessly utilize a bicycle or skateboard or
recklessly roller skate or in-line skate on any trail or in any park or
recreational facility.



      1.   For purposes of this subsection, RECKLESSLY shall mean in
willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.



      2.   In all cases pedestrians shall be afforded the
right-of-way.



      3.   Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to permit
skateboarding, roller skating or in-line skating in or upon any area where
such activity is otherwise prohibited by other provisions of this code.



      4.   It is unlawful to ride any bicycle outside of any roadway
or other paved area, except in areas or on trails posted or designated for
such use.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.160  POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL.



   A.   Except as provided herein, it is unlawful for any person to
possess any open container of, or to consume, beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverage, as defined in California Business and Professions Code § 23004, in
any city-owned park or recreational facility, or in or upon any city-owned
public place within the city.



   B.   The provisions of subsection A. above, shall not apply to
persons conducting or attending social events in or upon any city-owned park,
recreational facility, or other city-owned public place where alcoholic
beverages are being served, that are sponsored by the city, or that are
conducted by established community service or similar non-profit
organizations, or other persons, organizations or entities that have rented a
city-owned facility, having prior written consent of the City Manager, after
taking into account the nature of the event and its potential risk to the
public health and safety.



      1.   During events to which this exception applies, the lawful
consumption of alcohol and/or possession of open containers of alcoholic
beverages is strictly limited to the immediate area where such event is being
conducted and only for the duration of the event. 



      2.   A true copy of any required license or permit issued by
the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and the City
Manager's written consent, authorizing the provision of the alcoholic
beverage being served, must be in the possession of an authorized
representative of the organization sponsoring the event, and that
representative shall be present at all times at the event. The representative
shall present the license or permit, and/or City Manager's written consent,
to any peace officer upon demand.



   C.   In accordance with the provisions of California Business and
Professions Code § 25620, possession of an open container of alcohol in
violation of this section is punishable as an infraction.



(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)  Penalty, see §§ 1.04.010 and 1.04.030



§ 12.00.170  EXCEPTIONS TO ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any city, state or
federal employee lawfully performing his or her official duties.




(Ord. 1109, passed 12-4-07)




CHAPTER 12.04:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   12.04.010   Superintendent of Streets



   12.04.020   Street obstructions generally



   12.04.030   Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, etc.



   12.04.035   Maintenance of trees and shrubs adjacent to public
property and rights-of-way



   12.04.040   Obstructing passage and annoying persons on streets,
sidewalks, etc.



   12.04.050   Depositing petroleum products on paved streets



   12.04.060   Limitation on location of signboards, electric signs



   12.04.070   Location of gasoline pumps; permit required



   12.04.080   Limitations on location and use of awnings



§ 12.04.010  SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS.



   A.   The City Engineer shall be the Superintendent of Streets.



('61 Code, § 20.1)



   B.   The Superintendent of Streets shall oversee and control all
labor upon the streets, alleys and sidewalks of the city and any other work
ordered by the Council to be done, and shall see that such work conforms to
the provisions of this code and the ordinances of the city.



('61 Code, § 20.2)



(Ord. 7, passed - - )



§ 12.04.020  STREET OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction of any
kind in or upon any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city, or to
authorize, procure or permit any obstruction to be placed therein or thereon,
except as may be required by employers or the officials of the city in the
proper discharge of their duties.



('61 Code, § 20.5)  (Ord. 16, passed - - )



§ 12.04.035  MAINTENANCE OF TREES AND SHRUBS ADJACENT TO PUBLIC PROPERTY
AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   A.   Any privately owned or maintained tree or shrub which is
allowed to grow or otherwise protrude into or over any public property or
public right-of-way so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct the free
passage of persons or vehicles thereon, or to cause any accumulation thereon
of leaves or other tree or plant material, is hereby declared a nuisance and
the Director of Maintenance Services or designee thereof ('Director'
hereinafter in this section) is hereby authorized to abate the same.



   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, encroaching
trees or shrubs may be abated in accordance with the following procedures:



      1.   Any occupant of the property upon which the encroaching
tree or shrub is located, and the owner thereof as shown in the last
equalized assessment roll then available, shall be served with written notice
to abate therein specifying  the nature of the encroachment, and a date by
which abatement must occur which shall not be less than seven (7) calendar
days following the date of the notice, unless the Director determines that
protection of the public health and safety requires earlier trimming of the
encroaching tree or shrub. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director may
summarily abate the nuisance where deemed necessary in order to immediately
protect the public health and safety. In such event, however, the owner
and/or occupant shall be entitled to request a hearing following receipt of a
bill for the costs of abatement, as provided in this section.



      2.   In the event the encroaching shrub or tree or has not
been sufficiently trimmed within the time provided in the notice, the
Director may cause the appropriate maintenance to be conducted at the owner's
and/or occupant's expense. At the Director's discretion, a bill for the costs
of abatement will be presented to both the owner and occupant and shall be
immediately due and payable as a debt on a written contract. If the estimate
for the abatement exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the Director will
cause a second notice to be filed specifically indicating that it does exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00), and an additional seven (7) calendar days
will be designated for them to remove the encroachment. Exceptions will be
made, at the Director's discretion, for those residents that can demonstrate
a substantial hardship would be created by such debt. If such bill remains
unpaid for a period of not less than thirty (30) days following the date
thereof, the same may be assessed against the parcel and shall become a lien
thereon, collectable as set forth in § 15.216.090 of this code.



      3.   The property owner or occupant may, within five (5)
business days of receipt of the abatement billing, file a written request for
a hearing, whereupon the Director shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct
a hearing within ten (10) business days, notifying both owner and occupant of
hearing time and date. At the hearing, the owner and/or occupant may present
evidence relevant to the decision to abate and/or the costs of abatement.
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may confirm or reduce the
abatement bill, or excuse the same where good cause exists. The decision of
the hearing officer shall be final unless the final abatement bill exceeds
five hundred dollars ($500.00), in which case the owner and/or occupant may
file a written appeal with the City Manager within five (5) business days of
the date of that decision. The City Manager shall conduct a hearing and
proceed in the manner prescribed above, and his or her decision shall be
final.



   C.   The procedures to abate nuisance trees and shrubs, as set forth
herein, are alternative to any and all other procedures available under this
code or state law to abate the same.



(Ord. 1034, passed 3-21-00)



§ 12.04.030  OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, ETC.



   A.   The placing, erecting or maintaining of any signs, signboards
or devices of a like character, awnings excepted, along, over and upon the
public streets, sidewalks and alleys within the city, not in accordance with
the provisions of this section, is hereby prohibited, is declared to be a
nuisance and the Superintendent of Streets is hereby directed to abate the
same.



   B.   The placement of temporary signs within public right-of-way
areas shall only be permitted subject to the following standards:



      1.   Application.  An application shall be consistent with
the specific provisions adopted by the City Council under separate resolution.



      2.   Number of permits per year.  A maximum of one (1) permit
per calendar year shall be granted to any one (1) applicant or associated
applicants.



      3.   Display duration.  Signs may be placed for a maximum
time period of forty-five (45) days.  Said time period shall be inclusive of
set up and removal of signs.



      4.   Location.  Sign display within public right-of-way areas
may occur only at the following locations and shall be limited to
installation upon city street light poles:



         a.   Brea Boulevard: From the south city limits to
Imperial Highway and Lambert Road to State College Blvd./Central Avenue.



         b.   Birch Street: From Brea Boulevard to Valencia
Avenue.



         c.   Imperial Highway: From Berry Street to Valencia
Avenue.



         d.   Kraemer Boulevard: From Imperial Highway to Lambert
Road.



         e.   Lambert Road: From Puente Street to Kraemer
Boulevard.



         f.   Puente Street: From Imperial Highway to Central
Avenue.



         g.   Rose Drive: From south city limits to Valencia
Avenue.



         h.   Valencia Avenue: From south city limits to Birch
Street/Rose Drive.



      5.   Number of signs. A maximum of one (1) sign per light pole
and three (3) signs per block, total, from any single or combination of
applicants are permitted.



      6.   Size and orientation of temporary signs.  Maximum
dimensions of signs shall not exceed thirty- six (36) inches in width and ten
(10) feet in length and shall be installed in a vertical orientation with a
maximum of fifteen (15) feet vertical clearance from adjacent grade.



      7.   Sign materials and design.  Signs shall be constructed
of weather-resistant fabric designed to remain durable throughout the display
period.  Said fabric shall be of a color and reflectivity to avoid
interference with traffic safety and directional controls.  Text and
graphics of temporary signs shall be of a design to avoid interference with
traffic safety and directional controls.  Final materials and design of
signs shall be subject to the review and approval of the Development Services
Director.



      8.   Sign brackets.  Applicant shall be responsible for the
installation and removal of all brackets.  This requirement may be modified
by the Development Services Director on a case-by-case basis.



      9.   Maintenance.  Applicant is required to maintain all
signs in an “as approved” condition.  Any necessary repairs to damaged
signs shall be immediately remedied by the applicant.  The city shall
reserve the right to immediately remove any sign it deems a public health,
safety, or welfare violation.



      10.   Final safety determinations.  The Development Services
Director shall maintain final determination authority on final proposed
design and placement of any sign within the right-of-way to fulfill the
city’s goals and policies for vehicular and pedestrian safety.



      11.   Prohibitions. The standards listed above shall
specifically serve to prohibit all other forms, locations, and installations
of signs within city right-of-way areas (i.e. signs within medians, taped
signs, stapled signs, and human/animal “sign dancers”).



(‘61 Code, § 20.6)  (Ord. 42, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1091, passed 3-21-06;
Am. Ord. 1135, passed 3-16-10)



§ 12.04.040  OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE AND ANNOYING PERSONS ON STREETS, ETC.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, stand or sit in or upon
any public highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk so as to in any manner
hinder or obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles
passing or attempting to pass along the same, or so as to in any manner annoy
or molest persons passing along the same.



('61 Code, § 20.7)  (Ord. 156, passed - - )



§ 12.04.050  DEPOSITING PETROLEUM PRODUCTS ON PAVED STREETS.



   No person shall pour, drip or allow to drip, kerosene, gasoline, crude
oil or distillate upon any asphalt, macadamized or paved street or alley in
the city.



('61 Code, § 20.8)  (Ord. 16, passed - - )



§ 12.04.060  LIMITATION ON LOCATION OF SIGNBOARDS, ELECTRIC SIGNS.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, to erect, extend, place or
maintain any signboard, signpost, advertisement sign or other similar device,
awnings, gasoline filling pumps and electric signs under certain conditions,
excepted, over, along or upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or public
places within the city, or upon property immediately fronting any of the
streets, alleys or public places of the city so that the same shall project
over eighteen (18) inches or be less than seven (7) feet above the sidewalk
grade established on or along the streets, alleys or public places; provided,
however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to signs marking
the streets of the city and street warning and direction signs placed by the
city, or signs placed under the direction of the Street Superintendent,
giving direction of the different streets and roads running into or through
the city.



('61 Code, § 20.10)



   B.   Electric signs or devices of like character may be used so that
the same shall at all times be and remain, including attachments and supports
to the building, not less than seven (7) feet above the top of the sidewalk
of established grade, and so that the same shall not, during day light,
project more than 18 inches beyond the property line, and shall at all times
during daylight be drawn or swung close to the building so that the same does
not project more than eighteen (18) inches beyond the property line.



('61 Code, § 20.11)  (Ord. 42, passed - - )



§ 12.04.070  LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No gasoline pumps or filling devices shall be established or located on
the sidewalks, streets, alleys or any public places within the city without
application to do so having been first made to the City Council, and permit
granted to so install such filling devices or pumps.



('61 Code, § 20.12)  (Ord. 42, passed - - )



§ 12.04.080  LIMITATIONS ON LOCATION AND USE OF AWNINGS.



   Awnings may be erected and maintained over windows in front of business
houses along the public streets of the city, and the same and all attachments
or devices used in attaching the same to the building or raising or lowering
the same, must be at all times not less than seven (7) feet above the top of
the sidewalk or the grade established therefor; and nothing in this section
shall be interpreted to prohibit the painting and printing on such awnings,
signs stating only the character of business done by the business house,
together with the name of the person doing business therein; and no other
advertising matter shall be permitted thereon.



('61 Code, § 20.13)  (Ord. 42, passed - - )



CHAPTER 12.08:  CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   12.08.010   Curbs, gutters and sidewalks to conform to certain
specifications



   12.08.020   Repair and replacement of curbs and sidewalks affected
by abandoned or discontinued private driveways



§ 12.08.010  CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS TO CONFORM TO CERTAIN
SPECIFICATIONS.



   It is hereby provided that all curbs, gutters and sidewalks hereafter
constructed within the city shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with the specifications adopted by the Council, copies of which
specifications are on file in the office of the City Engineer.



('61 Code, § 20.22)  (Ord. 202, passed - - )



§ 12.08.020  REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF CURBS AND SIDEWALKS AFFECTED BY
ABANDONED OR DISCONTINUED PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS.



   When the City Council determines either that driveways through curbs
and over sidewalks have been abandoned, or that it is for the best interests
of the city that their use be discontinued by the adjoining property owner,
the city will give fifteen (15) days written notice either to the occupant of
the property, or to the owner of the property as shown by the last equalized
assessment roll, that the owner of the abutting property shall at the owner's
expense, replace such curb and sidewalks under city plans and specifications,
and that the owner of the property shall within fifteen (15) days from date
of notice elect in writing filed with the City Clerk to either improve the
property under city specifications at the owner's expense, and if the owner
so elects shall make the improvement within thirty (30) days thereafter, or
if the owner does not so elect to improve the property at the owner's
expense, the city shall immediately improve the property by having curb and
sidewalks repaired or their installation made, and that upon completion of
such repair or installation, notice of the costs thereof shall be mailed to
the property owner with demand for payment, and the property owner shall have
thirty (30) days in which to make payment from the date of mailing of the
demand. If payment is not made within that time, the amount thereof shall
become a charge and lien upon the property and added to the next year's
assessment roll and shall be payable with the following year's taxes against
the property.



('61 Code, § 20.23)  (Ord. 256, passed - - )



CHAPTER 12.12:  EXCAVATIONS



Section



   12.12.010   Permit required



   12.12.020   Bond



   12.12.030   Insurance required



§ 12.12.010  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or undertake the
building or laying or construction of any sewer, pipe line, curb, sidewalk,
crossing, intersection or any construction that makes necessary the repair of
any street, alley or public place in the city, or the paving or repaving, or
repairing of any street, land, avenue, crossing or intersection upon or
within or under any of the streets, avenues, crossings or intersections
within the city, which are now or may hereafter be dedicated to the use of
the city, unless such person shall first have obtained a permit so to do,
from the Superintendent of the Streets.



('61 Code, § 20.24)  (Ord. 87, passed - - )



§ 12.12.020  BOND.



   A.   Before any person shall be entitled to apply for and obtain, or
have issued to him or her, a permit for any of the purposes set forth in the
preceding section it shall be the duty of such person to deposit with the
City Engineer cash or a bond in amounts to be fixed by the Council, and
payable to the city with good and sufficient sureties.



('61 Code, § 20.25)



   B.   The bond required by paragraph A. above shall be conditioned
that the principal or the sureties will be bound as follows:



      1.   That such person will in all respects conform to the
specifications and requirements of this code and all ordinances of the city,
now in effect, or that may hereafter be adopted by the city, regulating or
pertaining to the kind, quality, proportions and manner of laying, building,
constructing or repairing the streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, crossings
or intersections in the city.



      2.   That such person shall place, or cause to be placed,
sufficient safeguards about the work being constructed as to warn and protect
the traveling public from injury by reason of any excavation, embankment or
obstruction that may be placed or left about the work being, or having been
constructed, and that such person will indemnify the city, or its employees,
or officers against any expense incurred in defense of any damage suit or
judgment resulting directly or indirectly from failure to protect such
excavation, embankment or obstruction, by reason of failure to comply with
the provisions of this chapter.



      3.   That such person after such permit has been granted, had
or obtained, as provided in this chapter, will at the order of the
Superintendent of Streets, and within ten (10) days after such work so
undertaken shall have been completed, fill in any excavation, remove any
obstructions and embankments and put such street, avenue, alley, sidewalk,
crossing or intersection into passable condition, and immediately thereafter
and as soon as possible repair and put such street, alley or public place as
nearly as possible in as good a condition as it was before such excavation or
construction was commenced; and that if such repair, reconstruction, filling
in or removing of such embankment or obstruction is not completed within such
time and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets, the
Superintendent of Streets may perform such work as may be necessary to comply
with the requirements herein specified, and charge the same to the deposit
made, or against the bond filed, and if not promptly paid by the principal or
sureties, the city shall institute suit to collect.



      4.   That such person will pay or cause to be paid to the city
such sum as the Council may prescribe from time to time to, cover the payment
to an inspector, in case the city shall deem it advisable to employ an
inspector to supervise such work.



      5.   That such bond shall be  in an amount fixed by the City
Council, according to the character and value of the work to be performed,
and the risk assumed by the city.



('61 Code, § 20.26)  (Ord. 87, passed - - )



§ 12.12.030  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Each person, as a condition precedent to obtaining a permit under this
chapter, shall provide for insurance pertaining to liability and property
damage in such amounts and subject to such requirements as the City Council
may determine to impose by resolution.



CHAPTER 12.16:  NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS



Section



   12.16.010   Block defined



   12.16.020   Generally



   12.16.030   Numbering of entrances to buildings generally



   12.16.040   Allotment of numbers to each block



   12.16.050   Odd and even numbers



   12.16.060   Superintendent of Streets to designate numbers; time for
compliance with chapter



   12.16.070   Alternative addressing schemes



§ 12.16.010  BLOCK DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK.  All that space between two (2) cross streets or alleys.



('61 Code, § 20.27)  (Ord. 17, passed - - )



§ 12.16.020  GENERALLY.



   The numbering of the buildings and premises of the city shall commence
with the number one hundred (100), north and south from Ash Street and east
and west from Brea Boulevard.



('61 Code, § 20.28)  (Ord. 17, passed - - )



§ 12.16.030  NUMBERING OF ENTRANCES TO BUILDINGS GENERALLY.



   All numbers shall be not less than three (3) inches in height and of
such material and color and so placed that they may be read and distinguished
from the sidewalk in front of the building on which used.



('61 Code, § 20.29)  (Ord. 17, passed - - )



§ 12.16.040  ALLOTMENT OF NUMBERS TO EACH BLOCK.



   Each block shall be entitled to one hundred (100) numbers. One (1)
number may be allowed for each twenty-five (25) feet frontage on any street
or highway, and whenever in the space allowed to the number there shall be a
hallway or tenement fronting on the street, such hallway or tenement shall be
given an additional half (½) number.



('61 Code, § 20.30)  (Ord. 17, passed - - )



§ 12.16.050  ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS.



   The building numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of streets
shall be consecutive odd numbers, and the numbers on the southerly and
easterly sides shall be consecutive even numbers.



('61 Code, § 20.31)  (Ord. 17, passed - - )



§ 12.16.060  SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS TO DESIGNATE NUMBERS; TIME FOR
COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.



   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Streets to assign to the
owner, agent or occupant of any building in the city, the proper number, and
all buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter within ninety (90) days from and after its passage. All buildings
hereafter erected shall be numbered within thirty (30) days from the time of
their completion.



('61 Code, § 20.32)  (Ord. 17, passed - - )



§ 12.16.070  ALTERNATIVE ADDRESSING SCHEMES.




   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, any developer
or owner of a multi-unit building complex in any commercial or industrial
zone within the city meeting the requirements of this section may request
exemption from the provisions of this chapter, provided a written application
therefor is filed with the Superintendent of Streets. In the case of a
building complex not yet constructed, such application shall be filed no less
than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the issuance of the first
certificate of occupancy for any unit or suite of said complex. 





   (B)   Such application shall identify all affected parcels by
assessor's numbers and shall be accompanied by a site plan or other graphic
document satisfactory to the Superintendent depicting all units in the
complex. All units shall be subject to the alternative addressing scheme. The
application shall also include an explanation by the applicant as to why the
exemption is being requested. At the time of filing, the applicant shall pay
a non-refundable administrative fee in such amount as may be established by
resolution of the City Council which shall not exceed the city's actual costs
incurred in processing the application.





   (C)   Approval criteria.  No alternative addressing scheme
application shall be approved unless it complies with the following standards
and criteria: 





      (1)   The project or development for which the addressing
scheme is being requested is at least ten acres in area; 





      (2)   The proposed addressing scheme will apply to all
buildings within the project or development;





      (3)   The parcel(s) for which the addressing scheme is applied
fronts a street which has no standard city addressing which would otherwise
affect addressing of such parcel(s);





      (4)   The proposed addressing scheme provides for odd numbers
on the west or north side of a street, and even numbers on the east or south
side of a street, as applicable;





      (5)   The proposed address numbers are in logical order and
increase as each address moves farther from the center of the city;





      (6)   All tenants and/or lessees of existing buildings and
units or suites within the development have given the applicant written
consent to the proposed addressing scheme and satisfactory evidence of such
consent is provided with the application; and





      (7)   The proposed addressing scheme provides for each
building within a project or development to have only one street number
assigned and each unit or suite of a building to have a unit or suite number
assigned.





   (D)   If all of the approval criteria set forth in division (C)
above, are found to be satisfied, the Superintendent shall further consider
the following factors in deciding whether or not to approve an application
for an alternative addressing scheme:





      (1)   The extent to which the proposed addressing scheme would
benefit the entire complex;





      (2)   Whether or not the proposed addressing scheme would
cause confusion to business invitees of the affected complex or any other
commercial or industrial building or complex;





      (3)   Whether or not United States mail and/or private package
deliveries would be adversely affected; In considering the factors set forth
in this paragraph, the Superintendent may require the applicant to obtain and
provide proof of consent by the United States Postal Service to the proposed
addressing scheme. The time within which the Superintendent's decision must
be rendered pursuant to this Section shall be tolled from the time such
consent is requested to the time proof thereof is received by the
Superintendent;





      (4)   Whether or not the proposed addressing scheme would
adversely affect the delivery of emergency police, fire or medical services;





      (5)   Whether or not the proposed addressing scheme would be
inconsistent with any condition of any subdivision map approval;





      (6)   Whether or not the proposed addressing scheme would
violate any local, state or federal rule or regulation; and





      (7)   Reasons provided by the applicant as to why such
exemption should be granted, including whether or not any particular harm or
damage may be caused to the applicant if not granted.





   (E)   The Superintendent shall render a written decision with
findings within 21 calendar days after a request deemed complete is filed.
The Superintendent's decision shall be final. Once denied, a new application
involving the same parcel(s) may not be filed in less than 12 months from the
date of such denial.




(Ord. 1018, passed 1-5-99)



CHAPTER 12.20:  STREET TREES



Section



   12.20.010   Supervision of Director of Maintenance Services



   12.20.020   Survey of work to be done



   12.20.030   Official street tree species list



   12.20.040   Master plan



   12.20.050   Street tree maintenance



   12.20.060   Street tree replacement plan



   12.20.070   Interference with street trees, etc.; overhanging limbs;
permission required



   12.20.080   Tree removal criteria



   12.20.090   Damaging city trees



   12.20.100   Dumping harmful substance on city trees



   12.20.110   Protection of utilities and public improvements



§ 12.20.010  SUPERVISION OF DIRECTOR OF MAINTENANCE SERVICES.



   The Director of Maintenance Services shall have exclusive authority to
inspect, maintain, plant, remove, prune, root prune, or otherwise alter
street trees.



('61 Code, § 20.60) (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.020  SURVEY OF WORK TO BE DONE.



   The Director of Maintenance Services shall cause surveys to be made
from time to time, to determine which trees are to be retained or removed in
order to conform to the tree planning and maintenance program.



('61 Code, § 20.61)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.030  OFFICIAL STREET TREE SPECIES LIST.



   The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt an official street tree
species list designating specific species of trees which may be planted on
any street. The Director of Maintenance Services shall periodically review
said list and recommend changes therein as may be necessary or advisable.



('61 Code, § 20.62)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.040  MASTER PLAN.



   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt a master plan of trees for
all streets within the city based on a study of local conditions and designed
to fit the special street and tree factors involved. Upon adoption of such
master plan, all street tree planting and removal shall be governed by the
requirements thereof.



('61 Code, § 20.63)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.050  STREET TREE MAINTENANCE.



   The property owner shall not permit any vine or other growth on a
street tree. The Maintenance Services Department will perform all other
maintenance of street trees as deemed necessary by the Director of
Maintenance Services.



('61 Code, § 20.64)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.060  STREET TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN.



   A.   Any street tree removed shall be replaced if a replacement is
deemed appropriate and if it is mutually agreed to by both the city and the
property owner. The replacement tree shall be selected in accordance with the
official tree species list and tree master plan.



   B.   In addition to replacing all removed street trees whenever
possible, it is the responsibility of the Director of Maintenance Services to
insure all vacant street tree locations are planted within the city. Such
vacancies are to be planted in accordance with the official tree species list
and tree master plan.



('61 Code, § 20.65)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.070  INTERFERENCE WITH STREET TREES, ETC.; OVERHANGING LIMBS;
PERMISSION REQUIRED.



   A.   No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall cut, trim,
prune, plant, remove, spray, injure or in any other manner interfere with any
street tree within the city without first having secured the written
permission of the Director of Maintenance Services. If the city is required
to remove a tree placed in violation of this section or replace a tree
damaged or removed in violation hereof, the responsible party will be billed
for the costs incurred by the city.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer to
permit the branches of any tree to hang over the sidewalk or to cut down,
girdle, destroy or remove any standing or growing tree or shrubbery or any
ornament or improvement in any public street, alley or sidewalk within the
city, without first obtaining written consent to do so from the Director of
Maintenance Services.



('61 Code, § 20.66)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.080  TREE REMOVAL CRITERIA.



   Parkway easement trees may be removed in the city when they meet the
removal criteria set forth below:



   A.   The tree is dead, seriously diseased, or dying.



   B.   Trees planted near or growing into sewer lines or water lines.



   C.   Trees growing into power lines which cannot reasonably be
trimmed.



   D.   Where surface roots are causing major disruption of the parkway
causing the maintenance of the parkway itself to be different.



   E.   Where trees have become too large for the width of the parkway,
causing major damage to the sidewalks or curbs and gutters, or where root
pruning will damage the tree or make it subject to falling over in heavy
winds.



   F.   Where trees are leaning to the point of being unstable in heavy
winds.



   G.   Trees which are blocking any traffic-control device and simple
trimming cannot remedy the visibility problem and may subject the city to
liability.



   H.   If tree size, location or type present a hazard to the general
public or cause a liability to the city.



('61 Code, § 20.67)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.090  DAMAGING CITY TREES.



   No person shall post or affix to any city tree any bill, poster,
placard, picture, announcement, notice, advertisement or sign, or cut, paint,
print or make any of the same upon such tree or affix or attach in any manner
any other thing whatsoever, including any guy wire or rope to any such tree
except for the purpose of protecting it or other purpose authorized by the
city.



('61 Code, § 20.68)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.100  DUMPING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE ON CITY TREES.



   No person shall dump, pour or spill any oil, salt, salt water or other
deleterious matter upon any city tree or city tree space, or maintain within
ten (10) feet of any such tree or tree space any receptacle from which such
matter leaks or drips.



('61 Code, § 20.69)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



§ 12.20.110  PROTECTION OF UTILITIES AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   A.   City trees shall not be planted within the following distances
of the following utilities and public improvements:



      1.   Sewer, gas or water lines - ten (10) feet.



      2.   Driveways - ten (10) feet.



      3.   Street lights - twenty (20) feet.



      4.   Power poles - ten (10) feet.



      5.   Intersections (curb radius area) - thirty (30) feet.



      6.   Fire hydrants - ten (10) feet.



   B.   The Director of Maintenance Services shall cause to be removed
any city tree or part thereof which is injurious, or appears likely to become
injurious to any utility or, other public improvement.



('61 Code, § 20.70)  (Ord. 943, passed - - )



CHAPTER 12.24:  REGULATION OF
NEWSPAPER RACKS



Section



   12.24.010   Intent and purpose



   12.24.020   Definitions



   12.24.030   Permit required



   12.24.040   Prohibited installations



   12.24.050   Placement and maintenance standards



   12.24.055   Regulations applicable to the Brea Downtown Newsrack
District



   12.24.060   Display of certain matter prohibited



   12.24.070   Display of harmful matter



   12.24.080   Violation — notice to owner



   12.24.090   Impounding of newsracks



   12.24.100   Return of impounded newsracks



   12.24.110   Sale or disposal after impoundment



   12.24.120   Hearing procedures on impoundment



   12.24.130   Appeals



   12.24.140   Restoration



§ 12.24.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   A.   The City Council of the city hereby finds that newsracks,
stands, containers and similar newspaper and vending devices have
proliferated and increased in areas of the city to the extent that in some
instances they constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare
by impeding pedestrian traffic and interfering with ingress and egress to and
from buildings, vehicles and public modes of transportation.



   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health,
safety, and welfare through the regulation of placement, appearance, number,
size, and servicing of newsracks on public rights-of-way so as to:



      1.   Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience.



      2.   Insure no unreasonable interference with the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any
residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by
persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles.



      3.   Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of
sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, and
access to locations used for public transportation services.



      4.   Reduce visual blight on the public rights-of-way, and
protect the aesthetics of store window displays, public landscaping and other
improvements.



      5.   Maintain and protect the value of surrounding properties.



      6.   Reduce exposure to the city to personal injury or
property damage claims and litigation.



      7.   Protect the right to distribute information protected by
the state and federal constitutions through the use of newsracks.



      8.   Avoid interference with the emergency activities of
public safety agencies.



   C.   It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way discriminate
against, regulate or interfere with the publication, circulation,
distribution, or dissemination of any newspapers or other written materials.



('61 Code, § 20A.1)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED LOCATION(S).   A location or locations approved by the
Director for newsracks in the Brea Downtown Newsrack District, each of which
shall not exceed ten feet (10') in length.



   BREA DOWNTOWN NEWSRACK DISTRICT.   That portion of the Brea Downtown
area that is described as follows:  Beginning at the northeast corner of
Assessors Parcel No. 296-331-39, east along the southern boundary of the
railroad right-of-way to the intersection of the extension of the center line
of Orange Avenue, south to the intersection with the extension of the south
property line of Assessors Parcel No. 319-242-01, west to the intersection
with the east boundary of the alley right-of-way, south to the intersection
of the north property line of Assessors Parcel No. 319-242-17, east to the
intersection of the extension of the property line and the center line of
Orange Avenue, south to the intersection of the center line and the extension
of the south property line of Assessors Parcel No. 319-242-17, west to the
intersection of the east boundary of the alley right-of-way, south to the
intersection of the south property line of Assessors Parcel No. 319-242-07,
east to the intersection with the center line of Orange Avenue, south to the
intersection with the extension of the south property line of Assessors
Parcel No. 296-291-30, west to the intersection with the east boundary of the
alley right-of-way, south to the intersection with the south boundary of the
right-of-way of Imperial Highway, west to the intersection with the extension
of the east property line of Assessors Parcel No. 296-142-06, north to the
intersection with the north property line of Assessors Parcel No. 296-361-25,
east to the intersection of the west boundary of the Walnut Street
right-of-way, north to the intersection of the north boundary of the Ash
Street right-of-way, east to the intersection with the west boundary of the
Brea Boulevard right-of-way, and north to the starting point at the northeast
corner of Assessors Parcel No.296-331-39.  A map depicting the foregoing
boundaries of the Brea Downtown Newsrack District is available for public
inspection in the office of the City Clerk during normal business hours of
the city.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Development Services of the city, or his or
her designee.



   EXPLICIT SEXUAL ACTS.  Depictions of sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism,
masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity,
masturbation, or lewd exhibition of genitals, whether any of the above
conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members
of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other acts of
sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person's genitals, pubic
region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.



   HIGH CIRCULATION PAPER. Any newspaper, news periodical or other news
publication that:



      1.   Is published on five (5) or more calendar days per week;
and



      2.   Has a national circulation in excess of eight hundred
thousand (800,000).



   NATIONAL CIRCULATION.  The total circulation of a newspaper, news
periodical or news publication as reflected in an independently audited
circulation report chosen by the Director.



   NEWSRACK.  Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage
unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale
or distribution of any publication.



   OWNER.  Any person or company whose name appears as an owner on a
newsrack as required by § 12.24.050.H. of this chapter, for which a permit
is sought or obtained.



   PARKWAY.  The area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street,
and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and
the property line adjacent thereto. PARKWAYS shall also include any area
within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any place of any nature which is dedicated to
use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, and includes, but is
not limited to, a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, public easement, crossing,
intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue,
boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, bridge, thoroughfare, a park, square and
any other similar public way.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.



   SIDEWALK.  Any surface provided for the use of pedestrians.



   STANDARD CIRCULATION PAPER.  Any newspaper, news periodical or other
news publication that is not a high circulation paper.



   STREET.  All that area dedicated to public use for public street
purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys
and sidewalks.



('61 Code, § 20A.2)  (Ord. 944, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-20-04)



§ 12.24.030  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A.   A newsrack permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall
be required prior to the installation, placement or maintenance of any
newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public
right-of-way. Each permit shall be valid for one (1) year unless sooner
terminated as provided herein, and may be renewed annually. Each permit shall
designate the number and location or locations of newsracks for which the
permit has been issued.



   B.   A written application for a newsrack permit shall be filed with
the Director and shall contain the following:



      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant
and owner of the newsrack(s).



      2.   The name, address and telephone number of a
representative or other responsible person whom the city may notify or
contact at any time concerning the applicants newsrack(s).



      3.   The number of newsracks at the street address of each
proposed location as shown on a scaled drawing.



      4.   A diagram of the location or locations proposed for the
installation of the newsrack(s).



      5.   Names of newspapers or other written material to be
contained in each newsrack.



      6.   Type or brand of newsrack, including a photograph or
scaled drawing of the newsrack and mount.



      7.   A written statement satisfactory to the City Attorney
whereby the owner agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its
officers, officials and employees, from any loss or liability or damage,
including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury, and for property
damage sustained by any person, as a result of the installation, use or
maintenance of a newsrack or newsracks within the city.



   C.   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in
an amount set by resolution of the City Council, which shall not exceed the
actual cost of investigating the facts contained in the application and
processing of the application.



   D.   Upon a finding that the applicant is in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Director shall issue a newsrack permit
applicable to the location or locations approved by the traffic engineer. If
a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the
specific cause of such denial by the Director and of the right to appeal in
accordance with § 12.24.130.



   E.   A newsrack permit shall not be required prior to the
installation, placement or maintenance of a newsrack which does not rest in
whole or in part in or upon a public right-of-way. Such newsrack may not,
however, be placed within any required setback area, or where otherwise
prohibited by the zoning ordinance of the city. For purposes of application
of the zoning ordinance to newsracks, a newsrack shall be deemed to be a
structure.



('61 Code, § 20A.3)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.040  PROHIBITED INSTALLATIONS.



   A.   No person shall install, use or maintain, or cause to be
installed, used or maintained, any newsrack which projects onto, into or over
any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in
part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.



   B.   No person shall install, use or maintain, or cause to be
installed, used or maintained, any newsrack which in whole or in part rests
upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use
or maintenance:



      1.   Would likely endanger the safety of persons or property;



      2.   Is on a site or location used for public utility
purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental purpose;



      3.   Would likely and unreasonably interfere with or impede
the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including access to any legally
parked or stopped vehicle;



      4.   Would likely and unreasonably interfere with or impede
ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of
poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects
permitted at or near the location; or



      5.   Would interfere with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the
use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.



('61 Code, § 20A.4)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.050  PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any
public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:



   A.   No newsrack shall exceed forty (40) inches in height, thirty
(30) inches in width or twenty-four (24) inches in thickness.



   B.   Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the
wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less
than 18 inches nor more than twenty-four (24) inches from the edge of the
curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed
parallel to the wall and not less than six (6) inches nor more than eighteen
(18) inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on a
sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another newsrack.



   C.   No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to
any property without the express written permission of the owner of such
property.



   D.   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 12.24.040, no newsrack
shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:



      1.   Within ten (10) feet of any marked mid-block crosswalk;



      2.   Within thirty (30) feet of any street or alley curb
return;



      3.   Within eight (8) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box,
curb bordering any fire access lane, police call box or other emergency
facility;



      4.   Within ten (10) feet of any driveway;



      5.   Within five (5) feet ahead of or twenty-five (25) feet to
the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;



      6.   Within six (6) feet of any bus bench or bus shelter;



      7.   At any location whereby the clear space for the
passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four (4) feet; or



      8.   Within three (3) feet of any area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs or trees, or within three (3) feet of any display window of
any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede
or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes.



   E.   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper or printed material sold therefrom.



   F.   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition
and in good repair at all times.



   G.   Each newsrack shall be constructed and located in compliance
with this chapter and in such manner as to comply with all state and federal
regulations concerning access by disabled persons.



   H.   Each newsrack shall have affixed thereto in a place where such
information may be easily seen, the correct name, address and telephone
number of the owner thereof. Upon acceptance of a newsrack permit, each
permittee shall be deemed to have consented to receive any notices given
pursuant to this chapter, by mail, at the address affixed to such permitted
newsrack(s).



   I.   No newsrack permit shall be transferable without ten (10)
working days' prior notification to the city and continued compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 20A.5)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.055  REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO THE BREA DOWNTOWN NEWSRACK DISTRICT.



   A.   This section shall govern the outdoor placement of newsracks
within the Brea Downtown Newsrack District.  No newsrack may be placed inthe
Brea Downtown Newsrack District except by permit, in an approved location,
and in compliance with all provisions of this chapter.  Except when in
direct conflict with this section, in which case the provisions of this
section shall control, all other provisions of this chapter also shall apply
to newsracks within the Brea Downtown Newsrack District.



   B.   Approved locations of newsracks shall be determined by the
Director.  Approved locations for newsracks shall be designated as primary,
for immediate use, and secondary for future use, if needed.  A maximum of
five (5) newsrack spaces shall be provided for at an approved location and
one (1) newsrack containing only the publication for which the permit
applies, shall be installed per space.  The approved locations of the
newsracks shall be determined prior to the acceptance of newsrack permit
applications for approved locations within the Brea Downtown Newsrack
District.  A separate newsrack permit is required for each newsrack.  Each
newsrack permittee shall install each permitted newsrack in strict compliance
with this chapter and guidelines provided by the Director, and the
installation shall be subject to inspection prior to use. 



   C.   Newsrack spaces within the Brea Downtown Newsrack District
shall be assigned to newsrack permit applicants by lottery, provided any such
applicant satisfies all other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
Failure to win a lottery for a newsrack space shall be considered adequate
grounds for denial of a newsrack permit. For each approved location, the
lottery for four (4) of the newsrack spaces shall be limited to high
circulation papers and the lottery for the final newsrack space shall be
limited to standard circulation papers.  Notwithstanding the preceding, if
only one (1) high circulation paper applies for a newsrack space at an
approved location, then the lottery for the final newsrack spaces shall be
limited to standard circulation papers.  No permit applicant shall be
eligible for more than one (1) newsrack permit at any single approved
location unless there are less qualified permit applicants than available
spaces.  The Director shall conduct the lottery by placing into a container
the names of all eligible permit applicants and drawing names until the
number of available spaces at an approved location reaches zero (0).  The
Director shall give permit applicants advance written notice of the time and
place of the lottery, and shall allow members of the public to witness the
lottery.  Applications for a newsrack permit shall be valid for six (6)
months, provided no required information has changed.



   D.   Subject to the provisions of paragraph E., each newsrack permit
shall have a maximum term of three (3) calendar years (January 1 through
December 31).  Regardless of when issued, each permit shall expire on
December 31 of the third year.  At the expiration of each term, the Director
shall re-allocate the permits by conducting an area-wide re-allocation
lottery if a written re-allocation request has been submitted in the period
between forty-five (45) days and thirty-five (35) days prior to the term
expiration by either an existing permittee or a new permit applicant.  If no
such request is filed within this period, then the Director may renew the
permits without conducting an area-wide re-allocation lottery.  In such
event, existing permittees may file applications for renewal of their
permits, along with a nonrefundable renewal application fee, commencing
thirty (30) days prior to the term expiration.  The Director shall renew the
permit, within ten (10) city business days of accepting the application, if
the subject newsrack remains in compliance with this chapter.



   E.   If a newsrack is abandoned during the permit term, then the
newsrack permit for that newsrack space shall be re-allocated for the
unexpired portion of the three (3)-year term pursuant to the lottery process
of paragraph C.  If an area-wide re-allocation lottery is not conducted at
the term expiration and a newsrack permit is not renewed by the existing
permittee, then that permit shall be re-allocated pursuant to the lottery
process of paragraph C.  The permittee who abandoned the newsrack or who
failed to renew the newsrack permit shall not be eligible to participate in
the re-allocation lottery.  A permittee may not substitute a different
publication for a publication for which the permit was obtained.



   F.   Any newsrack owner denied a newsrack permit for an approved
location may appeal suchdenial in accordance with the procedures set forth in
paragraphs A. through C.2. of § 12.24.130 provided, however, that such
denial may not be appealed if based upon results of the lottery process set
forth in this section.



   G.   Newsracks within the Brea Downtown Newsrack District shall
strictly conform to the size specifications set forth in § 12.24.050.A., and
the uniform design and color specifications as established by the Director. 
Newsracks not complying with those physical specifications are prohibited and
not allowed in the Brea Downtown Newsrack District.



   H.   Approved locations for newsracks, and/or any or all newsrack
spaces therein, may be temporarily or permanently relocated upon five (5)
city business days' prior written notice to affected newsrack owners, when
deemed necessary for any public purpose as determined by the Director.



   I.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no
advertising material, other than the permitted news publication itself when
properly located within a newsrack, may be placed within or upon any newsrack.



   J.   The Director may promulgate policies or procedures as necessary
or convenient for the administration of this section.



(Ord. 1071, passed 7-20-04)



§ 12.24.060  DISPLAY OF CERTAIN MATTER PROHIBITED.



   Publications offered for sale from newsracks placed or maintained on or
projecting into or over a public right-of-way shall not be displayed or
exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from any public
right-of-way any of the following:



   A.   Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual
organs or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or
effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.



   B.   Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perinea,
anuses or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has
as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.



   C.   Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts
where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual
arousal, gratification or affront.



('61 Code, § 20A.6)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.070  DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATTER.



   A.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms “harmful
matter,” “matter,” “person,” “knowingly,” “exhibit,” and
“minor” shall have the meanings specified in Cal. Penal Code § 313 or
any successor provisions thereto. For the purposes of this section, the term
“blinder rack” shall mean opaque material placed in front of, or inside,
the newsrack and which prevents exposure to public view.



   B.   Prohibition. No person shall knowingly exhibit, display, or
cause to be exhibited or displayed, harmful matter in any newsrack located in
whole or in part in or on a public right of way or other public place from
which minors are not excluded, unless blinder racks have been installed so
that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to public view.



('61 Code, § 20A.7)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.080  VIOLATION — NOTICE TO OWNER.



   Whenever any newsrack is found to be in violation of this chapter, the
Director shall cause a tag to be attached to such newsrack specifying the
date and nature of the violation. Within three (3) working days thereafter, a
written notice of such violation shall be sent by first class mail by the
Director to the owner whose name appears on the newsrack as required in §
12.24.050.H., specifying the nature of the violation and that the newsrack
shall be impounded if corrections are not made. The owner shall, within ten
(10) working days from the date on which the notice of violation was mailed,
either cause the violation to be corrected or request a hearing pursuant to
§ 12.24.120.



('61 Code, § 20A.8)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.090  IMPOUNDING OF NEWSRACKS.



   A.   If an owner fails to timely correct the violation(s) specified
in the written notice, and fails to request a hearing within the time
provided herein, the Director may impound such newsrack or newsracks.



   B.   In the event a newsrack does not have the owner's name, address
and telephone number affixed thereto as required by this chapter, then such
newsrack may be impounded if, within ten (10) working days of the date the
violation tag was affixed, the owner has not requested a hearing as provided
in § 12.24.120, in which case the newsrack shall be deemed to be abandoned.



   C.   Where the installation, use or maintenance of a newsrack
creates an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, it may
be impounded, provided written notice is thereafter provided to the owner by
first class mail pursuant to paragraph E. below.



   D.   When such newsrack has been abandoned, it may be impounded. For
purposes of this section, a newsrack shall be deemed abandoned when it has
remained empty for thirty (30) consecutive days or longer, or no new
publication has been placed in the newsrack for forty-five (45) days of
longer. Upon abandonment, a newsrack may be impounded without prior notice,
provided post impoundment notice is given to the owner, if the owner can be
identified, pursuant to paragraph E. below.



('61 Code, § 20A.9)



   E.   Whenever any newsrack is impounded, the Director shall provide
written notice by first class mail to the owner within three (3) working days
of such impoundment and of the rights of the owner to recover such impounded
newsrack(s).



('61 Code, § 20A.10)



(Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.100  RETURN OF IMPOUNDED NEWSRACKS.



   A.   Any newsrack, together with its contents, which has been
impounded shall be returned to the owner:



      1.   If a hearing is, not timely requested, upon receipt of an
impound fee within thirty (30) days of impoundment, the amount of which has
been set by resolution of the City Council;



      2.   Upon a determination after hearing by the Director that
the newsrack should not have been impounded and should be returned to the
owner; or



      3.   Upon a decision by the City Council on appeal that the
newsrack should not have been impounded.



   B.   In the event a hearing has not been requested within the time
permitted, an impound fee, the amount of which has been set by resolution of
the City Council, shall be imposed upon the owner.



('61 Code, § 20A.11)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.110  SALE OR DISPOSAL AFTER IMPOUNDMENT.



   The Director may sell or otherwise dispose of any newsrack, together
with its contents, and retain the proceeds, on behalf of the city, from any
such or other disposition and any moneys contained in the newsrack at the
time of its impoundment, provided that either:



   A.   Thirty (30) days have elapsed since impoundment occurred, no
hearing has been required within, the time permitted, and the owner has
failed to pay all impound fees assessed; or



   B.   A hearing and an appeal, if filed, have resulted in a final
determination that the newsrack was properly impounded and fees assessed have
not been received within thirty (30) days from the date of said final
determination.



('61 Code, § 20A.12)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.120  HEARING PROCEDURES ON IMPOUNDMENT.



   A.   Any newsrack owner may file a written request with the Director
of a hearing within the time specified in § 12.24.080, for the purpose of
demonstrating that a newsrack should not be impounded, was improperly
impounded, or that a violation as specified in the notice of violation has
not in fact occurred.



   B.   Within five (5) working days from the date on which the request
for hearing is received, the Director shall set a hearing date and shall
notify the owner by first class mail of the date, time and place of such
hearing. The hearing shall occur within ten (10) working days of the date of
mailing the notice.



   C.   Conduct of hearing. At the time set for the hearing or at the
date to which the hearing is continued, the Director shall receive all
evidence relevant to the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the specified
violation(s), the compliance or non-compliance with any or all of the
provisions of this chapter, and any other relevant information. The hearing
need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and
witnesses.



   D.   Within ten (10) working days after the conclusion of the
hearing, the Director shall find and determine, from the facts adduced at the
hearing, whether the newsrack is in violation of this chapter. The decision
of the Director shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a
determination of the issues presented and the amount of the impound fee, if
any, to be imposed. Thereafter, the director may order the owner to remove
such newsrack, if deter-mined to be in violation of this chapter, within ten
(10) working days of the mailing date of the decision. If a notice of appeal
is not timely filed during said ten (10) day period, the Director may
thereafter order the newsrack to be impounded without further notice to the
owner.



   E.   The Director shall send to the owner, by first class mail, a
copy of the decision and order.



('61 Code, § 20A.13)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.130  APPEALS.



   A.   Any newsrack owner may, within ten (10) working days of the
mailing date of the copy of the Director's decision and order, appeal such
decision to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal. If no hearing was
timely requested and a newsrack was impounded, then the owner may appeal such
impoundment provided a written request for appeal is received by the Director
within ten (10) working days of such impoundment.



   B.   An appeal shall set forth in writing specifically wherein the
appellant believes there was error or abuse of discretion on the part of the
Director. The Director shall, within ten (10) working days, transmit the
appeal, together with a copy of his or her file, decision and order, to the
Clerk of the City Council, who shall set the matter for hearing.



   C.   The City Council shall, upon receipt of the material specified
in the preceding paragraph from the Director, and after a hearing:



      1.   Approve the decision and order of the Director;



      2.   Reverse or modify the decision and order, and refer the
matter back to the director; or



      3.   Where no hearing before the director was timely
requested, sustain the impoundment or impose fees or order the newsrack
returned with or without fees being imposed.



('61 Code, § 20A.14)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



§ 12.24.140  RESTORATION.



   A.   In the event an owner removes any news-rack, or has a newsrack
removed by the Director following hearing and/or appeal, if any, it shall be
such owner's responsibility to restore the site of the newsrack to an
undamaged condition. Undamaged condition shall mean a condition which is
smooth, free of holes, fasteners, and physical devices of any nature, such
that another newsrack may be located on that specific site without further
restoration.



   B.   In the event such newsrack permittee fails to restore the site
as required herein, the city shall be authorized, at its discretion, to
restore the site following the expiration of five (5) working days' prior
written notice to the owner stating his or her obligation to perform
restoration. The cost of such restoration performed by the city shall be
recoverable from the permittee as a debt in a contract action.



('61 Code, § 20A.15)  (Ord. 944, passed - - )



CHAPTER 12.28:  REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   12.28.010   Purpose



   12.28.020   Definitions



   12.28.030   Installation requirements for small wireless facilities



   12.28.040   Permit required



   12.28.050   Fees



   12.28.060   Conflicting code provisions superseded



§ 12.28.010  PURPOSE.



   The City Council of the City of Brea expressly finds that the
installation of small wireless facilities in city rights-of-way requires city
regulation, consistent with State and federal law as it currently exists, in
order to more fully protect the public health and safety, preserve and
protect the city's aesthetic interests, protect city infrastructure and other
public facilities, and to provide for the orderly deployment of small
wireless facilities in order to ensure the continued quality of
telecommunication services to the public.



   The City Council further finds that regulations established herein are
not intended to, nor shall they be interpreted or applied to:



   A.   Prohibit or effectively prohibit any personal wireless service
provider's ability to provide personal wireless services;



   B.   Prohibit or effectively prohibit any personal wireless service
provider's ability to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications
service, subject to any competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory rules or
regulations;



   C.   Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services;



   D.   Deny any request for authorization to place, construct or
modify personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities
comply with the Federal Communication Commission's regulations concerning
such emissions;



   E.   Prohibit any collocation or modification that the city may not
deny under Federal or State law;



   F.   Impose any unfair, unreasonable, discriminatory or arbitrary
fees that exceed the reasonable cost to provide the services for which the
fee is charged; or



   G.   Otherwise authorize the city to act in conflict with any
applicable Federal or State law or regulation.



(Ord. 1208, passed 1-15-19)



§ 12.28.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW. Ministerial review of an application by the city
relating to the review and issuance of a permit, including review by the City
Engineer to determine whether the issuance of a permit is in conformity with
the applicable provisions of this chapter.



   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.  This definition does not apply to broadcast antennas, antennas
designed for amateur radio use, or satellite dishes for residential or
household purposes.



   CONSTRUCTION CODES. Means California Building, Fire, Electrical,
Plumbing, and/or Mechanical Codes adopted by the city.



   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application under this chapter.



   APPLICATION. A written request, on a form provided by the city, for a
SWF permit.



   CITY.  The City of Brea.



   COLLOCATE. To install or mount a SWF in the PROW on infrastructure, or
an existing support structure, an existing tower, utility-owned structure, or
on an existing pole to which another SWF is attached at the time of the
application.  COLLOCATION has a corresponding meaning.



   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Means, collectively, the equipment at a fixed
location or locations within the PROW that enables communications services,
including:  (i) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial, fiber-optic or other
cabling, power supply (including backup battery), and comparable equipment,
regardless of technological configuration; and (ii) all other equipment
associated with any of the foregoing.  A COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY does not
include the pole, tower or support structure to which the equipment is
attached.



   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Telecommunications service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 153(53), including wireless broadband internet service.



   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER or PROVIDER. A provider of
communications services.



   DISCRETIONARY REVIEW. Review of an application by the city relating to
the review and issuance of a permit that is other than an administrative
review.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



   INFRASTRUCTURE. Any city-owned or operated facility, equipment, pole,
pipe, cabinet, or other structure located in the PROW.



   LAWS. Collectively, any and all Federal, State, or local laws,
statutes, common law, codes, construction codes, rules, regulations, orders,
and/or ordinances.



   MASTER AGREEMENT.  An agreement between the city and a permittee
authorizing the installation and maintenance of one (1) or more SWFs.



   PERMIT. A written authorization (in electronic or hard copy format) to
install a SWF at a specified location(s) in the PROW.  A permit may also
consist of a master agreement between the applicant and city to install and
maintain one (1) or more SWFs in the PROW.



   PERMITTEE. An applicant that has received a permit under this chapter.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including a
governmental entity.



   POLE. A legally constructed city or utility owned pole, such as a
utility, lighting, traffic, or similar pole made of wood, concrete, metal or
other material, located or to be located within the PROW.  A POLE does not
include a tower or support structure and does not include a pole or structure
that supports electric transmission lines.



   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY or PROW. The area on, below, or above property
that has been designated for use as, or is used for, a city-owned or
controlled roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley or similar purpose. The
term does not include a federal interstate highway or other areas that are
not within the legal jurisdiction, ownership or control of the city.



   REPLACE or REPLACEMENT. In connection with an existing pole, support
structure or tower, to replace (or the replacement of) same with a new
structure, substantially similar in design, size and scale to the existing
structure and in conformance with this chapter and any other applicable city
code provisions, in order to address limitations of the existing structure to
structurally support collocation of a communications facility.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY or SWF. A wireless facility that meets the
following qualifications:  (i) each antenna could fit within an enclosure of
no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume;  (ii) all other wireless
equipment associated with the antenna, including the provider's preexisting
equipment, is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in
volume; and (iii) the facility is the type of facility otherwise described in
47 C.F.R. § 1.1312(e)(2).



   STATE. The State of California.



   SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A structure in the PROW other than a pole or a tower
to which a wireless facility is attached at the time of the application.



   TOWER. Any structure in the PROW built for the sole or primary purpose
of supporting a wireless facility.  A tower does not include a pole or a
support structure.



   WIRELESS FACILITY. The equipment at a fixed location or locations in
the PROW that enables wireless services.  The term does not include:  (i)
the support structure, tower or pole on, under, or within which the equipment
is located or collocated; or (ii) coaxial, fiber-optic or other cabling that
is between communications facilities or poles or that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna.  A
SWF is one type of wireless facility.



   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any wireless services using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public.



   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.



(Ord. 1208, passed 1-15-19)



§ 12.28.030  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.



   A.   Site selection.



      1.   The preferred location for SWF shall be on existing
infrastructure such as utility poles or street lights. The infrastructure
selected should be located at alleys, streets and/or near property line
prolongations. If the SWF is not able to be placed on existing
infrastructure, the applicant shall provide a map of existing infrastructure
in the service area and describe why each such site was not feasible.



      2.   When existing infrastructure sites have been exhausted or
there is no available infrastructure in the proposed location, the city will
consider entering into a master agreement with an applicant on mutually
agreeable terms, but which will require that the applicant dedicate new
infrastructure such as a street light, on which the SWF can be installed. 
The installation shall be subject to any of the size, attachment, and other
physical restrictions set forth in divisions B.1. and 2., below, as
determined necessary by the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall approve
all plans and specifications, including the means of providing electrical
power.



   B.   Existing infrastructure requirements.



      1.   Street light.



         a.   The antenna shall be the smallest possible volume
but in no case greater than three (3) cubic feet. The antenna must be
enclosed in an RF transparent screen unless a whip style antenna is used. 
Antenna installations will be top of pole mount and shall not increase the
height by more than ten percent (10%) or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater,
over other street lights in the immediate vicinity.  The antenna shall be as
small as technically possible, and RF screen and/or color treatment shall be
utilized if possible to camouflage the installation.



         b.   Equipment, other than antennas, shall be mounted as
prescribed by the City Engineer in one of the manners described herein:



            (1)   Equipment shall be mounted in a base shroud
of approved design to be retrofitted to an existing light standard.  The
base shroud shall be coated or painted with an approved color to match the
existing pole.



            (2)   Equipment shall be mounted directly to the
pole a minimum of eight (8) feet above the existing grade and be coated or
painted with an approved color to match the existing pole.



            (3)   Equipment shall be mounted to the pole in an
equipment box a minimum of eight (8) feet above the existing grade.  The
equipment box shall be coated or painted an approved color to match the
existing pole and will be no wider than two times (2x) the diameter of the
pole at the point it is mounted nor protrude from the surface of the pole by
more than eight (8) inches.



         c.   The applicant may propose or the city may require
that the existing light standard be replaced with a city-approved pole that
is manufactured with a base shroud designed to accept wireless equipment and
integrated RF screen to accept a wireless antenna.



      2.   Utility pole.



         a.   The antenna shall be the smallest possible volume
but in no case greater than three (3) cubic feet and shall be mounted at the
top of the pole or on the side of the pole with a bracket.  When mounted
with a bracket the bracket may extend no more than eighteen (18) inches from
the surface of the pole and will be coated or painted to match the existing
pole. The antenna must be enclosed in an RF transparent screen unless a whip
style antenna is used.  The antenna shall be as small as technically
possible, and RF screen and/or color treatment shall be utilized if possible
to camouflage the installation.



         b.   Equipment, other than antennas, shall be mounted as
prescribed by the Director in one (1) of the manners described:



            (1)   Equipment shall be mounted directly to the
pole a minimum of eight (8) feet above the existing grade and be coated or
painted with an approved color to match the existing pole.



            (2)   Equipment shall be mounted in an equipment
box that is mounted directly to the pole a minimum of eight (8) feet above
the existing grade.  The equipment or box shall be coated or painted to
match the existing pole and will be no wider than the diameter of the pole at
the point it is mounted nor protrude from the surface of the pole by more
than eight (8) inches.   



         c.   If the existing utility pole already has more than
two (2) existing risers/drops, the pole must be replaced with a metal pole
that allows the new cable and wires to be located inside the pole, in
conduit.  The existing drops will also be relocated inside the new pole and
underground entry into the pole through the foundation is required.  When
the installation will result in two (2) or fewer risers/drops on the pole,
the wires and cable may be installed as a riser/drop in conduit painted to
match the pole, or as directed by the city.



      3.   Alternative infrastructure. The City Engineer shall be
authorized to consider and allow use of other infrastructure not described
above and not otherwise prohibited herein, when the City Engineer determines
that the proposed alternate infrastructure: (i) is substantially similar in
physical characteristics to a preferred structure; and (ii) the visual impact
that would be suffered by the public is no greater than the impact if
installed on a preferred structure; and (iii) the proposed alternative
infrastructure can accommodate the proposed SWF without creating any risk to
the public health or safety. Any approved alternate infrastructure shall be
subject to all requirements for SWFs set forth in this section.



   C.   Prohibited locations. The City Engineer has determined that, in
order to ensure protection of the public health and safety, no SWF may be
installed or maintained: (i) where any hazard to normal traffic flow could
occur or exist, such as obscuring of drivers' visibility or sight lines; or
(ii) which would result in any obstruction or restriction of pedestrian
movement or risk to pedestrian safety; or (iii) which would or could result
in violation of any law, including any ADA standard; or (iv) which would or
could result in violation of any applicable Federal, State, County or local
standard including standards of the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.



(Ord. 1208, passed 1-15-19)



§ 12.28.040  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A.   A SWF permit must be obtained from the city before a SWF may be
installed or maintained in the PROW. A standard City of Brea encroachment
permit may also be required as a condition of SWF permit approval. A SWF
permit is valid for ten (10) years provided. However, to ensure the greatest
availability to other applicants of preferred locations for SWFs,
installation of each SWF for which the permit is issued shall be completed
within one (1) year of issuance. Upon a showing of good cause not based on
fault of the permittee, the City Engineer may extend the time to complete the
installation under a SWF permit, for an additional six (6) months. Upon a
failure of a permittee to complete installation in the required period of
time, the permit shall be deemed abandoned and the proposed SWF location
shall be made available to other SWF applicants.



      In the event that an application is deemed granted by rule of law
or court decision, all conditions and design guidelines set forth in this
chapter are still applicable to the installation. 



      An application for a permit to install a SWF shall be made in
writing on such forms as the City Engineer prescribes, and shall comply with
the following minimum requirements, in addition to all other information and
documentation determined to be necessary by the City Engineer to effectuate
the purpose and intent of this section.  A review of an application for a
SWF that complies in all respects with this chapter, shall be deemed an
administrative review. Any proposed wireless facility not satisfying all
requirements of this chapter for SWFs, or for any kind of facility that is
not a SWF, shall be subject to discretionary review.



      The application form shall specify the number, size and format of
the project plans and application materials to be provided, including, but
not limited to, electronic format.  The City Engineer may waive certain
submittal requirements or require additional information based on specific
project factors.  Unless an exemption or waiver applies, all applications
shall include all of the following and will not be accepted if any submittal
material is missing or not fully completed.  An application shall not be
deemed complete by the city unless all required information, submittals, and
documentation has been submitted to the city as follows: 



      1.   Complete application. A fully completed and executed city
application form for the type of approval sought, and all information,
materials, fees, attachments, submittals, and proof of insurance specified in
the city-approved application form, must be submitted. Where the city
determines that it requires expert assistance in evaluating an application,
the city may hire a consultant and the fee charged by the consultant shall be
reimbursed to the city by the applicant regardless of the outcome of the
application.



      2.   Executed under penalty of perjury. All applications shall
be signed under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California
by an authorized representative of the applicant. 



      3.   Applicant information.  Complete legal name and contact
information for the facility owner, facility operator, agent (if any), and
property owner (for any collocation facility on any existing SWF), and
related letter(s) of authorization if the owner is other than the city.



      4.   Detailed description of the SWF. A full written
description of the proposed facility, its purpose, and specifications. 



         a.   Fiber only. Applicants seeking to install a SWF
shall not seek a ministerial permit to install fiber only and subsequently
seek to install antennas and accessory equipment pursuant to a SWF permit. 
The applications for all installations in the PROW shall simultaneously
request fiber installation or other cable installation when applying for a
SWF permit.



         b.   Distributed antenna system.  Applications for a
SWF permit for a DAS shall be submitted as a single SWF application for the
entire project.  Each individual location within the system shall be
processed and considered for approval separately.  Permitting fees will be
applied to each site.  Each location will be evaluated and must comply with
all design and development standards as defined by this chapter.



         c.   Utility pole attachments. For any SWF proposed to
be collocated on a pole or structure owned by a public utility such as
Southern California Edison, the application shall include written evidence of
the utility's approval of applicant's proposed attachment including any and
all applicable terms and conditions, and detailed description of the approved
SWF. A SWF authorized by law and approved by the utility company for
attachment to a utility owned pole or structure, shall be subject to all
provisions of this chapter except to the extent any such provisions are
preempted by State or Federal law related to utility pole attachments by
wireless providers ("Pole Attachment Rules").



      5.   Inventory.  An inventory list and map of the applicant's
existing SWFs, including but not limited to collocations, operated by the
applicant within two (2) miles of the proposed site ("service area"), and
longer range conceptual plans for a period of five (5) years shall also be
provided, if available. The inventory list must include specific information
as to location, height, and design of each facility. The city may share such
information with other applicants seeking to locate SWFs within the service
area, in order to encourage collocation.



      6.   Geographic service area.  A written description
identifying the geographic service area for the subject installation,
accompanied by a two (2)-year master plan of anticipated future installations
and/or modifications, including maps.



      7.   Report on alternatives. A report explaining why the SWF
is needed at the requested location, including a written statement explaining
the rationale for selecting the proposed site; and how the proposed SWF is
the least intrusive means for the applicant to provide wireless service in
the proposed service.  Said statement shall include all existing structures
and/or alternative sites evaluated for potential installation of the proposed
SWF and why said alternatives are not a viable option.  If the city has
requested that the applicant collocate its SWF on a site, the applicant shall
explain why collocation is not feasible, including efforts made to develop
such an alternative.



      8.   SWF plans.  Detailed engineering plans of the proposed
SWF showing all equipment and antennas, including height, shape, size and
nature of construction in accordance with the requirements established by the
City Engineer.  The plans shall include, but are not limited to, a fully
dimensioned diagram of the proposed SWF and antennas, including height,
diameter, design, shape, size, structural integrity, power output and
frequency, back-up power source (if any), nature of construction, purpose of
the facility, and technical engineering specifications, economic and other
pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design, together with
evidence that demonstrates that the proposed facility has been designed to
the minimum height and diameter required from a technological standpoint for
the proposed site.  The plans for any new free-standing structure must
provide sufficient detail to demonstrate that the structure will be able to
accommodate at least one (1) other similar telecommunications provider in
addition to the applicant.  The plans shall include a diagram showing the
separation between the proposed SWF and any existing facility or facilities
on the same support structure or site, if collocation is planned. In order to
minimize visual impact of equipment boxes, every applicant seeking to
collocate with another SWF shall utilize its best efforts to arrange with the
existing SWF operator to share equipment enclosures. The collocating wireless
provider shall provide a written description of its efforts made to share any
equipment enclosure. If unable to achieve a sharing arrangement, the
applicant's written description shall clearly state the reasons why.



      9.   Site plans. A fully-dimensioned site/landscaping plan
that includes, at a minimum, the following information: specific placement of
the proposed equipment shelters, antenna(s), and any other SWF on the site;
setbacks from adjacent property lines; the location of existing structures,
trees, and other significant site features; the type and locations of
materials proposed to screen SWF antennas and other components; the proposed
materials and color(s) for the SWF, and all other information required by the
Director.



      10.   Photographs and visual analysis. Photo-simulations
showing views of the proposed SWF from surrounding properties and adjoining
PROW at varying distances and angles with a map indicating the locations used
for the analysis and their distances from the site.



      11.   Documentation of Federal and State compliance.  Copies
of all applicable licenses, permits and/or other approvals required by the
FCC, CPUC, and any other federal, state, and/or local agency with authority
to regulate SWFs, and documentation of compliance with all conditions imposed
in conjunction with such licenses or approvals.  The required documentation
shall include, but is expressly not limited to, the following:



         a.   Engineering calculations demonstrating that the
proposed SWF will comply with all applicable FCC rules, regulations, and/or
specifications.



         b.   Completion of the radio frequency (RF) emissions
exposure guidelines checklist contained in Appendix A to the Federal
Communications Commission's (FCC) "Local Government Official's Guide to
Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety," or any successor regulations, to
determine whether the SWF will be "categorically excluded," as that term is
used by the FCC.



         c.   For a SWF that is not categorically excluded under
the FCC regulations for RF emissions, the applicant shall submit an RF
exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer
acceptable to the City that certifies that the proposed SWF, as well as any
SWFs that contribute to the cumulative exposure in the subject area, will
comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards, exposure limits and
emission levels.  The RF report must include the actual frequency and power
levels (in watts effective radiated power "ERP") for all existing and
proposed antennas at the site and exhibits that show the location and
orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF
exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that
term is defined by the FCC) and also the boundaries of areas with RF
exposures in excess of the controlled/occupational limit (as that term is
defined by the FCC).  Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and
identified for every transmitting antenna at the project site.



      12.   Any environmental documentation required to obtain such
federal and/or state license, permit or other approval.



      13.   CPUC. A copy of the certificate of public convenience
and necessity issued by the California Public Utilities Commission ("CPUC")
to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that authorizes the
applicant to provide the wireless telecommunications service for which the
facilities are proposed to be constructed in the PROW.  Any applicant that,
prior to 1996, provided telecommunications service under administratively
equivalent documentation issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that
documentation in lieu of a certificate of public convenience and necessity.



      14.   Environmental compliance. A completed environmental
assessment and documentation establishing that all applicable environmental
mitigation measures imposed by the CPUC, city and any other federal or state
environmental determinations: (i) have been met; (ii) will be met as part of
the proposed SWF; or (iii) are not applicable.



      15.   Noise compliance.  A statement made under penalty of
perjury that the level of noise to be emitted by the proposed SWF will comply
with the noise standards contained in this code.



      16.   Traffic control plan.  A traffic control plan when the
proposed installation will require use of any active traffic lane on any
street. 



      17.   Any other information, studies and/or other
documentation determined necessary by the City Engineer.



   B.   Application of federal "shot clocks." Applications shall be
processed in compliance with the following federally established timelines:



      1.   The city shall have sixty (60) days from the date of
receipt of an application for a permit to collocate one (1) or more SWFs on
infrastructure, within which to evaluate the application for "completeness,"
i.e., to determine whether or not all requirements of this chapter and this
code relating to the application, its contents and required information and
submittals, have been satisfied.  The foregoing period shall be ninety (90)
days for applications to install one (1) or more SWFs in the PROW involving
no collocation, or where SWFs identified in the application will be both
collocated and not collocated.



      2.   Unless otherwise agreed upon in writing by the applicant
and city, for an initial application to install one (1) or more SWFs, if the
city notifies the applicant on or before the 10th day after submission that
the application is materially incomplete, and identifies the missing
documents or information and the specific rule or regulation creating the
obligation to submit such documents or information, the time for the city to
act on the application is tolled, and the shot clock date calculation shall
restart at zero on the date on which the applicant submits all the documents
and information identified by the city to render the application complete.



      3.   For any resubmitted application following the city's
notice of deficiency, the time for the city to act on the application shall
be tolled for the number of days from:



         a.   The day after the date when the city notifies the
applicant in writing that the applicant's supplemental submission was not
sufficient to render the application complete and identifies the missing
documents or information that need to be submitted based on the city's
original request under division B.2., above, until;



         b.   The date when the applicant submits all the
documents and information identified by the city to render the application
complete, provided the notice pursuant to division B.3.a., above is served on
or before the 10th day after the date when the applicant makes a supplemental
submission in response to the city's request under division B.2., above.



      4.   The "shot clock date" or starting date for a SWF
application is determined by counting forward, beginning on the day after the
date when the application was submitted, by the number of calendar days of
the shot clock period identified in this division B., provided, that if the
date calculated in this manner is a local, state, or federal holiday within
the city or state ("legal holiday"), the shot clock date is the next business
day after such date.  The term "business day" means any day the city's
administrative offices operate and any day that is not a legal holiday of the
city or state.



   C.   Construction requirements.



      1.   Every permitted SWF shall be constructed/installed in
strict compliance with the approved plans and specifications, provisions of
this chapter, all laws, and all written policies and direction of the City
Engineer related to installation of utilities and/or other physical
encroachments into the PROW. All cabling and wiring must be contained in
conduit, affixed directly to the face of the pole, for as long as it is
technically feasible.  No exposed slack or extra cable will be allowed.  No
visible electrical meters will be allowed.  The applicant shall negotiate
directly with the electric utility to determine a flat rate for
installation.  The applicant is responsible for the cost of all electrical
usage.



      2.   All work shall be done in accordance with latest City of
Brea Public Works, State, Caltrans, California Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devises, Work Area Traffic Control Handbook, County and Federal
Standards and Specifications or as otherwise required by the City Engineer. 
It is the contractor's responsibility to obtain the City of Brea Public Works
Standards and Specifications before starting work.  Any work done without
inspection or not conforming to said standards and specifications shall be
subject to removal and replacement in the presence of a City Public Works
Inspector.



   D.   Insurance and indemnity.



      1.   As a condition of approval of every SWF permit, and by
accepting such permit, the permittee, to the fullest extent permitted by law,
agrees to and shall indemnify, defend and pay reasonable attorneys' fees and
costs, and hold the City of Brea, its elected officials, officers, employees,
attorneys, contractors, agents, and volunteers harmless, with respect to any
and all claims, liabilities, and legal actions, allegedly or actually arising
out of or related to, the acts and/or omissions of the applicant, its owners,
officers, employees, contractors, agents, and any other person or entity
acting on behalf of the applicant, in the exercise of rights and/or
performance of obligations, in connection with any SWF or other permit issued
to the applicant pursuant to this chapter.



      2.   Prior to entering any PROW pursuant to a SWF permit, the
permittee shall procure, provide satisfactory evidence of, and maintain
commercial general auto liability, and worker’s compensation insurance in
such form and with such limits as required by the city's Risk Manager or
otherwise as required as a condition of the issuance of a city encroachment
permit.  Unless approved in writing by the city Risk Manager, self-insurance
shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this chapter.



   E.   Written policy and guidelines. Due to rapidly changing
technology and regulatory requirements, the City Council authorizes the City
Engineer to publish a Wireless Application Policy and Guidelines to serve as
further regulatory guidance and clarification.  The Policy and Guidelines
may be updated at the discretion of the City Engineer to adjust for new
technologies and regulations, and compliance therewith is a condition of
approval in every SWF permit.



   F.   Abandonment. Whenever a wireless permittee intends to abandon a
wireless facility, including any SWF, the permittee must notify the City
Engineer in writing of its planned abandonment.  A wireless facility
including SWF shall be removed within ninety (90) days of abandonment with
attainment of all required permits.  Any wireless facility not in use for a
period of six (6) months shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed
pursuant to this chapter.



   G.   Administrative variance. An administrative variance from the
strict locational or physical requirements of § 12.28.030 or § 12.28.040
may be granted by the City Engineer in his or her discretion, when it is
shown to the City Engineer's satisfaction based on substantial evidence that,
because of special, unique circumstances applicable to the proposed location,
the strict application of the requirements of the section would deprive the
applicant of privileges enjoyed by other permittees in the vicinity operating
a similar SWF. Any administrative variance granted shall be subject to such
conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not
constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations
upon other wireless providers seeking to locate any SWF in the area where
such property is situated.



(Ord. 1208, passed 1-15-19)



§ 12.28.050  FEES.



   Each applicant/permittee shall pay one (1) time and recurring fees, per
each SWF, in  amounts: (i) not less than those amounts deemed presumptively
reasonable under then-in effect federal law or regulations; or (ii)
established by the city by resolution as a reasonable, non-discriminatory
approximation of the city's costs; or (iii) agreed upon by the city and a
permittee in a master agreement.



(Ord. 1208, passed 1-15-19)



§ 12.28.060  CONFLICTING CODE PROVISIONS SUPERSEDED.



   The provisions of this chapter shall govern and supersede any
conflicting provisions of the city code with respect to the permitting and
regulation of SWFs in PROW."



(Ord. 1208, passed 1-15-19)



TITLE 13:  UTILITIES



   Chapter



      13.00   SEWERS



      13.04   UNDERGROUND UTILITIES



      13.08   WATER



      13.12   WELL CONSTRUCTION AND ABANDONMENT



      13.16   BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROLS



      13.20   WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM



      13.24   INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL



      13.28   MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICES



      13.32   STORM WATER DRAINAGE



CHAPTER 13.00:  SEWERS



Section



Article I.  Installation



   13.00.100   Definitions



   13.00.110   When connection with city lines required



   13.00.120   Permit to connect with main sewer lines



   13.00.130   Separate connection required for each structure;
exceptions



   13.00.140   Use of existing sewers; inspection and permit required



   13.00.150   Inspection/right of entry



   13.00.160   Food grinders prohibited



   13.00.170   Construction standards



Article II.  Use



   13.00.200   Definitions



   13.00.210   Use of public sewers required



   13.00.220   Discharge in natural outlets regulated



   13.00.230   Industrial wastewater



   13.00.240   Prohibitions and limitations on discharges



   13.00.250   Illegal discharges and unauthorized connections



   13.00.260   Enforcement of article



Article III.  Charges for Sewage and Sanitation Services



   13.00.300   Council to fix charges



   13.00.310   Method of billing; payable in accordance with
regulations for municipal utility service



Article IV.  Sewer Connection Fees



   13.00.400   Purpose and intent



   13.00.410   Time of payment of fees



   13.00.420   Sewer fund



   13.00.430   Sewer connection fees



Article V.  Fats, Oils and Grease Disposal



   13.00.500   Intent and purpose



   13.00.510   Definitions



   13.00.520   FOG discharge limitations



   13.00.521   Prohibitions



   13.00.522   Food grinders prohibited



   13.00.530   FOG wastewater discharge permit required



   13.00.540   FOG pretreatment and grease control device required



   13.00.541   Variance and waiver of grease interceptor requirement



   13.00.542   Best management practices required



   13.00.543   Grease control device operation and maintenance
requirements



   13.00.544   Multiple food facilities at commercial properties



   13.00.545   Grease disposal mitigation fee



   13.00.546   Payment of charges



   13.00.550   Sewer system overflows and interferences, public
nuisance, abatement orders and cleanup costs



   13.00.551   Notification of spill



   13.00.560   Inspection and sampling conditions



   13.00.561   Right of entry



   13.00.570   Violations



   13.00.571   Public nuisance



   13.00.572   Damages to facilities or interruption of normal
operations



   13.00.580   Enforcement



   13.00.581   Compliance schedule agreement



   13.00.582   FOG wastewater discharge permit suspension



   13.00.583   FOG wastewater discharge permit revocation



   13.00.584   Termination of service



   13.00.585   Emergency suspension order



   13.00.586   Appeals



Article VI.  Legal Authority and Penalties



   13.00.600   Legal authority and enforcement



   13.00.610   Civil penalties



   13.00.620   Criminal penalties



   13.00.630   Judicial review



   13.00.640   Severability and general application



ARTICLE I.  INSTALLATION



§ 13.00.100  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.  Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent
or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sewer facilities.



   B.O.D. or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20°C), expressed in
parts per million by weight.



   BUILDING.  A structure entirely separated from any other structure by
a space or by walls by which there are no communicating doors or windows or
similar openings.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives waste from inside the building and conveys it to the building
sewer which begins ten (10) feet outside the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  That part of the horizontal piping of a drainage
system, which receives the discharge from a single building drain and conveys
it directly to a public sewer, private sewer, or on-site sewage disposal
system.



   CHANGE IN OPERATIONS.  Any change in the ownership, food types, or
operational procedures that have the potential to increase the amount of FOG
generated and/or discharged by FSEs in an amount that alone or collectively
causes or creates a potential for SSOs to occur.



   CITY.  The City of Brea.



   CITY ENGINEER.  The City Engineer of the City of Brea or his or her
designee.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the City of Brea or his or her
designee.



   CONNECTING SEWER.  That portion of the sewer system that extends from
the “wye” or “tee” branch of the public sewer within public
right-of-way or a public easement. CONNECTING SEWERS are owned by and the
responsibility of the property owner, and NOT by the City of Brea.



   COUNTY.  The County of Orange.



   DISCHARGER.  Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of
wastewater directly or indirectly to the sewer facilities.  DISCHARGER shall
have the same meaning as USER.



   DISTRICT.  Orange County Sanitation District (OCSD).



   DOMESTIC SEPTAGE.  The liquid and solid material removed from a septic
tank, cesspool, portable toilet, Type III marine sanitation device, or
similar treatment works that receives only domestic wastewater.



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.  The liquid and solid waterborne wastes derived
from the ordinary living processes of humans of such character as to permit
satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or by
means of a private disposal system.



   FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG).  Any substance including vegetable,
animal or other product that is used in, or is a by-product of the cooking or
food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidify with
a change in temperature or other conditions.



   FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTROL MANUAL or FOG CONTROL MANUAL.  The
manual setting forth best management practices for FSEs, as approved by the
City Manager.



   FIXTURE.  Any plumbing or sewer outlet requiring a trap or vent.



   FOG CONTROL PROGRAM.  A program required by and developed pursuant to
§ C.12(viii) of the sewer WDRs as part of the Sewer System Management Plan
(“SSMP”) developed by the city.



   FOG WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT or DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A FOG wastewater
discharge permit issued by the city pursuant to this article.



   FOOD FACILITY, FOOD FACILITIES, FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT or FSE. 
“Facilities” defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facility Law
(CURFFL), Cal. Health & Safety Code § 113785, and any commercial entity
within the boundaries of the city, operating in a permanently constructed
structure such as a room, building, or other place, or portion thereof, and
maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving,
or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other
entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and
which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors,
steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or
Type II hood, as defined in CURFFL.  A limited food preparation
establishment is not considered a FSE when engaged only in reheating, hot
holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is
no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG.  A limited
food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes
the form, flavor, or consistency of food.



   FOOD GRINDER.  Any device installed in the plumbing or sewer system
for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by-products for
the purpose of disposing it into the sanitary sewer system.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, or dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storing and sale of produce.



   GREASE CONTROL DEVICE.  Any grease interceptor, grease trap or other
mechanism or equipment, which attaches to wastewater plumbing fixtures and
lines, the purpose of which is to trap/collect FOG prior to it being
discharged into the sanitary sewer system.



   GREASE DISPOSAL MITIGATION FEE.  A fee charged by the city to an
owner/operator of a FSE when there are physical limitations to the property
or structure that make the installation of the usual and customary grease
interceptor for the FSE under consideration impossible.



   GREASE INTERCEPTOR. A multi-compartment device that is constructed in
different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the
Uniform Plumbing Code, underground between a food facility and the connection
to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from
the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next.



   GREASE TRAP.  A grease control device that is used to serve individual
fixtures.



   HOUSE SEWER.  That portion of the horizontal piping extending from a
point two (2) feet from the foundation wall of the building to its connection
with the connecting sewer.  HOUSE SEWERS are owned by the property owner and
NOT the City of Brea.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. All liquid-carried wastes and wastewater of the
community, excluding domestic wastewater and domestic septage, and shall
include all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing,
agricultural, or other operation.



   INSPECTOR.  A person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or
proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and disposal
facilities.



   INTERFERENCE.  Any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the city’s sanitary
sewer system, treatment processes or operations; or is a cause of violation
of any NPDES permit or waste discharge requirements issued to the city,
including but not limited to the sewer WDRs.



   LIMITED FOOD PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENTS.  Establishments engaged only
in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products.  It
does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency
of food.  For purposes of this article, a LIMITED FOOD PREPARATION
ESTABLISHMENT is not considered to be a food facility.



   LOT.  Any piece or parcel of land as bounded, defined or shown upon
the latest map, plan or deed recorded in the office of the County Recorder.



   MAIN SEWER.  A main pipe line sewer of the city laid in the streets,
alleys, along rights-of-ways or within an easement provided for the
collection of sewage from connecting sewers and conveying same to disposing
plant, and provided with wye and tee branches for connecting sewers.



   MAJOR OPERATIONAL CHANGE.  A physical change or operational change of
an FSE which causes or results in the generation of an amount of FOG that
exceeds the current amount of FOG discharged to the sewer system by the FSE
and which causes or creates a potential for interference with the sewer
system or SSO.



   MANIFEST.  That receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes
for disposing recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required by the city.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure planned or under construction for
which a sewer connection permit has not been issued.



   PERMITTEE.  A person who has received a permit to discharge wastewater
into the city’s sewer facilities subject to the requirements and conditions
established by the city.



   pH:  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-eighth (1/8")
inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   REGULATORY AGENCY or REGULATORY AGENCIES.  Those agencies having
regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city, including, but not
limited to:



      1.   The United States Environmental Protection Agency;



      2.   The California State Water Resources Control Board
(SWRCB);



      3.   The California Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Santa Ana Region (Santa Ana RWQCB);



      4.    The California Department of Public Health (CDPH).



      5.   The California State Office of Emergency Services.



      6.   The Orange County Sanitation District (OCSD);



      7.   The Orange County Health Care Agency; and



      8.  The Orange County Public Works Department.



   REMODELING.  A physical change exceeding a cost of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000) to a food facility that requires a building permit, and
involves any one (1) or combination of the following:



      1.   Under-slab plumbing in the food processing area;



      2.   A thirty percent (30%) increase in the net public seating
area;



      3.   A thirty percent (30%) increase in the size of the
kitchen area; or



      4.   Any change in the size or type of food preparation
equipment.



   SANITARY SEWAGE.  The sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings, (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories or institutions.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.  Any combination of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER LATERAL.  A building sewer (sanitary) as defined in the Uniform
Plumbing Code.  It is the wastewater connection between the structure’s
wastewater facilities and a public sewer system.  SEWER LATERALS between the
main sewer line and the property being served by the lateral are owned by the
property owner, and NOT by the City of Brea.



   SEWER SYSTEM or SEWER FACILITIES. Any and all facilities operated by
the city and used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing
of wastewater, sewage and sludge.



   SEWER WDRS.  The State General Waste Discharge Requirements for
Sanitary Sewer Systems (State Water Resources Control Board Order No.
2006-2003).



   SSOs.  Sanitary sewer overflows.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   USER.  Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater
directly or indirectly to a public sewer system. USER shall mean the same as
DISCHARGER.



   WASTE.  Sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid,
gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or
animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever
nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.



   WASTEWATER.  The liquid- and water-carried wastes of the community and
all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or
permitted to enter a public sewer.



   WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS.  The individual chemical,
physical, bacteriological, and other parameters, including volume and flow
rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the
quality and quantity of wastewater.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



   WATER MINIMIZATION PRACTICES.  Plans or programs intended to reduce or
eliminate discharges to the sewer system or to conserve water, including, but
not limited to, product substitutions, housekeeping practices, inventory
control, employee education, and other steps as necessary to minimize
wastewater produced.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.110  WHEN CONNECTION WITH CITY LINES REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, any
connections with any cesspool or place for depositing sewage, except with and
into sewage disposal lines within the city, and subject to inspection and
such regulation by the city as provided in this chapter, or as may from time
to time, be prescribed by the City Council, if and when the property or place
to be connected, fronts upon, or is located within two hundred (200) feet of
a constructed, completed and accepted city line sewer.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-2-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.120  PERMIT TO CONNECT WITH MAIN SEWER LINES.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or attempt to make,
or cause to be made any connection with the main sewer lines of the city
without first having secured permit there for, and having paid a connection
fee in an amount which shall be set by the Council from time to time. 
Permission to make such connection shall be granted upon application made
upon blank forms furnished by the city and in manner as in such form
prescribed. Such application shall be filed with the City Engineer, together
with the connection fee. The City Engineer shall be authorized to issue a
permit for making such connection. The fee so paid shall be deposited in the
“sewer fund.” All sewer connections and pipe lines laid in connection
therewith must be under the supervision of the City Engineer and in
conformity with the requirements and provisions relating to such connections
prescribed by the City Council.



   B.   A permit shall not be assignable or transferable or used to aid
or abet any unlicensed firm or corporation in the performance of any work or
operation for which such permit was issued.



   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any street or
public place in the city or excavate therein for the purpose of laying any
pipe or making any such connection or to lay such pipe or make such
connection, without having first deposited, in addition to the application
fee herein prescribed, a deposit in such sum as prescribed by the City
Council as guarantee that the street or public place so excavated or
disturbed will be repaired and placed in like condition as such street was,
prior to the commencement of such excavation. The deposit shall be returned
to the depositor if and when repairs of the streets as herein provided shall
have been completed and approved. If repair is not made within ten (10) days
after commencement of such excavation, the City Engineer shall cause the same
to be repaired and charge the cost thereof against the deposit, and thereupon
refund the balance, if any, not used.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.130  SEPARATE CONNECTION REQUIRED FOR EACH STRUCTURE; EXCEPTIONS.



   A.   Every building or other structure situated within the city
shall be separately and independently connected with a connecting sewer,
except where more than one (1) building or other structure is situated upon
the same lot, in which case all such buildings and structures may be joined
in the use of one (1) house and connecting sewer; provided, however, that all
such buildings and structures are owned by the same person.



   B.   The same connecting sewer may, in special cases, by permission
of the City Engineer, be used to serve two (2) or more lots.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.140  USE OF EXISTING SEWERS; INSPECTION AND PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A.   No building or other structure shall be connected to an old
sewer nor shall any old sewer line be used unless it will satisfactorily
stand the test provided in this article for new sewer, and a permit has been
granted for so connecting and a certificate of inspection obtained from the
City Engineer.



   B.   On any lot where there is an existing house sewer serving the
building and upon which another building is to be placed, such building may
be served from the existing house sewer; provided, however, that such sewer
has been approved by the City Engineer; and provided further, that wherever
the existing sewer would be within the area to be occupied by the proposed
building, it shall be reconstructed of extra strength vitrified clay or
SDR-26 PVC pipe.



   C.   House connection sewers may be constructed of either extra
strength vitrified clay or SDR-26 PVC pipe.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.150  INSPECTION/RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.



   A.   Construction of structures, planting of trees or any other
cause of obstructions over sewers or sewer laterals that restrict or prevent
access for inspection and maintenance to sewers, sewer laterals and other
wastewater generating and disposal facilities is prohibited.



   B.   Users or occupants of a premises where wastewater is created,
conveyed, treated, or discharged shall allow city representatives, having
presented proper credentials, reasonable access to all parts of the
wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, monitoring, reviewing or copying records, photographing,
videotaping, or recording during all times that the discharger’s facility
is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No user shall interfere
with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to authorized city or OCSD personnel
attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a
discharge of wastewater to the city’s sewer system.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.160  FOOD GRINDERS PROHIBITED.



   Installation of food grinders in all new non-residential construction
is prohibited.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.170  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   A.   All sewers system pipelines and appurtenances shall be
constructed in accordance with the City Sewer Standards Plans and
Specifications.



   B.   For construction specifications and details not covered in the
City Standards, the following reference standards may be applied at the
discretion of the City Engineer:



      1.   The California Plumbing Code;



      2.   The Uniform Plumbing Code;



      3.   The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction
(Greenbook); and/or



      4.   The Standard Plans for Public Works Construction
(Greenbook).



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



ARTICLE II.  USE



§ 13.00.200  DEFINITIONS.



   See § 13.00.100 for the definitions that apply to Article II.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.210  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.220  DISCHARGE IN NATURAL OUTLETS REGULATED.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city
or any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.230  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.



   A.   The Orange County Sanitation District (OCSD) regulates all
industrial wastewater discharges to the public sewer system.  Any person
desiring a permit to connect to the public sewer for the purpose of
discharging any industrial waste shall submit an application to the OCSD. 
The application shall include complete information regarding the quantity and
nature of the wastewater to be discharged.  A copy of the industrial
wastewater discharge permit issued by OCSD must be submitted to the city
prior to city issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



   B.   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
having any of the following shall be subject to review and approval of the
City Engineer:



      1.   A five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than
three hundred (300) parts per million by weight;



      2.   More than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by
weight of suspended solids;



      3.   Any quantity of substances having the characteristics
described in § 13.00.240;



      4.   An average daily flow greater than five percent (5%) of
the average daily sewage flow of the city;



      5.   A peak flow of more than four (4) times its average daily
flow; or



      6.   Additional prohibited discharges are listed in §
13.00.240.



   C.   Where necessary in the opinion of OCSD or the City Engineer,
the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment or
other remedial measures as may be necessary to meet the conditions set out in
this article.  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
review by OCSD, the City Engineer, and the Orange County Health Care
Agency.  No construction of such facilities shall commence until the review
has been completed and written authorization for such construction has been
received.



   D.   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



   E.   When required by the City Engineer, the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the City Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the
owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to
be safe and accessible at all times.



   F.   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in Chapter 13, shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage.  Samples shall be taken at a control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been provided, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.



   G.   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.240 PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or allow to be discharged wastewaters
directly or indirectly into city sewer facilities that cause or are capable
of causing, either alone or by interaction with other substances,
interference with the operation of city sewers, including but not limited to
the following.



   A.   General prohibitions.



      1.   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into
the city sewer system, any pollutant, wastewater, or flow that causes pass
through or interference or would cause the city to violate any federal,
state, or local regulatory requirement.



      2.   No user shall increase the contribution of flow,
pollutants, or change the nature of pollutants where such contribution or
change does not meet applicable standards and requirements or where such
contribution would cause the city to violate any federal, state, or local
regulatory permit.



      3.   No person shall transport waste from one location or
facility to another for the purpose of treating or discharging it directly or
indirectly to the city sewer system without written permission from the city.



      4.   No person shall deliver by vehicular transport, rail car,
or dedicated pipeline, directly or indirectly to the OCSD sewerage
facilities, wastewater which contains any substance that is defined as a
hazardous waste by the regulatory agencies.



   B.   Specific prohibitions.  No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the sewerage facilities, pollutants, substances, or
wastewater which:



      1.   Creates a fire or explosive hazard in the sewerage
facilities including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) 
(sixty degrees Centigrade (60°C)) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21; or produces a gaseous mixture that is ten percent (10%) or greater of
the lower explosive limit (LEL).  Prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, ethers, alcohols,
ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides;



      2.   Causes obstruction to the flow in the sewer system
resulting in interference or damage to the sewerage facilities;



      3.   Produces noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      4.   Results in toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the
sewerage facilities in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;



      5.   Contains any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable regulations from other governmental agencies
empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials;



      6.   Causes, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
OCSD’s treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity test.  Any toxic
substances in amounts exceeding established standards. Any chemical elements
or compounds, phenols or other taste or odor producing substances.  Any
chemical elements or compounds, which are not susceptible to treatment and/or
will pass through the OCSD treatment facilities or which may interfere with
the biological processes or efficiency of the treatment processes.  Any
chemical elements or compounds cause acute worker health and safety problems;



      7.   Causes the OCSD’s effluent or any other product of the
treatment process, residues, biosolids, or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation, reuse or disposal;



      8.   Causes discoloration or any other condition that affects
the quality of the OCSO’s influent or effluent in such a manner that
inhibits the OCSO’s ability to meet receiving water quality, biosolids
quality, or air quality requirements established by regulatory agencies;



      9.   Creates excessive foaming in the sewer system or at the
treatment facilities;



      10.   Violates any applicable federal categorical pretreatment
standard, statute, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency or
regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the operation of or discharge of
wastewater through the sewerage facilities;



      11.   Has a pH less than six (6.0) or greater than twelve
(12.0).  Any waste which will cause corrosion or deterioration of the city
sewer system or OCWD treatment facilities.  Prohibited materials include,
but are not limited to, acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride
compounds and substances which will react with water to form acidic products;



      12.   Has a maximum biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater
than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds per day;



      13.   Is in excess of the permitted mass emission rates
established in accordance with: the concentration limits set forth in Table
1, or the latest update of OCSD wastewater discharge regulations or the
OCSD-issued discharge permit;



      14.   Contains material which will readily settle or cause an
obstruction to flow in the sewer resulting in interference.  Any solid or
viscous wastes which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or
otherwise interfere with the proper operation of OCSD treatment facilities. 
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, grease, uncomminuted
garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, and similar
substances;



      15.   Contains wax, grease or oil of mineral origin in
concentrations of more than one hundred (100) mg/l whether emulsified or not,
or any other waste containing substances which may precipitate, solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (32° and 150°F) (zero and sixty-five degrees Centigrade
(0°and 65°C)) at the point of discharge into city sewers;



      16.   Contains garbage that has not been ground or comminuted
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension
under flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no
particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension;



 


Table 1
Orange County Sanitation District Maximum Allowable Local Discharge Limits




Constituent

 

Milligrams/liter





Arsenic
 

2.0



Cadmium
 

1.0



Chromium (total)
 

2.0



Copper
 

3.0



Lead
 

2.0



Mercury
 

0.03



Nickel
 

10.0



Silver
 

5.0



Zinc
 

10.0



Cyanide (total)
 

5.0



Cyanide (amenable)
 

1.0



Polychlorinated biphenyls
 

0.01



Pesticides
 

0.01





 



 


Total toxic organics

 

0.58



Sulfide (total)
 

5.0



Sulfide (dissolved)
 

0.5



Oil and grease of mineral or petroleum origin
 

100.0



BOD
 

15,000 lbs/day




 



 


Maximum Allowable Discharge Limits
For Wastehaulers Discharging Domestic Septage




Constituent

 

Milligrams/liter





Cadmium
 

1.0



Chromium
 

2.0



Copper
 

25.0



Lead
 

10.0



Nickel
 

10.0



Zinc
 

50.0





 



      17.   Contains slug load concentrations of pollutants that may
cause interference with the OCSD treatment facilities;



      18.   Contains any amounts of organic phosphorus compounds
released in a discharge at a flow rate or in a concentration which will cause
pass through or interference with the sewerage facilities; or



      19.   Contains any waste not in compliance with national
categorical pretreatment standards as represented in 40 CFR Ch. I, Subch. N
or 40 CFR Parts 401-471.



   C.   Storm water.  Ground water, street drainage, subsurface
drainage, foundation drains, or yard drainage shall not be discharged
directly or indirectly to the city sewer system. The city, at its sole
discretion, may approve the discharge of such water by granting a special
purpose permit only when no alternative method of disposal is reasonably
available. The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that no
alternative method of disposal is reasonably available. If a special purpose
permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a sewer, the user
shall pay connection fees, applicable charges and fees for use and shall meet
such other conditions as required by the city.



   D.   Unpolluted water.  Unpolluted water, such as single-pass
cooling water, shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connection
to a public sewer.  The city may approve the discharge of such water only
when no alternative method of disposal is reasonably available by issuing a
special purpose permit.



   E.   Septic tank and cesspool wastes.  Discharges of septic tank,
or cesspool wastes, into the city sewer or directly into the treatment plant
facilities is prohibited.



   F.   Temperature.  No person shall discharge wastewater with a
temperature higher than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (sixty
degrees Centigrade (60°C)). Heat in discharged wastewater shall not cause
the temperature of wastewater entering the headworks of any OCSD wastewater
treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (forty
degrees Centigrade (40°C)).



   G   Point of discharge.  No person, excluding city personnel
involved in maintenance functions of sewer facilities, shall discharge any
water, wastewater or any substance directly into a manhole or other opening
in a sewer other than through an approved building sanitary sewer, unless
upon written application by the user and approved by the city and payment of
the applicable charges for use and fees.



   H.   Wastewater strength limitations.  No person shall discharge
wastewater containing substances in excess of the quantities or
concentrations listed in Table 1 or containing other materials, or having
other characteristics, including, but not limited to, ammonia, biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, suspended
solids, oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin, total dissolved solids,
and phenolic compounds in quantities that may cause or are found to cause
problems, pass through, or interference with the sewerage facilities.  No
person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of 0.01 mg/l of
pesticides as a daily maximum, to include, but not limited to the following:
DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, both isomers), DDE
(dichlorodiphenylethylene), DDD (dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane), Aldrin,
Benzene Hexachloride (alpha, beta, and gamma isomers), Chlordane, Endrin,
Endrin aldehyde, TCDD (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzop-dioxin), Toxaphene
(alpha)-Endosulphan, (beta)-Endosulphan, Endosulphan sulfate, Heptachlor,
Heptachlor epoxide, and Dieldrin.  No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of 0.01 mg/l of polychlorinated biphenyls as a daily
maximum to include, but not limited to the following: Aroclors 1016, 1221,
1228, 1232, 1248, 1254, 1260, and 1262.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.250  ILLEGAL DISCHARGES AND UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS.



   A.   No person shall discharge or make an unauthorized connection to
the city sewer system without a permit or except as provided in the permit
issued by the city.  Specifically, but not by way of limitation as to any
connection to the city sewer system; no roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, car wash pads not covered by a roof, or other sources
of surface runoff or ground water shall be connected to a city sewer facility
or to a building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a city sewer facility.



   B.   In the event of violation, all charges and penalties specified
under Article VI Legal Authority and Penalties shall be applied and collected
by the City Manager.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.260  ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE.



   A.   Protection from damage.   No unauthorized person shall
maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, which is a
part of the municipal sewage works.



   B.   Notice to correct violation. Any person found to be violating
any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.



   C.   Penalty for continuing violation.  Any person who shall
continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in § 13.00.581
Compliance Schedule Agreement shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   D.   Liability for expense, loss or damage occasioned the city. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



ARTICLE III. CHARGES FOR SEWAGE AND SANITATION SERVICES



§ 13.00.300  COUNCIL TO FIX CHARGES.



   The City Council shall fix, determine and change from time to time the
amount and character of the charges to be made, including different charges
for services furnished in connection with different types or characters of
property, any and all charges for the use by the public of the city sewerage
facilities and for the collection of trash, garbage and other refuse by the
city.



(‘61 Code, §19.36)  (Ord. 219, passed - - )



§ 13.00.310  METHOD OF BILLING; PAYABLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS FOR
MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICE.



   The charges provided for in § 13.00.300 shall be collected pursuant to
Chapter 13.28.



ARTICLE IV.  SEWER CONNECTION FEES



§ 13.00.400  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The development of buildings and other facilities for human habitation
in the city has created a need for the expansion of city sewer facilities and
has increased the cost of maintaining the city’s sewerage system.
Accordingly, it is the intent of the Council that any person constructing a
new building or such facility shall pay the fees prescribed in this article,
or as subsequently established by ordinance or resolution of the City
Council, prior to connecting the same to the city’s sewerage system. The
payment of the fees prescribed in this Article IV is required and assessed
pursuant to the revenue raising power of the city in order to produce
revenues to be utilized solely for the maintenance and repair of the sewerage
system of the city and to provide new facilities of general benefit to that
system and those persons utilizing it such as, but not limited to trunk
lines.  Fees set forth in this Article IV may be amended at any time by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council in accordance with Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 66000 through 66018, or any successor provisions thereto.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.410  TIME OF PAYMENT OF FEES.



   The fees required by this Article IV shall be paid as a prerequisite to
the issuance of any building permit for the construction of a building,
provided that fees related to the construction of a mobile home park shall be
paid as a prerequisite to the issuance of the permit first required to
commence construction of such park. Any fees paid pursuant to this article
shall be refunded in the event that the permit issued is not utilized for the
commencement of the construction to which it applies.



(Ord. passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.420  SEWER FUND.



   All monies collected pursuant to this Article IV shall be deposited in
the sewer fund, expenditures from which shall be made only for those purposes
set forth in § 13.00.400 hereof or as refunds provided for in § 13.00.410
hereof.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.430  SEWER CONNECTION FEES.



   Each and every person constructing a new building or facility for human
habitation located in the city shall pay the applicable fee described in the
following schedule:




Proposed Sewer Connection Fee





   Connection Fee





Bathtub   $10





Laundry, tub or washer   10





Shower   10





Sink-kitchen   10





Sink-bar   5





Wash basin (lavatory)   5





Wash basin (set) (double lavatory)   10





Water closet (toilet)   20





Bidet   5





Dental units   5





Drinking fountain   5





Floor drain   10





Interceptors for grease, oil and solids   15





Interceptors for sand, auto wash, and the like   15





Laundry tub or washer (self service)   15





Receptors   15





Showers gang-per head   5





Sink, bar commercial   10





Sinks, commercial or industrial   15





Sinks, floor   5





Sinks, flushing rim   15





Sinks, service   10





Swimming pool   15





Urinal, pedestal   10





Urinal, stall   10





Urinal, wall trough   20




   Connection Charge



   Mobile home parks shall pay a fee of ninety ($90) dollars per pad as
required in § 13.00.410.



   High Sewer User Fee



   A fee of fifty ($0.50) cents is hereby established for each 1,000 cubic
feet of monthly flow or portion thereof in excess of 15,000 cubic feet per
month estimated flow as determined by the City Engineer. Out of city users
shall pay double the fees above.



(‘61 Code, § 19.47)



ARTICLE V.  FATS, OILS AND GREASE DISPOSAL



§ 13.00.500  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of this article to establish regulations for the
disposal of fats, oils and grease (“FOG”) and other insoluble waste
discharges from food facilities within the city.  The purpose is to
facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the sanitary sewer system
while at the same time attempting to prevent blockages of those sanitary
sewer systems as a result of the discharge of FOG, and to specify appropriate
FOG disposal requirements for food facilities to protect the public health
and safety.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.510  DEFINITIONS.



   A.   Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality
shall be as defined in the sewer WDRs and in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Environment Federation.  The testing procedures for waste constituents and
characteristics shall be as provided in 40 C.F.R. 136.  Other terms not
herein defined are defined as being the same as set forth in the latest
adopted applicable editions of the California Codes applicable to building
construction adopted pursuant to the California Building Standards Law.



   B.   See § 13.00.100 for additional definitions that apply to
Article V.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.520  FOG DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no food facility
shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system FOG that
exceeds a concentration level adopted by regulatory agency or that may
accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages or interferences within
the sewer system or at a sewer system lateral which connects the food
facility to the sewer system.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.521  PROHIBITIONS.



   The following prohibitions shall apply to all food facilities.



   A.   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged any
wastewater from any food facility directly or indirectly into the sewer
system without first obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit pursuant to
this article.



   B.   The discharge of any waste, including FOG and solid materials
removed from a grease control device, to the sewer system, is prohibited.



   C.   The discharge of any waste or FOG to the sewer system that
fails to comply with the FOG Control Manual is prohibited.



   D.   The discharge of any waste or FOG to the sewer system in a
manner which either violates the sewer WDRs or causes or contributes to
condition which fails to comply with any of the provisions of the sewer WDRs
is prohibited.



   E.   Refer to Article II Use for additional wastewater prohibitions
and limitations.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.522  FOOD GRINDERS PROHIBITED.



   A.   Installation of food grinders in the plumbing system for new
construction of food facilities shall be prohibited.



   B.   All food grinders shall be removed from an existing FSE upon:



      1.   Major operational change to the FSE;



      2.   Any construction requiring the issuance of a building
permit for either remodeling or construction of the FSE valued at five
hundred dollars ($500) or more; or



      3.   Within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective
date of this article, except when expressly approved by the City Manager.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)  Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.530  FOG WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A.   Permit required.  No food facility or food service
establishment shall conduct or otherwise be open for business, or serve or
provide food, unless the owner or operator, or authorized agent or
representative thereof, first applies for and obtains a FOG wastewater
discharge permit pursuant to this chapter.



   B.   Prohibited discharges.  No person shall discharge or cause,
allow or permit to be discharged, any wastewater from any food facility or
food service establishment, directly or indirectly into the sewer system
without first obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this
chapter.  Compliance with this chapter must be demonstrated at the time any
business license is issued for a food facility or food service establishment,
or any business in which a food facility or food service establishment is
operated.



   C.   Permit provisions.  FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other
regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the city and any other
regulatory agency.  The provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permits
shall be enforced by the city in accordance with this chapter and applicable
state and federal regulations and other provisions of this code.



   D.   FOG wastewater discharge permit application.



      1.    Any person required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge
permit shall complete and file with the city prior to commencing discharges,
an application in a form prescribed by the City Manager and shall provide the
city such information and documents as the City Manager determines is
necessary and appropriate to properly evaluate the application.  The
applicable fees shall accompany the application.



      2.   After evaluation of the data furnished, the City Manager
may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, subject to terms and conditions
set forth in this article and as otherwise determined by the City Manager to
be appropriate to protect the city’s sewer system.



   E.   FOG wastewater discharge permit conditions.  The issuance of a
FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any or all of the following
conditions or limits as determined by the City Manager:



      1.   Limits on discharge of FOG and other priority pollutants;



      2.   Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of
grease interceptors and other grease control devices;



      3.   Grease interceptor or other grease control device
maintenance frequency and schedule;



      4.   Requirements for implementation of best management
practices and installation of adequate grease interceptor and/or grease
control device;



      5.   Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best
management practices;



      6.   Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and
records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests;



      7.   Requirements to self-monitor;



      8.   Requirements for the food facility to construct, operate
and maintain, at its own expense, FOG control devices and sampling facilities;



      9.   Consent by the operator of the FSE for the city and other
regulatory agencies to inspect the FSE to confirm compliance with this
chapter, the sewer WDRs and other applicable laws, rules and regulations,
including any NPDES permit applicable to the city; and/or



      10.   Additional requirements, terms and conditions as
otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the City Manager to
protect the city’s system or as specified by other regulatory agencies or
which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with this chapter as
determined by the City Manager.



   F.   FOG wastewater discharge permit fee.



      1.   A charge to cover all costs of the city for providing the
sewer service and monitoring shall be established by ordinance or resolution
of the City Council.



      2.   The FOG wastewater discharge permit fee shall be paid by
the applicant and received by the city prior to issuance of either a new
permit or a renewed permit.  A permittee shall also pay any delinquent
invoices in full prior to permit renewal.



   G.   FOG wastewater discharge permit modification of terms and
conditions.



      1.   The terms and conditions of an issued FOG wastewater
discharge permit may be subject to modification and change by the sole
determination of the City Manager during the life of the permit based on:



         a.   The discharger’s current or anticipated operating
data;



         b.   The city’s current or anticipated operating data;



         c.   Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies
which affect the city; or



         d.   A determination by the City Manager that such
modification is appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter.



      2.   The permittee may request a modification to the terms and
conditions of an issued FOG wastewater discharge permit.  The request shall
be in writing stating the requested change, and the reasons for the change. 
The City Manager shall review the request, make a determination on the
request, and respond in writing.  The permittee shall be informed of any
change in the FOG wastewater discharge permit limits, conditions, or
requirements at least forty-five (45) days prior to the effective date of
change.  Any changes or new conditions in the discharge permit shall include
a reasonable time schedule for compliance.



   H.   FOG wastewater discharge permit duration and renewal.  FOG
wastewater discharge permits shall



Prior to expiration of the FOG wastewater discharge permit, the user shall
apply for renewal of the discharge permit in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.



   I.   Exemption from FOG wastewater discharge permit.  A limited
food preparation establishment, as defined herein, is not considered a food
facility and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit.
Exempted establishments shall be engaged only in reheating, hot holding or
assembly of ready to eat food products and, as a result, there is no
wastewater discharge containing significant amount of FOG.  A limited food
preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the
form, flavor, or consistency of food.



   J.   Non-transferability of permits. FOG wastewater discharge
permits issued under this chapter are for a specific food facility, for a
specific operation and create no vested rights.  No permit holder shall
assign, transfer, sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under this
chapter nor use any such permit for or on any premises or for facilities or
operations or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying
permit.  Any FOG wastewater discharge permit, which is transferred to a new
owner or operator or to a new facility, is void.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.540  FOG PRETREATMENT AND GREASE CONTROL DEVICE REQUIRED.



   A.   Food facilities are required at the time of construction to
install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease
interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this
chapter in accordance with the FOG Control Manual and the requirements of 40
C.F.R. § 403.5.



   B.   All fixtures, equipment and drain lines located in the food
preparation and clean up areas of food facilities that are sources of FOG
discharge shall be connected to an approved grease control device unless
otherwise determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   C.   Dishwashers or other fixtures discharging emulsifying agents
(e.g., detergents) shall be connected to the sewer system such that their
potential to adversely impact the operation of the grease control device
operation is minimized.



   D.   Grease interceptors shall be used in all new food facilities
where it is necessary to install a grease control device, and shall have a
minimum capacity of seven hundred fifty (750) gallons.



   E.   New food facilities shall follow sizing criteria for larger
devices as specified by the Uniform Plumbing Code.



   F.   All existing food facilities undergoing remodeling or a major
change in operations shall be required to install grease control devices with
each chamber readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection of
each chamber from the surface and shall include a downstream sample box in
accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as determined by the City Manager.



   G.   No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued for a food
facility that is required to have an approved grease control device, until
such device has been installed, inspected and approved by the City Manager.



   H.   The City Manager may establish additional guidelines to
supplement this article regarding, but not limited to:



      1.   Design, construction and inspection standards of grease
control devices;



      2.   The operation and maintenance standards for grease
control devices;



      3.   Kitchen best management practice to prevent FOG from
entering the devices;



      4.   Grease control device cleaning, reporting, and
enforcement standards; and



      5.   Standards for the collection and disposal of FOG by
appropriate entities.



   I.   Upon the effective date of this article, the introduction of
any additives into a food facility’s wastewater system for the purposes of
emulsifying FOG, is prohibited without the specific written authorization
from the City Manager.



   J.   No discretionary permit, including but not limited to a
conditional use permit, shall be issued to a food facility unless the
applicant can demonstrate that a grease interceptor has been or will be
installed at the food facility in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.541  VARIANCE AND WAIVER OF GREASE INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENT.



   A.   Variance from grease interceptor requirements.  A variance or
a conditional waiver from the grease interceptor requirements on such terms
and conditions as may be established by the City Manager, consistent with the
requirements of the sewer WDRs, the city’s FOG control program, the FOG
Control Manual, and best construction, engineering, environmental and health
and safety practices, to:



      1.   Allow alternative pretreatment technology that is, at
least, equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge in lieu of a grease
interceptor, may be granted by the City Manager to food facilities
demonstrating to the City Manager’s satisfaction that it is impossible or
impracticable to install, operate or maintain a grease interceptor; or



      2.   Where the food facility demonstrates to the City
Manager’s satisfaction that any FOG discharge from the food facility is
negligible and will have an insignificant impact to the sewer system.



   B.   Waiver from grease interceptor installation with a grease
disposal mitigation fee.  For food facilities where the installation of a
grease interceptor is not feasible and no equivalent alternative pretreatment
device can be installed, a waiver from the grease interceptor requirement may
be granted by the City Manager with the imposition of a grease disposal
mitigation fee as described in § 13.00.545.  The City Manager’s
determination to grant the waiver with a grease disposal mitigation fee will
be based upon such considerations that the City Manager determines to be
appropriate and consistent  with  the sewer WDRs, the  city’s FOG
control program, the FOG Control Manual, and best construction, engineering,
environmental and health and safety practices.  Provided, however, that such
waiver will terminate and a grease interceptor will be installed at the FSE
when the operator of the FSE or the owner of the property upon which the FSE
is located either:



      1.   Applies for any discretionary permit, including but not
limited to a conditional use permit; or



      2.   Conducts any remodeling to a food facility which involves
construction valued at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more requiring a
building permit and which involves any one (1) or combination of the
following:



         a.   Under-slab plumbing in the food processing area;



         b.   A thirty percent (30%) increase in the net public
seating area;



         c.   A thirty percent (30%) increase in the size of the
kitchen area; or



         d.   Any change in the size or type of food preparation
equipment.



   C.   Application for waiver or variance of requirement for grease
interceptor.



      1.   A food facility may submit an application for waiver or
variance from the grease interceptor requirement to the City Manager.  Terms
and conditions for issuance of a variance to a FSE shall be set forth in the
permit.



      2.   The City Manager may revoke a waiver or variance at any
time when any of the terms and conditions for its issuance is not satisfied
or if the conditions upon which the waiver was based change so that the
justification for the waiver no longer exists.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.542  BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIRED.



   A.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, all food
facilities shall implement best management practices in their operations to
minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system.



   B.   All food facilities must implement and demonstrate compliance
with best management practices (BMP) requirements as specified in the
city’s FOG Control Manual.  Detailed requirements for BMP shall be
specified in the manual and may include kitchen practices and employee
training that are essential in minimizing FOG discharges.



   C.   Periodic reporting of the status of the implementation of BMP
shall be submitted to the City Manager, in accordance with the FOG control
program and the FOG Control Manual.



      1.   The City Manager may require visual and other monitoring
at the sole expense of the permittee to observe the actual conditions of the
food facility’s sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream.



      2.   The City Manager may require reports for self-monitoring
of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of the permittee needed
for determining compliance with any conditions or requirements as specified
in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.  Monitoring reports
of the analyses of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics shall be
in a manner and form approved by the City Manager and shall be submitted upon
request of the City Manager.  Other reports may be required, such as
compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any
other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the City Manager to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



      3.   Failure by the permittee to perform any required
monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the City Manager
constitutes a violation of this chapter and shall be cause for the city to
initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater
constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and
requirements specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or in this
chapter.



      4.   The permittee shall be responsible for any and all
expenses of the city in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation
of reports.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.543  GREASE CONTROL DEVICE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   All existing and newly installed grease control devices shall
be maintained in a manner consistent with a maintenance plan approved by the
City Manager.



   B.   Grease control devices shall be maintained in efficient
operating condition in accordance with the FOG Control Manual.



   C.   Grease interceptors and other grease control devices must be
cleaned, maintained, and have FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner
at regular intervals and in accordance with the FOG Control Manual.  Grease
removed from grease interceptors shall be waste hauled periodically as part
of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors.



   D.   No FOG that has accumulated in a grease control device shall be
allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sanitary sewer system, storm drain,
or public right-of-way during maintenance activities.



   E.   Each new and existing food facility with a grease control
device shall have an approved maintenance plan which specifies the minimum
maintenance frequency for removal of all accumulated FOG from the grease
control device, which shall be determined as follows:



      1.   For new food facilities, the minimum maintenance
frequency for interceptors shall be as follows:



 


Type of Establishment

 

Minimum Maintenance Frequency



I.  Take out only
 
Every forty-five (45) days


- With wok stoves, deep fryers or more than one (1) griddle
 
Every twenty (20) days


II.  Take out and seating
 
Every sixty (60) days


- With wok stoves, deep fryers or more than one (1) griddle
 
Every thirty (30) days


III.  Seating only
 
Every ninety (90) days


- With wok stoves, deep fryers or more than one (1) griddle
 
Every sixty (60) days



 



      2.   For existing food facilities with a grease interceptor,
the maintenance plan shall be determined in one (1) of the following methods:



         a.   In the same manner as for new food facilities under
subparagraph E.1. above; or



         b.   The owner/operator of a food facility in existence
on the effective  date of this article may submit an application to the City
Manager requesting that a maintenance plan other than that identified in
subparagraph E.1. above be imposed on that food facility, due to the fact
that the food facility has been following a regular maintenance cycle in the
past, and based on the particular food facility operation, the current
regular maintenance plan is adequate to guard against FOG passing into the
sanitary sewer system.  Upon a determination by the City Manager that an
acceptable grease control device maintenance plan is being followed that
meets the minimum requirements set forth in the Uniform Plumbing Code, then
it may be used as the approved maintenance plan for that particular food
facility.



         c.   In the event it is determined that a food facility,
as a result of a change in operations, is using a grease interceptor that is
smaller in capacity than would be required for that food facility under this
article, the City Manager may allow said food facility to continue to operate
with the smaller grease interceptor, provided the food facility prepares a
maintenance plan acceptable to the City Manager that requires more frequent
servicing than would otherwise be required if the proper sized grease
interceptor was installed.



   F.   Notwithstanding subparagraph E. above, if any grease
interceptor at any time contains floating oil/grease in the final chamber, or
sludge in any chamber that is within two (2) inches of the discharge elbow,
the owner and/or operator of the food facility shall have the grease
interceptor serviced such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge, and other
materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor after which the
interceptor shall be refilled with cold water.



   G.   Notwithstanding subparagraphs E. and F. above, all existing
food facilities with a grease interceptor shall be serviced not less than
every one hundred eighty (180) days.  Grease traps shall be cleaned of all
material on a daily basis.



   H.   FOG removed from grease interceptors shall be waste hauled on a
regular basis as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for
grease interceptors and disposed of in a proper manner and at regular
intervals.



   I.   The owner and/or operator of a food facility with an approved
grease control device shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts and
invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease
control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than
two (2) years.  The owner and operator of a food facility shall, upon
request, make the manifests, receipts, and invoices available to any county
health care or city code enforcement representative, or his or her designee,
representative of a local sanitation agency that has jurisdiction of the
sanitary sewer system that services the food facility, or any authorized
inspector that has jurisdiction under the Water Quality Ordinance.



   J.   The owner and/or operator of a food facility with a grease
control device shall allow any county health care agency representative, city
code enforcement officer, or any authorized inspector that has jurisdiction
under the Water Quality Ordinance, or a representative of the local
sanitation agency that has jurisdiction of the sanitary sewer system that
services the food facility, access to the food facility premises during
normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the food facility’s
grease control devices, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices
relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control 
devices.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.544  MULTIPLE FOOD FACILITIES AT COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES.



   For properties at which multiple food facilities are operated on a
single parcel, each food facility operator shall be individually and
separately responsible for installation and maintenance of the grease
interceptor or other grease control device serving its food facility and for
compliance with this chapter.  Furthermore, owners of commercial properties
at which multiple food facilities that are operated on a single parcel shall
be responsible for ensuring compliance by each food facility on the parcel.
Such operators and/or property owner can comply with this chapter by
installing and maintaining a grease interceptor or grease interceptors or
other grease control devices serving multiple food facilities upon approval
by the City Manager on such terms and conditions that the City Manager may
establish in his or her sole discretion, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and the Uniform Plumbing Code.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.545  GREASE DISPOSAL MITIGATION FEE.



   A.   Commencing one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective
date of this article, new food facilities that are permitted to operate
without an installed grease interceptor as a result of a waiver or variance
issued under this chapter shall be required to pay an annual grease disposal
mitigation fee.



   B.   The payment of a grease disposal mitigation fee in lieu of
installing a grease interceptor shall only be allowed after all other grease
control devices have been considered for installation.



   C.   The grease disposal mitigation fee shall be established by
resolution of the City Council, and shall be based on the estimated annual
increased cost of maintaining the sewer system and sewer lateral pipelines
for inspection and removal of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents
attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor or
grease control device and such other costs that the City Council considers
appropriate.



   D.   This section shall not be interpreted to allow a new food
facility or existing food facilities undergoing remodeling or change in
operations, to operate without an approved grease interceptor unless the City
Manager has determined that it is impossible to install or operate a grease
control interceptor for the food facility under the provisions of this
chapter.



   E.   The food facility owner or operator shall pay the grease
disposal mitigation fee annually, no later than July 30 of each year.



   F.   The grease disposal mitigation fee may be waived or reduced on
a no less than annual basis when the food facility owner or operator
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Manager that it has fully
implemented BMPs on a regular basis to reduce the introduction of FOG into
the City’s sewer system to the extent such discharges from the food
facility meet the water quality requirements of the sewer system and the
sewer WDRs.



   G.   The grease disposal mitigation fee may not be waived or reduced
when the food facility’s private sewer lateral pipeline has failed and
resulted in a wastewater backup, a SSO or some other blockage of or
interference with the sewer system within or adjacent to the food facility
during the twelve (12) months prior to the waiver request.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.546  PAYMENT OF CHARGES.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided, all fees, charges and penalties
established by this chapter are due and payable upon receipt of notice
thereof.  All such amounts are delinquent if unpaid forty-five (45) days
after date of invoice.



   B.   Any charge that becomes delinquent shall have added to it a
penalty in accordance with the following:



      1.   Forty-six (46) days after date of invoice, a basic
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the base invoice amount, not to exceed a
maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000); and



      2.   A penalty of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month of
the base invoice amount and basic penalty shall accrue from and after the
forty- sixth (46) day after date of invoice.



   C.   Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after ninety (90) days shall
be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or
immediate suspension of the FOG wastewater discharge permit.



   D.   Penalties charged under this section shall not accrue to those
invoices successfully appealed, provided the city receives written
notification of the appeal prior to the payment due date.



   E.   Payment of disputed charges is still required by the due date
during the city review of any appeal submitted by a permittee or other person.



   F.   Collection of delinquent accounts shall be in accordance with
the city’s policy resolution establishing procedures for collection of
delinquent obligations owed to the city, as amended from time to time by the
City Council.  Any such action for collection may include an application for
an injunction to prevent repeated and recurring violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.550  SEWER SYSTEM OVERFLOWS AND INTERFERENCES, PUBLIC NUISANCE,
ABATEMENT ORDERS AND CLEANUP COSTS.



   A.   Notwithstanding any waiver of any grease interceptor or other
grease control device requirements under this chapter or any waiver or
variance, a food facility determined by the City Manager to have contributed
to a sewer blockage, SSOs or any sewer system interferences resulting from
the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, shall be ordered by the
City Manager to install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject
to a plan to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created
by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system
interferences.



   B.   Sewer line failures, blockages, SSOs and other sewer system
interferences may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and
welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances.



   C.   If the city must act immediately to contain and clean up a SSO
caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or serving a food
facility, or other sewer system, facility or line failures, blockages, or
other sewer system interferences, or at the request of  the property owner
or operator of the food facility, or because of the failure of the property
owner or the food facility to abate the condition causing immediate threat of
injury to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, the
city’s costs for such abatement shall be entirely borne by the property
owner or the operator of the FSE, and the individual(s) as a responsible
officer, operator or owner of the FSE(s), and shall constitute a debt to the
city and become due and immediately payable  upon the city’s request for
reimbursement of such costs.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.551  NOTIFICATION OF SPILL.



   A.   In the event a permittee or the operator of a food facility is
unable to comply with  any provision of this chapter or with any condition
of a FOG wastewater discharge permit due to a breakdown of equipment,
accidents, or human error or if the permittee has reasonable opportunity to
know that his, her or its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of
the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this chapter or applicable water
quality standards under applicable laws and regulations of a regulatory
agency or the sewer WDRs, or may cause a SSO, a sewer blockage or other
interference with the sewer system or sewer facilities, the discharger shall
immediately notify the city by telephone at the number specified in the
permit.  If the material discharged to the sewer system has the potential to
cause or results in sewer blockages or sewer interference or a SSO, the
discharger shall also immediately notify the Orange County Health Department.



   B.   Confirmation of the discharger’s notification shall be made
in writing to the City Manager at the address specified in the permit no
later than five (5) working days from the date of the incident.  The written
notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the
discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem,
and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.



   C.   Notification by a permittee of a spill shall not relieve the
permittee or any other person or entity of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or
any other public agency or regulatory agency or any other damage or loss to
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any
fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other
applicable law.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.560  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING CONDITIONS.



   A.   The City Manager may inspect or order the inspection and
sampling of the wastewater discharges of any food facility to ascertain
whether the provisions and intent of this chapter and sewer WDRs are being
met and the permittee is complying with all requirements of this chapter and
any FOG wastewater discharge permit and all applicable laws.



   B.   The permittee shall allow the city access to the food facility
premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the food
facility’s grease control devices or interceptor, reviewing the manifests,
receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of
the grease control devices or interceptor.  Where a food facility has
security measures in force, the permittee shall make necessary arrangements
so that representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter without delay
for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.



   C.   The City Manager shall have the right to place or order the
placement on the food facility’s property or other locations as determined
by the City Manager, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or
metering operations.



   D.   For the City Manager to determine the wastewater
characteristics of the discharger for purposes of determining the annual use
charge and for compliance with permit requirements, the permittee shall make
available for inspection and copying by the city all notices, monitoring
reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those
related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal without restriction
but subject to the confidentiality provision set forth in this chapter.  All
such records shall be kept by the permittee for a minimum of two (2) years.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.561  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Permittees, owners or operators of food facilities, and other persons
or occupants of premises where wastewater or FOG is created or discharged
shall allow the City Manager, or city representatives, reasonable access to
all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the
purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the discharger’s
facility is open, operating, or any other reasonable time.  No person shall
interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to city representatives
attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a
discharge of wastewater to the city’s sewer system.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10) Penalty, see §§ 13.00.610 and 13.00.620



§ 13.00.570  VIOLATIONS.



   A.   The owner and operator of a food facility shall be in violation
of this chapter if such owner or operator or permittee:



      1.   Discharges wastewater in any manner in violation of this
chapter or of any order issued by the City Manager, as authorized by this
chapter;



      2.   Fails to obtain a discharge permit, as required and
within the period of time specified by this chapter;



      3.   Fails to install an approved grease control device as
required by this chapter;



      4.   Makes any false statement, representation, record,
report, plan or other document that is filed with the county;



      5.   Tampers with or knowingly renders inoperable any grease
control device required under this chapter;



      6.   Fails to clean, maintain or remove grease from a grease
control device within the required time for such cleaning, maintenance or
grease removal;



      7.   Fails to keep up-to-date and accurate records of all
cleaning, maintenance, and grease removal for the food facility’s grease
control device and upon request fails to make those records available to any
city code enforcement representative, or their designees, or to any
representative of a public agency or a local sanitation agency that has
jurisdiction over the sewer system that services the FSE for the purpose of
inspecting, monitoring, or reviewing the grease control device manifests,
receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from
the grease control device, and/or to inspect the grease control device;



      8.   Refuses a county health care or city code enforcement
representative, or his or her designee, or the City Manager or a
representative of a local sanitary sewer agency that has jurisdiction over
the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility, or any authorized
inspector, reasonable access to the food facility for the purposes of
inspecting, monitoring, or reviewing the grease control device manifests,
receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from
the grease control device, and/or to inspect the grease control device;



      9.   Disposes of, or knowingly allows or directs FOG to be
disposed of, in an unlawful manner;



      10.   Fails to remove all food grinders located in the food
facility at the time he or she renews their business license;



      11.   Introduces additives into a wastewater system for the
purposes of emulsifying fats, oils and grease without the written, specific
authorization from the sanitary sewer agency that has jurisdiction of the
sanitary sewer system that services the food facility;



      12.   Fails to pay the grease disposal mitigation fee or other
fees, as specified in this chapter when due;



      13.   Fails to perform any required monitoring, or to submit
monitoring reports required by the City Manager;



      14.   Fails to comply with the provisions of the FOG Control
Manual; or



      15.   Otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or any permit issued by the city under this chapter.



   B.   Violations under this section shall be subject to the
procedures, penalties and remedies set out in Chapter 1.04, as amended from
time to time.



   C.   All costs for the investigations, enforcement actions and
ultimate corrections of violations under this section incurred by the city
(including but not limited to attorney’s fees), shall be reimbursed by the
owner/operator of the food facility.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.571  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Discharge of waste, FOG or wastewater in any manner in violation of
this chapter, the sewer WDRs or any other waste discharge requirements or
permit established or issued by the City Manager, as authorized by this
chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the City Manager.  Any person creating a public
nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.572  DAMAGES TO FACILITIES OR INTERRUPTION OF NORMAL OPERATIONS.



   A.   Any person who discharges any waste, FOG or wastewater,
including but not limited to those listed under 40 C.F.R. 403.5, which causes
or contributes to any sewer blockage, SSOs, obstruction, interference,
damage, or any other impairment to the city’s sewer system, or to the
operation of those facilities shall be liable for all costs required to clean
or repair the facilities together with expenses incurred by the city to
resume normal operations.



   B.   A service charge of twenty-five percent (25%) of city’s costs
shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse the city for
miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and record
keeping.  The total amount shall be payable within forty-five (45) days of
invoicing by the city.



   C.   Any person who discharges waste, FOG or wastewater which causes
or contributes to the City violating its sewer WDR, or any other waste
discharge requirements or permit established or issued to the city by any
regulatory agency, or the city incurring additional expenses or suffering
losses or damage to facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses
incurred by the city, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments
made by other agencies or a court.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.580  ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   The City Council finds that in order for the city to comply
with the laws, regulations, and rules imposed upon it by regulatory agencies
and the sewer WDRs and to ensure that the city’s sewer facilities are
protected and are able to operate with the highest degree of efficiency, and
to protect the public health and environment, specific enforcement provisions
must be adopted to govern the discharges to the city’s sewer system by food
facilities.



   B.   To ensure that all interested parties are afforded due process
of law and that violations are resolved as soon as possible, the general
policy of the city is that:



      1.   Any determination relating to a notice of violation and
compliance schedule agreement (CSA) will be made by the City Manager, with a
right of appeal by the permittee to the City Council pursuant to the
procedures set forth in § 13.00.586;



      2.   A permittee or applicant for a permit may request the
City Council of the city to hear an appeal of the City Manager’s decision
pursuant to § 13.00.586.  Such request may be granted or denied by the City
Council; and



      3.   Any permit suspension or revocation recommended by the
City Manager will be heard and a recommendation made to the City Manager or
other person designated by the City Manager with a right of appeal of the
City Manager’s order by the permittee to the City Council pursuant to the
provisions of § 13.00.586.



   C.   The city, at its discretion, may utilize any one, combination,
or all enforcement remedies provided in this chapter, the City Code, and as
otherwise provided by law, in response to any discharge permit or chapter
violations.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.581  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE AGREEMENT.



   A.   Upon determination by the City Manager that a permittee or
other owner or operator of a food facility or owner of a property or a
discharger is not in compliance with the terms and conditions specified in
its FOG wastewater discharge permit or any provision of this chapter, or
needs to construct and/or acquire and install a grease control device or
grease interceptor, the City Manager may require the permittee, owner or
operator to enter into a compliance schedule agreement (CSA).



   B.   The issuance of a CSA may contain terms and conditions as
determined appropriate by the City Manager, including but not limited to
requirements for installation of a grease control device, grease interceptor
and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling
records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees,
or other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter.



   C.   The City Manager shall not enter into a CSA until such time as
all amounts owed to the city, including permit and other user or discharge
fees, noncompliance sampling fees, or other amounts due under this chapter
are paid in full, or an agreement for deferred payment secured by collateral
or a third party, is approved by the City Manager.



   D.   If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and
conditions of a CSA during its term, the City Manager may issue an order
suspending or revoking the discharge permit pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.582  FOG WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT SUSPENSION.



   A.   The City Manager may suspend any FOG wastewater discharge
permit when it is determined by the City Manager that a permittee:



      1.   Has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a
CSA, its FOG wastewater discharge permit or other order or directive by the
City Manager under this chapter;



      2.   Knowingly provided a false statement, representation,
record, report, or other document to the City Manager, the city or other
regulatory agency;



      3.   Refused to provide records, reports, plans, or other
documents required by the City Manager, the city or other regulatory agency
to determine compliance with permit terms or conditions, discharge
compliance, or compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws or
regulations;



      4.   Falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered
inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method;



      5.   Refused reasonable access to the permittee’s premises
for the purpose of inspection and monitoring or as otherwise provided for in
this chapter;



      6.   Failed to make timely payment of all amounts owed to the
city for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to
this chapter;



      7.   Causes interference, sewer blockages, or SSOs with or to
the city’s sewer system facilities or collection, treatment, or disposal
system;



      8.   Violated grease control device maintenance requirements,
or any condition or limit of its permit or any provision of this chapter;



      9.   Failed to comply with the provisions of the FOG Control
Manual; or



      10.   Otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or any permit issued by the city under this chapter.



   B.   When the City Manager has reason to believe that grounds exist
for suspension of a FOG wastewater discharge permit, he or she shall give
written notice thereof by certified mail or overnight mail delivery to the
permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist.



   C.   Effect.



      1.   Upon an order of suspension by the City Manager, the
permittee shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no
right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to
the city’s sewer system for the duration of the suspension.  All costs for
physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the permittee.



      2.   Any owner or responsible management employee of the
permittee shall be bound by the order of suspension.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.583  FOG WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.



   A.   Revocation. The City Manager may revoke any FOG wastewater
discharge permit when it is determined by the City Manager that a permittee
has failed to comply with this chapter.



   B.   Effect.



      1.   Upon an order of revocation FOG wastewater discharge
permit by the City Manager becoming final, the permittee shall permanently
lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or
indirectly to the city’s sewer system.  All costs for physical termination
shall be paid by the permittee.



      2.   Any owner or responsible management employee of the
permittee shall be bound by the order of revocation.



      3.   Any future application for a FOG wastewater discharge
permit at any location within the city by any person associated with an order
of revocation will be considered by the city after fully reviewing the
records of the revoked permit, which records may be the basis for denial of a
new permit.



      4.   An order of FOG wastewater discharge permit revocation
issued by the City Manager shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth
day after it is mailed to the permittee.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.584  TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   A.   The city, by order of the City Manager, may physically
terminate sewer service and water service to any food facility, as follows:



      1.   On a term of any order of suspension or revocation of a
FOG wastewater discharge permit; or



      2.   Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid FOG
wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether
direct or indirect, to the city’s sewer facilities after the notice and
process as provided herein.



   B.   All costs for physical termination as well as all costs for
reinstating service, shall be paid by the owner or operator of the food
facility or permittee.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.585  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION ORDER.



   The city may, by order of the City Manager, suspend sewer service and/
or water service when the City Manager determines that such suspension is
necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or
may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare
of persons, or to the environment, or may cause SSOs, sewer blockages,
interference to the city’s sewer facilities, or may cause the city to
violate any state or federal law or regulation or the sewer WDRs.  Any
discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall
immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG
to the sewer system.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.586  APPEALS.



   Any decision of the City Manager, other than a decision pursuant to §
13.00.585, may be appealed by any owner or operator of a food facility
affected by the decision, to the City Council.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



ARTICLE VI.  LEGAL AUTHORITY AND PENALTIES



§ 13.00.600  LEGAL AUTHORITY AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Manager is hereby charged with the legal authority and duty of
enforcing all provision in this chapter.  The provisions of this chapter
shall be applicable to any discharge and any building, structure or property
temporarily or permanently connected to the city sewer system, whether the
same is owned, operated or controlled by a private party or by a public
agency, other than the city, or quasi-public agency, corporation or
association.



   A.   The city shall have legal authority to obtain remedies for
noncompliance by industrial users with any pretreatment standard and
requirement, including the authority to seek injunctive relief. The city
shall have authority and procedures (after informal notice to the discharger)
to immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants
that may constitute an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, or cause interference with the operation of
any treatment plant.



   B.   In addition to such other penalties as may be prescribed for a
violation of these rules and regulations, whenever the City Manager finds
that a discharge of waste has been taking place in violation of any
prohibitions or limitations prescribed herein or pretreatment standards
promulgated in accordance herewith, he or she may require the user to submit
for his or her approval best management practice plans (BMPs) wherever
necessary to implement a pretreatment program (e.g. plans ensuring industrial
users conduct necessary routine maintenance, cleaning operations, chemical
storage practices, segregation of wastes for reclamation, reduction of
contaminated runoff, and the like).  Any failure to comply with such BMPs
shall likewise be deemed a violation of this article.



   C.   In addition to criminal penalties and administrative penalties
authorized by this code, all users of the city’s system and facilities are
subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the city,
U.S. EPA, Santa Ana RWQCB, or the County of Orange and other regulatory
agencies.  These actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and
provisions of several laws, including but not limited to:



      1.   Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.);



      2.   California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Cal.
Water Code §§ 13000 et seq.);



      3.   California Hazardous Waste Control Law (Cal. Health &
Safety Code §§ 25100 to 25250);



      4.   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42
U.S.C.A. §§ 6901 et seq.); and



      5.   Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54739 and 54740.



   D.   In the event the city is subject to the payment of fines or
penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory
agencies or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or
its permits or the sewer WDRs, and said violation can be established by the
city, as caused by the discharge of any user of the city’s sewer system
which is in violation of any provision of this chapter or the user’s FOG
wastewater discharge permit, the city shall be entitled to recover from the
user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount
of the fines or penalties to which it has been subjected.



   E.   Pursuant to the authority of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54739 and
54740, any person who violates any provision of this chapter; any permit
condition, prohibition or effluent limit; or any suspension or revocation
order shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000) per violation for each day in which such violation
occurs.  Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq., any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any permit
condition, prohibition, or effluent limit shall be liable civilly for a sum
not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per violation for each
day in which such violation occurs.  The City Attorney, upon request of the
City Manager, shall petition the Superior Court to impose, assess, and
recover such penalties, or such other penalties as the city may impose,
assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or state legislative
authorization.



   F.   Administrative civil penalties.  Pursuant to the authority of
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54740.5 and 54740.6, the city may issue an
administrative complaint to any person who violates:



      1.   Any provision of this chapter;



      2.   Any condition of a FOG wastewater discharge permit, a
CSA, a prohibition, or effluent limit, or any provision of the sewer WDRs; or



      3.   Any suspension or revocation order.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.610  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   A.   In addition to criminal penalties and administrative penalties
authorized by this code, all users of the city’s system and facilities are
subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the city,
U.S. EPA, Santa Ana RWQCB, or the County of Orange and other regulatory
agencies.  These actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and
provisions of several laws, including but not limited to:



      1.   Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.);



      2.   California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Cal.
Water Code §§ 13000 et seq.);



      3.   California Hazardous Waste Control Law (Cal. Health &
Safety Code §§ 25100 to 25250);



      4.   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42
U.S.C.A. §§ 6901 et seq.); and



      5.   Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54739 and 54740.



   B.   In the event the city is subject to the payment of fines or
penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory
agencies or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or
its permits or the sewer WDRs, and said violation can be established by the
city, as caused by the discharge of any user of the city’s sewer system
which is in violation of any provision of this chapter or the user’s FOG
wastewater discharge permit, the city shall be entitled to recover from the
user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount
of the fines or penalties to which it has been subjected.



   C.   Pursuant to the authority of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54739 and
54740, any person who violates any provision of this chapter; any permit
condition, prohibition or effluent limit; or any suspension or revocation
order shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000) per violation for each day in which such violation
occurs.  Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq., any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any permit
condition, prohibition, or effluent limit shall be liable civilly for a sum
not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per violation for each
day in which such violation occurs.  The City Attorney, upon request of the
City Manager, shall petition the Superior Court to impose, assess, and
recover such penalties, or such other penalties as the city may impose,
assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or state legislative
authorization.



   D.   Administrative civil penalties.  Pursuant to the authority of
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54740.5 and 54740.6, the city may issue an
administrative complaint to any person who violates:



      1.   Any provision of this chapter;



      2.   Any condition of a FOG wastewater discharge permit, a
CSA, a prohibition, or effluent limit, or any provision of the sewer WDRs; or



      3.   Any suspension or revocation order.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.620  CRIMINAL PENALTIES.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of a FOG
wastewater discharge permit or CSA is guilty of a misdemeanor, which upon
conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000), or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both.  Each
violation and each day in which a violation occurs may constitute a new and
separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
contained herein.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.630  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Pursuant to Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 1094.6, the city hereby enacts this
section to limit to ninety (90) days following final decisions in
adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be
brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, and pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 54740.6,
judicial review of a final order of the City Council or the City Manager
imposing administrative civil penalties pursuant to this chapter may be made
only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the
thirtieth day following the day on which such order becomes final.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



§ 13.00.640  SEVERABILITY AND GENERAL APPLICATION.



   A.   Severability.  If any provision of this chapter or its
application to any circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this
chapter and/or the application of such provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected.



   B.   General application. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
to all properties within the city and unincorporated areas that are served by
the Brea sewer system, including those properties otherwise being exempt from
payment of taxes or assessments by provisions of the State Constitution or
statute, including properties owned by public agencies or tax exempt
organizations.



(Ord. 1137, passed 4-20-10)



CHAPTER 13.04:  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES



Section



   13.04.010   Definitions



   13.04.020   Public hearing by Council



   13.04.030   Report by City Engineer



   13.04.040   Council may designate underground utility districts by
resolution



   13.04.050   Unlawful acts



   13.04.060   Exceptions



   13.04.070   Notice to property owners and utility companies



   13.04.080   Responsibility of utility companies



   13.04.090   Responsibility of property owners



   13.04.100   Responsibility of city



   13.04.110   Extension of time



§ 13.04.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMISSION. The Public Utilities Commission of the state.



   PERSON. Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their
agents and employees.



   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES and ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES.  Poles,
towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms,
braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances  located above ground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar
or associated service.



   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT. That area in the city within
which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are
prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the
provisions of § 13.04.040.



   UTILITY. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.



('61 Code, § 23B.1)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.020  PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL.



   The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain
whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal
of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated
areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities
for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The
City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and
place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each
such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to
time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and
conclusive.



('61 Code, § 23B.2)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.030  REPORT BY CITY ENGINEER.



   Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult
with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such
hearing containing among other information, the extent of such utilities
participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected
property owners. Such report shall also contain all estimates of the time
required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead
facilities.



('61 Code, § 23B.3)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.040  COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS BY
RESOLUTION.



   If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by
resolution declare such designated area an underground utility district and
order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall
include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the
time within which such removal and underground installation shall be
accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to
receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such
removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability
of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the
installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.



('61 Code, § 23B.4)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.050  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders
the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
therein as provided in § 13.04.040, it shall be unlawful for any person or
utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or
operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the
district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be
removed by such resolution except as such overhead facilities may be required
to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the
performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for
such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in
§ 13.04.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities
after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.



('61 Code, § 23B.5)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.060  EXCEPTIONS.



   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead
facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten
(10) days, without authority of the Council in order to provide emergency
service. The Council may grant special permission on such terms as the
Council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without
discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install,
maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures.



('61 Code, § 23B.6)



   B.   In any resolution adopted pursuant to § 13.04.040, the city
may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:



      1.   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.



      2.   Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street
lighting.



      3.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures)
crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been
prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when
such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures are not prohibited.



      4.   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of
34,500 volts.



      5.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a
building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one (1)
location on the building to another location on the same building or to an
adjacent building without crossing any public street.



      6.   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures,
used by a utility for furnishing communication services.



      7.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such
meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.



      8.   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.



('61 Code, § 23B.7)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.070  NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.



   A.   Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution
adopted pursuant to § 13.04.040, the City Clerk shall notify all affected
utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by
such resolution of the adopting thereof. Such City Clerk shall further notify
such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person
occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric,
communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall
provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive
such service from the lines supplying utility or utilities at a new location
subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective
utility or utilities on file with the Commission.



   B.   Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy
of the resolution adopted pursuant to § 13.04.040, together with a copy of
this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last
equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.



('61 Code, § 23B.8)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.080  RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.



   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service
within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to § 13.04.040,
the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors
and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission.



('61 Code, § 23B.9)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.090  RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.



   A.   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his or her property between the
facilities referred to in § 13.04.080 and the termination facility on or
within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with the
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or
utilities on file with the Commission.



   B.   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying
or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of paragraph A.
of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted
pursuant to § 13.04.040, the City Engineer shall post written notice on the
property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter may authorize the
disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and
associated facilities supplying utility service to such property.



('61 Code, § 23B.10)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.100  RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.



   The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from
all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner
or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to § 13.04.040.



('61 Code, § 23B.11)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



§ 13.04.110  EXTENSION OF TIME.



   In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to § 13.04.040 cannot be performed within the time provided
on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities,
strikes, minor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances
beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be
accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such
limitation.



('61 Code, § 23B.12)  (Ord. 424, passed - - )



CHAPTER 13.08:  WATER



Section



   13.08.010   Management of municipal water system



   13.08.020   Fiscal integrity of municipal water system



§ 13.08.010  MANAGEMENT OF MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM.



   The municipal water system shall be managed by the city through its
officers and employees, subject to such regulations and charges as may from
time to time be provided for.



('61 Code, § 24.1)  (Ord. 319, passed - - )



§ 13.08.020  FISCAL INTEGRITY OF MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM.



   It is the policy of the city that the city's municipal water system
shall be operated on such a basis that expenditures for water purchases,
maintenance, repair, capital improvements, employee salaries and benefits and
all incidental and related expenses therefor ultimately are paid for or
recovered by water rates charged to the various users of water serviced by
the municipal water system. Those officers and employees charged with the
management and operation of the municipal water system shall endeavor to
obtain any and all funds available to the municipal water system including,
but not limited to, grants from federal and state sources. Nothing contained
in this section shall preclude the city from making advances or loans to the
municipal water system, or grants, on such terms and conditions as are deemed
advisable by the City Council, from any funds of the city lawfully available
for the making of such loans, advances and/or grants.



('61 Code, § 24.2)  (Ord. 759, passed - - )



CHAPTER 13.12:  WELL CONSTRUCTION
AND ABANDONMENT



Section



   13.12.010   Purpose of chapter



   13.12.020   Definitions



   13.12.030   Permit



   13.12.040   Notification of completion of work; final inspection



   13.12.050   Notification of cancellation or denial of permit



   13.12.060   Public nuisance abatement



   13.12.070   Hearings; actions taken by Council



   13.12.080   Abatement costs



   13.12.090   Standards



§ 13.12.010  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to control the construction and
reconstruction of wells to the end that the ground water of the city will not
be impaired in quality and that water obtained from such wells will be
suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health,
safety or welfare of the people of this city; and to provide for the
destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances to the
end that such wells will not impair the quality of groundwater or otherwise
jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city.



('61 Code, § 24A.1)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



§ 13.12.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED, ABANDONMENT.  A well which has not been used for a period
of one (1) year, unless the owner declares in writing, to the City Engineer,
his or her intention to use the well again for supplying water or other
associated purposes, such as an observation well or injection well, and
receives approval of such declaration from the City Engineer. All such
declarations shall be renewed annually and at such time be resubmitted to the
City Engineer for approval. Test holes and exploratory holes shall be
considered abandoned twenty-four (24) hours after construction work has been
completed, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.



   AGRICULTURAL WELL. A water well used to supply water for irrigation or
other agricultural purposes, including so-called stock wells.



   CATHODIC PROTECTION WELL. Any artificial excavation in excess of 50
feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or
facilities for the protection, electrically, of metallic equipment in contact
with the ground, commonly referred to as a cathodic protection well or a deep
anode.



   CITY ENGINEER.  The City Engineer of the city of Brea or his or her
designee.



   COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY WELL. A water well used to supply water for
domestic purposes in systems subject to Cal. Health & Safety Code, Chapter 7
of Part 1 of Division 5.



   CONSTRUCT, RECONSTRUCT. To dig, drive, bore, drill or deepen a well, or
to reperforate, remove, replace or extend a well casing.



   DESTRUCTION. The proper filling and sealing of a well that is no longer
useful so as to assure that the ground water is protected, and to eliminate a
potential physical hazard.



   ELECTRICAL GROUNDING WELL. Any artificial excavation in excess of 50
feet constructed by any method for the purpose of establishing an electrical
ground.



   INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC WELL. A water well used to supply water for
domestic needs of an individual residence or commercial establishment.



   INDUSTRIAL WELL. A water well used to supply an industry on an
individual basis.



   OBSERVATION WELL. A well used for monitoring or sampling the conditions
of a water-bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or
quality.



   PERMIT.  A written permit issued by the City Engineer permitting the
construction, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment of a well.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. When applied to a well, shall mean any well which
threatens to impair the quality of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the
health or safety of the public.



   SALT WATER (HYDRAULIC) BARRIER WELL.  A well used for extracting water
from or injecting water into the underground as a means of preventing the
intrusion of salt water into a fresh water bearing aquifer.



   TEST or EXPLANATORY HOLE. An excavation used for determining the nature
of underground geological or hydrological collections, whether by seismic
investigation, direct observation or any other means.



   WELL.  Any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the
purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, for
providing cathodic protection or electrical grounding of equipment, for
making tests or observations of underground conditions or for any other
similar purpose. WELLS shall include, but shall not be limited to, community
water supply wells, individual domestic wells, industrial wells, agricultural
wells, cathodic protection wells, electrical grounding wells, test and
exploratory holes, observation wells and salt water (hydraulic) barrier
wells, as defined herein, and other wells whose regulation is necessary to
fulfill the purpose of this chapter as determined by the City Engineer. WELLS
shall not include: oil and gas wells, geothermal wells or other wells
constructed under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Conservation,
except those wells converted to use as water wells; wells used for the
purpose of dewatering excavations during construction, or stabilizing
hillsides or earth embankments; or other wells whose regulation is not
necessary to fulfill the purpose of this chapter as determined by the City
Engineer.



('61 Code, § 24A.2)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



§ 13.12.030  PERMIT.



   A.   No person shall, within the incorporated area of the city,
construct or reconstruct any well unless such construction or reconstruction
is carried out pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued
for that purpose by the City Engineer as provided in this chapter.



   B.   Nor shall any such person abandon a well unless it has been
destroyed pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued by the
City Engineer.



   C.   Nor shall any such person violate the terms of any order issued
by the City Engineer, issued pursuant to this chapter.



('61 Code, § 24A.3)



   D.   Applications for permits shall be made to the City Engineer
containing such information as he or she shall require.



   E.   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established by the City Council on the basis of the cost incurred in
enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Fifty percent (50%) of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant should the permit be denied or if the
permit is cancelled within sixty (60) days after issuance and no work has
been done. A permit shall remain in effect for one (1) year from date of
issuance.



   F.   Permits may be issued subject to any condition or requirement
found by the City Engineer to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter.



   G.   A permit may be cancelled or the conditions amended by the City
Engineer if he or she determines that to proceed with the work would result
in a public nuisance or the permit holder has violated the terms of the
permit or this chapter.



('61 Code, § 24A.4)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



§ 13.12.040  NOTIFICATION OF COMPLETION OF WORK; FINAL INSPECTION.



   The permittee shall notify the City Engineer in writing upon completion
of the work and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until such
written notification has been received. A final inspection of the work shall
be made by the City Engineer and no permittee shall be deemed to have
complied with this chapter or his or her permit until such inspection has
been performed.



('61 Code, § 24A.5)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



§ 13.12.050  NOTIFICATION OF CANCELLATION OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   In the event a permit is denied or cancelled, the applicant or permit
holder shall be given written notice by the City Engineer, which notice shall
specify the reasons for his or her action and shall notify the applicant or
permit holder of his or her right to request a hearing before the City
Engineer within ten (10) days.



('61 Code, § 24A.6)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



§ 13.12.060  PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   A.   In the event the City Engineer determines that a well
constitutes a public nuisance, he or she shall mail a written notice to the
landowner and the permit holder, if other than the landowner. A copy of the
notice shall be posted on the affected property. The notice shall state the
specific facts giving rise to such nuisance, the corrective measures deemed
necessary and time, date and place at which a hearing shall be held by the
City Council relating thereto, which date shall be not less than ten (10) nor
more than thirty (30) days after the date such notice is mailed.



('61 Code, § 24A.7)



   B.   If the City Engineer finds that immediate action is necessary
to prevent impairment of the ground water or a threat to the health or safety
of the public, he or she may abate the nuisance without giving notice. Within
twenty-four (24) hours after initiating such abatement, the City Engineer
shall give notice of a hearing before the City Council in the manner
prescribed in paragraph A. above.



('61 Code, § 24A.8)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



§ 13.12.070  HEARINGS; ACTIONS TAKEN BY COUNCIL.



   A.   At the time fixed for the hearing, the City Council shall hear
and consider all relevant testimony and evidence offered by the landowner,
and by any other interested person. In the event the Council finds that a
public nuisance exists, it shall direct the City Engineer to take any
necessary action to protect the ground water or the health and safety of the
public, unless the situation is corrected by the landowner on or before a
date to be specified by the Council.



   B.   If the Council finds that a permit was improperly denied or
cancelled, it shall order the City Engineer to issue or reinstate such permit.



('61 Code, § 24A.9)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



§ 13.12.080  ABATEMENT COSTS.



   The city shall have the right to recover its costs expended in abating
a nuisance pursuant to this chapter by way of civil action against the owner
and person in possession or control of the well in question, jointly or
severally.



('61 Code, § 24A.10)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



§ 13.12.090  STANDARDS.



   Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction or
abandonment of wells shall be the standards recommended in the State
Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, Chapter II and Appendices E, F
and G, and future amendments thereto. Until such time as standards for
cathodic protection wells and electrical grounding wells are recommended by
the State Department of Water Resources, such wells shall conform to the
“Tentative Deep Anode Standards,” Sheets A-497-S-1 and A-497-S-2 revised
December 10, 1969, of the Southern California Cathodic Protection Committee.
Well standards may be modified by the City Engineer, with the  concurrence
of the City Council, where required to cope with local geological and ground
water conditions.



('61 Code, § 24A.11)  (Ord. 506, passed - - )



CHAPTER 13.16:  BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROLS



Section



   13.16.010   Legislative policy and intent



   13.16.020   Definitions



   13.16.030   Enforcement



   13.16.040   Backflow prevention devices



   13.16.050   Operating permit



   13.16.060   Right of entry



   13.16.070   Appeals



   13.16.080   Board of Appeals



   13.16.090   Findings by City Council



§ 13.16.010  LEGISLATIVE POLICY AND INTENT.



   A.   It is the intent of the City Council, in enacting this Chapter
13.16, to enhance the health, safety and welfare of the community and to
protect the public water supply of the city from contamination or pollution
by isolating within the water customer's internal distribution or private
water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public
water system.



   B.   Further, it is the intent of this Council to promote the
elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential,
between in-plant potable water systems and nonpotable water systems, plumbing
fixtures and industrial piping systems, and to provide for a continuing
program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively
prevent the contamination or pollution of the city's water system.



   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter 13.16 shall be construed to
abrogate or supersede any provision or provisions of the Uniform Plumbing
Code, as most recently adopted by this Council, and the provisions of said
Uniform Plumbing Code shall be considered complementary and an addition to
the requirements of this Chapter 13.16.



('61 Code, § 24B.1)  (Ord. 835, passed - - )



§ 13.16.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR-GAP.  The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said
vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe, measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel, and
in no case less than one (1") inch.



   APPROVED.  Accepted by the Director as meeting an applicable
specification stated in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use.



   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY.  Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the city's public water supply will be considered as an
auxiliary water supply. Auxiliary waters may include water from another
public or private water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well,
spring, river, stream, harbor, and the like, or “used waters” or
“industrial fluids.” These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they
may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which
the city does not have sanitary control.



   BACKFLOW.The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.



   BACK PRESSURE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water
supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source.



   BACKSIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any
source other than its intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.



   CONTAMINATION.  An impairment of the quality of potable water by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a
degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health
through poisoning or through the spread of disease.



   CROSS-CONNECTION.Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which
contains potable water and the other non potable water or industrial fluids
of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may
occur into the city's water system. This includes, but it is not limited to,
any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections,
four (4) way plug valves, spools, dummy section of pipe, swivel or
change-over devices or sliding multiport tube.



   CROSS-CONNECTIONS — CONTROLLED.  A connection between the city's
water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow
prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will
continuously afford protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.



   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT.The installation of an approved
backflow prevention assembly at the water service connection to any
customer's premises where it is physically and economically unfeasible to
find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential
cross-connections within the customer's water system. Alternatively, it shall
mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the
service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system
where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be
effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Maintenance Services or his or her designee.



   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY.  An assembly of two (2) independently
operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each
end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of
each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance
specifications as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program
resulting in an approval by a recognized and city approved testing agency for
backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these assemblies must be
readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance.



   HAZARD, DEGREE OF.  The term derived from an evaluation of the
potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the
potable water system and includes the following:



      1.    HAZARD - HEALTH.  Any condition, device, or practice in
the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the
judgment of the Director, may create a danger to the health and well-being of
the water customer.



      2.    HAZARD - PLUMBING.  A plumbing type cross- connection
into a customer's potable water system that has not been properly protected
by an approved air-gap or approved backflow prevention assembly.



      3.    HAZARD - POLLUTIONAL.  An actual or potential threat to
the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the
public or the customer's potable water system which may constitute a nuisance
or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.



      4.    HAZARD - SYSTEM.  An actual or potential threat of
severe damage to the physical properties of the city's water system or the
customers potable water system or of pollution or contamination which would
have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.



   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM.  Any system containing a fluid or solution
which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted
in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system,
pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply.
This may include, but is not limited to: polluted or contaminated water; all
types of process waters and “used waters” originating from the public
potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalines, circulating cooling
waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are
chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances;
contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers,
irrigation canals or systems, and the like; oils, gases, glycerine,
paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting purposes.



   POLLUTION.  The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a
degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which
does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY. An assembly of two (2)
independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent differential pressure relief valve
located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check
valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing
shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet
the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and a
field evaluation program resulting in an approval by a recognized and city
approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The assembly
shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two (2) check
valves at an acceptable level less than the pressure on the public water
supply side of the assembly. At cessation of a normal flow, the pressure
between the two (2) check valves shall be less than the pressure on the
public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the
check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the
reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the
atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2) pounds per square inch or
less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these
assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance and
be installed in location where no part of the assembly will be submerged.



   WATER - NONPOTABLE.  Water which is not safe for human consumption or
which is of questionable potability.



   WATER - POTABLE.  Any water which, according to recognized standards,
is safe for human consumption.



   WATER - SERVICE CONNECTION.  The terminal end of a service connection
from the city's potable water system. If a meter is installed at the end of
the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream
end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service
line ahead of any meter or any backflow prevention assembly located at the
point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall
also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other
temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable
water system.



   WATER SYSTEM.  The water system shall be considered as made up of two
(2) parts: The utility system and the customer system.



      1.   The utility system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution systems and shall include all those facilities of the
water system under the complete control of the city, up to the point where
the customer system begins.



      2.   The customer system shall include those parts of the
facilities beyond the termination of the utility system which are utilized in
conveying domestic water to points of use.



('61 Code, § 24B.2)  (Ord. 835, passed - - )



§ 13.16.030  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Director of Maintenance Services shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter and shall have the responsibility for making interpretations of
this chapter, issuing operating permits, for deciding upon the approval of
materials, equipment and devices required to be installed hereunder and
establishing approved testing facilities.



('61 Code, § 24B.3)  (Ord. 835, passed - - )



§ 13.16.040  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.



   A.   Where required.  An approved backflow prevention assembly
shall also be installed on each service line to the customer system at or
near the property line or immediately inside the building being served, but
in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service line,
wherever the following conditions exist:



      1.   In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply
which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and
which has not been accepted as an additional source by the city, the public
water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line
appropriate to the degree of hazard.



      2.   In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or
any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create
an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system
shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an
approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the
degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and
waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to
deterioration in quality.



      3.   In the case of premises having internal cross-connection
that cannot be permanently corrected or controlled; or intricate plumbing and
piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.



      4.   In the event that the provisions of California Code of
Regulations, Title 17 as the same may be amended from time to time or its
successor provisions, pertaining to where backflow and cross-connection
devices are required, mandate greater or more stringent requirements than as
set forth in this § 13.16.040, then such provisions of said Title 17
pertaining thereto shall apply notwithstanding the provisions of this §
13.16.040.



('61 Code, § 24B.4)



   B.   Type required.  The type of protective assembly required for
the premises shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:



      1.   In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary
water supply as stated in paragraph A. above of this section and it is not
subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly.



      2.   In the case of any premises where there is water of a
substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if
introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved double check valve assembly at each service
connection.



      3.   In the case of any premises where there is any material
dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual
or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall
be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at each service connection.
Examples of premises where these conditions exist, include, but are not
limited to, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical
manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.



      4.   In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled
cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall
be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at each service connection.



      5.   In the case of any premises where, because of security
requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or
impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public
water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either
an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly on each service connection to the premises.



      6.   In the event that the provisions of California Code of
Regulations, Title 17, as the same may be amended from time to time or its
successor provisions, pertaining to the type of backflow and cross-connection
devices required to be installed for a given degree of hazard, mandate a
different or more stringent requirement for a given degree of hazard, then
such provisions of said Title 17 pertaining thereto shall apply
notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph B.



('61 Code, § 24B.5)



   C.   Approval.



      1.   Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be
a model and size approved by the Director. The term “approved backflow
prevention assembly” shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in
full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works
Association entitled:



      AWWA C506-84 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double
Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices; and that meets laboratory and field
performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and
Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by:



      Specifications of Backflow Prevention



      Assemblies § 10 of the most current



      issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection



      Control.



      2.   Said AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications have
been adopted by the Director. Final approval shall be evidenced by a
“certificate of approval” issued by an approved testing laboratory
certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCC&HR
specifications.



      3.   The Director shall formulate a list of approved testing
laboratories.



('61 Code, § 24B.6)



(Ord. 835, passed - - )



§ 13.16.050  OPERATING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A.   Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership or corporation which is a water customer of the city and whose
premises requires the installation and maintenance of a backflow prevention
device to obtain water from the city without first obtaining an operating
permit issued by the Director and approval the backflow prevention device(s)
installed, or to be installed, at the premises and otherwise complying with
any and all terms and provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 24B.7)



   B.   Application.  Every person, firm, partnership or corporation
required to obtain an operating permit hereunder shall make application to
the Director for issuance of such operating permit prior to commencement of
any activities requiring the installation of a backflow prevention device.
Such application shall be in the form prescribed by the Director and shall
include therein the following information:



      1.   Location of premises.



      2.   Numbered and location of service connections.



      3.   Name, model and type of device proposed to be installed
and the location thereof.



      4.   Type of use requiring installation of backflow prevention
device; i.e., process water, contaminated water, plating operation, and the
like.



      5.   Plans and specifications as necessary to show the method
of operation of the customer's premises.



      6.   Such other and further information as the Director may
require.



      7.   The application shall be executed by the owner, or
authorized representative thereof, under penalty of perjury as to the truth
of the facts contained therein.



('61 Code, § 24B.8)



   C.   Renewal.  Any water customer upon whose premises exists a
previously approved backflow prevention device shall provide the Director the
information required under paragraph A. above, certifying, under penalty of
perjury, that the conditions under which the operating permit was initially
issued have not changed or, if changed, the changed conditions existing at
the premises.



('61 Code, § 24B.9)



   D.   Inspection.  Upon approval by the Director of the type of
backflow prevention device to be installed, and the location thereof, the
customer shall obtain any and all building, plumbing, mechanical or other
permits required by the city code and cause the same to be installed in
accordance therewith. Upon installation, and prior to operation of the
facility, the backflow prevention device shall be inspected and subjected to
such testing as the Director may require to ensure proper operation thereof.
Upon successful completion of such inspection and testing, the Director shall
issue the operating permit.



('61 Code, § 24B.10)



   E.   Annual inspection.  Every person, firm, partnership or
corporation required to install and maintain a backflow prevention device
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall have such device tested and
inspected by the Director, at least annually. Failure to allow such
inspection and testing, or failure of the device to pass any such test or
inspection in accordance with the standards imposed hereby, shall be grounds
for cessation of water service to the premises. Except where the Director
determines that the public health and safety mandate the immediate
disconnection of the premises from the city water supply, the Director shall
provide to the water customer a reasonable time, not to exceed ten (10) days,
to repair or replace the defective device and cause the same to be tested and
inspected, or to permit entry to the premises for inspection and testing.



('61 Code, § 24B.11)



   F.   Additional inspections.  In the event the Director determines,
or has reasonable cause to believe, that a backflow prevention device has
been disconnected or tampered with, or the device has failed to operate
properly, the Director may require an inspection and testing thereof. In
addition, the Director may establish a testing and/or inspection program to
monitor such devices on a basis consistent with any apparent threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.



('61 Code, § 24B.12)



   G.   Existing devices.  All presently installed backflow prevention
assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this chapter but were
approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of
installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the
inspection and maintenance requirements imposed hereby, be excluded from the
requirements of these rules so long as the Director is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is
moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or
when the Director finds that the maintenance thereof constitutes a hazard to
health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention
assembly meeting the requirements of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 24B.13)



   H.   Fees.  In addition to any other fees or charges levied or
imposed by the city code for building, plumbing, mechanical or other permits
for installation, any person, firm, partnership or corporation required to
install and maintain a backflow prevention device shall pay the fee
established by resolution of the City Council for the operating permit and
inspection and testing of backflow prevention devices required by this
chapter.



('61 Code, § 24B.14) (Ord. 835, passed - - )



§ 13.16.060  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   A.   The Director shall have the authority to enter any building or
premises for the purpose of investigating the existence of suspected or
reported damage, defects, disconnection or tampering with an approved
backflow prevention device, or to determine whether or not such a device is
required on the premises, in order to protect the public water supply and the
public health, safety and welfare of the community. In addition, the Director
is authorized to enter any building or premises in order to inspect any
backflow prevention device for purposes of issuing an operating permit.



   B.   Except in emergency situations, the Director shall not enter
any building or premises without the consent of the owner or occupant
thereof, unless he or she possesses a search warrant authorizing entry and
search of the premises. No person shall hinder or prevent the Director while
in the performance of the duties herein described as emergency situations or
while in possession of a search warrant, from entering upon and into any and
all premises under his or her jurisdiction, at all reasonable hours, for the
purpose of inspecting the same to determine whether or not the provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable laws or ordinances pertaining to the
protection of persons or property are observed therein.



('61 Code, § 24B.15)  (Ord. 835, passed - - )



§ 13.16.070  APPEALS.



   A decision of the Director regarding the interpretation or
implementation of any provision of this chapter shall be final and shall
become effective forthwith upon the service of the decision of the Director,
in writing, upon the applicant or water customer. For purposes of this
section, service upon the applicant or water customer shall mean either
personal delivery or placement in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
and addressed to the applicant or water customer at his or her last known
business address; provided, however, that the applicant or water customer
may, within ten (10) days after the effective date of the decision of the
Director, file an appeal with the City Clerk, in writing, specifying the
reason or reasons for the appeal and requesting that the board of appeals
review the decision of the Director.



('61 Code, § 24B.16)  (Ord. 835, passed - - )



§ 13.16.080  BOARD OF APPEALS.



   The City Council shall act as a Board of Appeals in making a final
determination of any appeal filed in accordance with this chapter. The City
Clerk shall schedule a hearing on the appeal at reasonable times at the
convenience of the Board of Appeals, but not later than thirty (30) days
after receipt of the written appeal. The applicant or water customer may
appear in person before the Board or be represented by an attorney and may
introduce evidence to support his or her claim. The Director shall transmit
to the Board all records, papers, documents and other materials in support of
his or her decision and shall provide a copy thereof to the person appealing
the decision of the Director. The person appealing the decision of the
Director shall cause, at his or her own expense, any tests or research
required by the Board to substantiate his or her claim to be performed or
otherwise carried out. The Board may continue such appeal hearing from time
to time as deemed necessary by the Board. The Board may, by resolution,
affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, any appealed decision,
determination or interpretation of the Director. A copy of the resolution
adopted by the Board shall be mailed to the appellant and the Board's
decision shall be final upon the mailing, by United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the appellant's last known address of record and the decision of
the Board shall be final upon the mailing of such resolution.



('61 Code, § 24B.17)  (Ord. 835, passed - - )



§ 13.16.090  FINDINGS BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council hereby finds the failure to install and/or properly
maintain any required backflow prevention device in good working order by any
person constitutes a public nuisance.



('61 Code, § 24B.18)  (Ord. 835, passed - - )



CHAPTER 13.20:  WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM



Section



   13.20.010   Title



   13.20.020   Findings



   13.20.030   Declaration of purpose and intent



   13.20.040   Definitions



   13.20.050   Application



   13.20.060   Permanent water conservation requirements - prohibition
against waste



   13.20.070   Phase 1 water supply shortage



   13.20.080   Phase 2 water supply shortage



   13.20.090   Phase 3 water supply shortage



   13.20.100   Phase 4 water supply shortage - emergency condition



   13.20.110   Procedures for determination/ notification of water
supply shortage



   13.20.120   Other provisions



   13.20.130   Hardship waiver



   13.20.140   Penalties and violations



§ 13.20.010  TITLE.



   This chapter will be known as the City of Brea Water Conservation Water
Supply Shortage Program.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.020  FINDINGS.



   A.   A reliable minimum supply of potable water is essential to the
public health, safety  and  welfare of the people and economy of  the
Southern California region.



   B.   Southern California is a semi-arid region and is largely
dependent upon imported water supplies. A growing population, climate,
environmental concerns, and other factors in other parts of the state and
western United States, make the region highly susceptible to water supply
reliability issues.



   C.   Careful water management that includes active water
conservation measures not only in times of drought, but at all times, is
essential to ensure a reliable minimum supply of water to meet current and
future water supply needs.



   D.   Cal. Constitution Article XI, § 7 declares that a city or
county may make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary,
and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws.



   E.   Cal. Constitution Article X, § 2 declares that the general
welfare requires that water resources be put to beneficial use, waste or
unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and
conservation of water be fully exercised with a view to the reasonable and
beneficial use thereof.



   F.   Cal. Water Code § 375 authorizes water suppliers to adopt and
enforce a comprehensive water conservation program to reduce water
consumption and conserve supplies.



   G.   The adoption and enforcement of a water conservation and supply
shortage program is necessary to manage the city's potable water supply in
the short and long-term and to avoid or minimize the effects of drought and
shortage within the city. Such program is essential to ensure a reliable and
sustainable minimum supply of water for the public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.030  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a water
conservation and supply shortage program that will reduce water consumption
within the city through conservation, enable effective water supply planning,
assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and
maximize the efficient use of water within the city to avoid and minimize the
effect and hardship of water shortage to the greatest extent possible.



   B.   This chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards
intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency for non-shortage
conditions and further establishes three phases of water supply shortage
response actions to be implemented during times of declared water shortage or
declared water shortage emergency, with increasing restrictions on water use
in response to worsening drought or emergency conditions and decreasing
supplies.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.040  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter have the
meaning defined in this section:



   BILLING UNIT.  The unit of water used to apply water rates for
purposes of calculating water charges for a person's water usage and equals
seven hundred forty eight (748) gallons of water.



   CITY. The City of Brea.



   LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION SYSTEM.  An irrigation system with pipes, hoses,
spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an
automated system.



   LARGE LANDSCAPE AREAS. A lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or
combination thereof, equal to more than one (1) acre of irrigable land.



   PERSON.  Any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private
entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water
provided by the city.



   POTABLE WATER. Water which is suitable for drinking.



   RECYCLED WATER. The reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for
beneficial use.



   SINGLE PASS COOLING SYSTEMS. Equipment where water is circulated only
once to cool equipment before being disposed.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.050  APPLICATION.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use
of any potable water provided by the city.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water
necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government
services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services.



   C.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of
recycled water, except where expressly provided.



   D.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water
by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees,
shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale.



   E.   This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of
water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or
local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water
quality or control of drainage or runoff. Refer to the local jurisdiction or
Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any stormwater
ordinances and stormwater management plans.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.060  PERMANENT WATER CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS - PROHIBITION
AGAINST WASTE.



   The following water conservation requirements are effective at all
times and are permanent. Violations of this section will be considered waste
and an unreasonable use of water.



   A.   Limits on watering hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn,
landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time on any day,
except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose
equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for
very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing
an irrigation system.



   B.   Limit on watering duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn,
landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape
irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is
limited to no more than fifteen (15) minutes watering per day per station.
This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that
exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter
produces more than two (2) gallons of water per hour and weather based
controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a seventy percent (70%)
efficiency standard.



   C.   No excessive water flow or runoff. Watering or irrigating of
any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows
excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street,
alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited.



   D.   No washing down hard or paved surfaces. Washing down hard or
paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when
necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a
hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a
positive self-closing water shut-off device or a low-volume, high-pressure
cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used.



   E.   Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. Excessive use,
loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the
water user's plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after
such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and
in no event more than five (5) days of receiving notice from the city, is
prohibited.



   F.   Re-circulating water required for water fountains and
decorative water features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative
water feature that does not use re-circulated water is prohibited unless a
waiver has been obtained.



   G.   Limits on washing vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a
vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus,
motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except
by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose
equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This
division does not apply to any commercial car washing facility.



   H.   Drinking water served upon request only. Eating or drinking
establishments, including but not limited to a restaurant, hotel, cafe,
cafeteria, bar, club or other public place where food or drinks are sold,
served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to
any person unless expressly requested.



   I.   Commercial lodging establishments must provide option to not
launder linen daily. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging
establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and
linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently
display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily
understood language.



   J.   No installation of single pass cooling systems. Installation of
single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water
service.



   K.   No installation of non-re-circulating water systems in
commercial laundry systems. Installation of non-re-circulating water systems
is prohibited in new commercial laundry systems.



   L.   Restaurants required to use water conserving dish wash spray
valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, are
prohibited from using non-water conserving dish wash spray valves.



   M.   Commercial car wash systems. Effective on July 1, 2009, all new
commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed operational
re-circulating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this
requirement from the city.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.070  PHASE 1 WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE.



   A.   A Phase 1 Water Supply Shortage condition exists when the city
notifies its water users that due to drought or other supply reductions, a
consumer demand reduction of up to ten percent (10%) is necessary to make
more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions. Upon
the declaration of a Phase 1 Water Supply Shortage condition, the city shall
implement the mandatory Phase 1 conservation measures identified in this
chapter. The type of event that may prompt the city to declare a Phase 1
Water Supply Shortage may include, among other factors, a finding that its
wholesale water provider calls for extraordinary water conservation.



   B.   Additional water conservation measures. In addition to the
prohibited uses of water identified in § 13.20.060, the following water
conservation requirements apply during a declared Phase 1 Water Supply
Shortage:



      1.   Limits on watering days. Watering or irrigating of lawn,
landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three (3)
days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the
months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape
or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one (1)
day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision
does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low
flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two (2)
gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or
irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held
hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device,
or for very short periods of time for the express express purpose of
adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.



      2.   Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All
leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or
distribution system must be repaired within seventy-two (72) hours of
notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.



      3.   Other prohibited uses. The city may implement other
prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.080  PHASE 2 WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE.



   A.   A Phase 2 Water Supply Shortage condition exists when the city
notifies its water users that due to drought or other supply reductions, a
consumer demand reduction of up to twenty percent (20%) is necessary to make
more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions. Upon
declaration of a Phase 2 Water Supply Shortage condition, the city shall
implement the mandatory Phase 2 conservation measures identified in this
chapter.



   B.   Additional conservation measures. In addition to the prohibited
uses of water identified in §§ 13.20.060 and 13.20.070, the following
additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared Phase 2
Water Supply Shortage:



      1.   Water allocations.



         a.   The city will implement reduced water allocations
for property served by the city using the tiered water rate structure
currently in effect. Reduced allocations within each tier of the water rate
structure will be based on the percentage reduction within each phase of the
Water Conservation and Water Supply Shortage Program. This results in lower
thresholds within each tier and further encourages conservation.  The city
must provide notice of the reduced water allocation by including it in the
regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the
city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going
water service.



         b.   A tiered water rate structure will be established
for any water customers not currently in a tiered water rate structure and
will be subject to the same provisions herein.



      2.   Watering days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape
or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two (2) days per
week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of
November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other
vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one (1)  day
per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision
does not apply to landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is
limited to no more than one (1) day per week on a schedule established and
posted by the city. This provision does not apply to two (2) gallons of water
per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use
of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a
positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short
periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an
irrigation system.



      3.   Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All
leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or
distribution system must be repaired within forty-eight (48) hours of
notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.



      4.   Limits on filling ornamental lakes or ponds.  Filling or
re-filling ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited, except to the extent
needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant
value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to
declaration of a supply shortage phase under this chapter.



      5.   Limits on washing vehicles. Using water to wash or clean
a vehicle, including but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus,
motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except
by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped
with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, by high
pressure/low volume wash systems, or at a commercial car washing facility
that utilizes a re-circulating water system to capture or reuse water.



      6.   Limits on filling residential swimming pools and spas. 
Re-filling of more than one (1)  foot and initial filling of residential
swimming pools or outdoor spas with potable water is prohibited.



      7.   Other prohibited uses. The city may implement other
prohibitions on water uses as determined by the city, after notice to
customers.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.090  PHASE 3 WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE.



   A.   A Phase 3 Water Supply Shortage Emergency exists when the city
declares a water shortage emergency condition pursuant to Cal. Water Code §
350 and notifies its residents and businesses that up to thirty percent (30%)
consumer demand reduction is required to ensure sufficient supplies for human
consumption, sanitation and fire protection. The city must declare a Water
Supply Shortage Emergency in the manner and on the grounds provided in Cal.
Water Code § 350.



   B.   Additional conservation measures.  In addition to the
prohibited uses of water identified in §§ 13.20.060, 13.20.070, and
13.20.080, the following water conservation requirements apply during a
declared Phase 3 Water Supply Shortage Emergency:



      1.   No watering or irrigating.  Watering or irrigating of
lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited,
except as approved by the city.



      2.   Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions.  All
leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or
distribution system must be repaired within twenty-four (24) hours of
notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.



      3.   No new potable water service. Upon declaration of a Phase
3 Water Supply Shortage Emergency condition, no new potable water service
will be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters will be
provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable
water service (such as, will serve letters, certificates, or letters of
availability) will be issued, except under the following circumstances:



         a.   A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued
for the project; or



         b.   The project is necessary to protect public health,
safety, and welfare; or



         c.   The applicant provides substantial evidence of an
enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset
prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the
city.



         d.   This provision does not preclude the resetting or
turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration
of service that has been interrupted for a period of one (1) year or less.



      4.   Discontinue service. The city, in its sole discretion,
may discontinue service to consumers who willfully violate provisions of this
section.



      5.   Other prohibited uses. The city may implement other
prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.100  PHASE 4 WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE - EMERGENCY CONDITION.



   A.   A Phase 4 Water Supply Shortage Emergency exists when the city
declares a water shortage emergency condition pursuant to Cal. Water Code §
350 and notifies its residents and businesses that up to forty percent (40%)
or more consumer demand reduction is required to ensure sufficient supplies
for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection. The city must declare
a Water Supply Shortage Emergency in the manner and on the grounds provided
in Cal. Water Code § 350.



   B.   Additional conservation measures. In addition to the prohibited
uses of water identified in §§ 13.20.060, 13.20.070, 13.20.080, and
13.20.090 the following water conservation requirements apply during a
declared Phase 4 Water Supply Shortage Emergency:



      1.   The city may reduce water allocations in all categories
to meet the available water supply.



      2.   The city may shut off all non-essential water uses.



      3.   Other prohibited uses. The city may implement other
prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.110  PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINATION/ NOTIFICATION OF WATER SUPPLY
SHORTAGE.



   A.   Declaration and Notification of Phase 1 and 2 Water Supply
Shortage. The existence of Phase 1 and Phase 2 Water Supply Shortage
conditions may be declared by resolution of the city adopted at a regular or
special public meeting held in accordance with state law. The mandatory
conservation requirements applicable to Phase 1 or Phase 2 conditions will
take effect on the tenth (10th) day after the date the shortage phase is
declared. Within five (5) days following the declaration of the shortage
phase, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for
publication of official notices. If the city establishes a water allocation,
it must provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular
billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city
customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going
water service. A water allocation will be effective on the fifth (5th) day
following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the
notice.



   B.   Declaration and notification of Phase 3 water supply shortage.
The existence of a Phase 3 Water Supply Shortage Emergency condition may be
declared in accordance with the procedures specified in Cal. Water Code §§
351 and 352. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to the Phase
3 conditions will take effect on the tenth (10th) day after the date the
shortage phase is declared. Within five (5) days following the declaration of
the shortage phase, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a
newspaper used for the publication of official notices. If the city
establishes a water allocation, it will provide notice of the allocation by
including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the
address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or
charges for on-going water service. A water allocation will be effective on
the fifth (5th) day following the date of mailing or at such later date as
specified in the notice.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.120  OTHER PROVISIONS.



   A.   Limits on building permits. The city may limit or withhold the
issuance of building permits which require new or expanded water service,
except to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or in cases which
meet the city's adopted conservation offset requirements.



   B.   Customer water conservation reports. The city may, by written
request, require all commercial, residential and industrial customers using
twenty-five thousand (25,000) or more billing units per year to submit a
water conservation plan and to submit quarterly progress reports on such
plan. The conservation plan must include recommendations for increased water
savings, separation of uses including increased water recycling based on
feasibility, and the reports must include progress to date on implementation
of such recommendations.



   C.   Reporting mechanism - hotline. The city may establish a water
waste hotline for residents to report violations of this chapter.



   D.   State model landscape ordinance. The Department of Water
Resources State Model Landscaping Ordinance is adopted by reference and
incorporated as part of this chapter. The full text of the Model Landscaping
Ordinance is available on the city's website at www.cityofbrea.net and a copy
is maintained with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.130  HARDSHIP WAIVER.



   A.   Undue and disproportionate hardship. If, due to unique
circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue
hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used,
that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to
similar property of classes of water users, then the person may apply for a
waiver to the requirements as provided in this section.



   B.   Written finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally
granted only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating
an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is
used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to
similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique
circumstances of the user or the user's property.



      1.   Application. Application for a waiver must be on a form
prescribed by the city and accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee in
an amount set by City Council resolution.



      2.   Supporting documentation. The application must be
accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other information, including
a written statement of the applicant.



      3.   Required findings for waiver. An application for a waiver
will be denied unless the City Manager finds, based on the information
provided in the application supporting documents, or such additional
information as may be requested, and on water use information for the
property as shown by the records of the city or its agent, all of the
following:



         a.   That the waiver does not constitute a grant of
special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and
businesses;



         b.   That because of special circumstances applicable to
the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a
disproportionate impact on the property of use that exceeds the impacts to
residents and businesses generally;



         c.   That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect
the ability of the city to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will
not be detrimental to the public interest; and



         d.   That the condition or situation of the subject
property of the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought
is not common, recurrent or general in nature.



      4.   Approval authority.  The City Manager or designee must
act upon any completed application no later than ten (10) days after
submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The
applicant requesting the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any
action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved,
the waiver will apply to the subject property during the period of the
mandatory water supply shortage condition. The decision of the City Manager
will be final.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



§ 13.20.140  PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS.



   A.   Violation of any provisions of the chapter herein must be
personally observed by members of the city staff able to personally attest to
them. The fines for such violations will be collected on the water bill.
Failure to pay a fine amount will be treated as nonpayment of the water bill
and water service may be terminated as a result. The fines for such
violations are as follows:



      1.   First violation. The city will issue a written warning
and deliver a copy of this chapter by mail.



      2.   Second violation. A second violation within the preceding
twelve (12) calendar months is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100).



      3.   Third  violation. A third violation within the preceding
twelve (12) calendar months is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred
and fifty ($250).



      4.   Fourth and subsequent violations. A fourth and any
subsequent violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred
($500).



         a.   Water flow restrictor device. In addition to any
fines, the city may install a water flow restrictor device of approximately
one (1) gallon per minute.



         b.   Termination of service. In addition to any fines,
the city may disconnect and/or terminate a customer's water service.



   B.   Cost of installing flow restrictor or disconnecting service. A
person or entity that violates this chapter is responsible for payment of the
city's charges for installing a flow restrictor or disconnecting and/or
reconnecting service per the city's schedule of charges then in effect.
Nonpayment will be subject to the same remedies as nonpayment of basic water
rates.



   C.   Separate offenses. Each day that a violation of this chapter
occurs is a separate offense.



   D.   Notice and hearing.



      1.   The city will issue a notice of violation by mail or
personal delivery at least ten (10) days before taking enforcement action.
Such notice must describe the violation and the date by which corrective
action must be taken. A customer may appeal the notice of violation by filing
a written notice of appeal with the city no later than the close of business
on the day before the date scheduled for enforcement action. Any notice of
violation not timely appealed will be final. Upon receipt of a timely appeal,
a hearing on the appeal will be scheduled, and the city will mail written
notice of the hearing date to the customer at least ten (10) days before the
date of the hearing.



      2.   Pending receipt of a written appeal or pending a hearing
pursuant to an appeal, the city may take appropriate steps to prevent the
unauthorized use of water as appropriate to the nature and extent of the
violations and the current declared water Phase condition.



(Ord. 1123, passed 6-18-09)



CHAPTER 13.24:  INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL



Section



   13.24.010   Enforcement and administration



   13.24.020   Definitions



   13.24.030   Notice



   13.24.040   Pollution of water prohibited



   13.24.050   Permits for disposal of industrial waste



   13.24.060   Application for permits



   13.24.070   Time within which action on application shall be taken



   13.24.080   When to issue permits



   13.24.090   Permit does not authorize certain acts



   13.24.100   Term of permits



   13.24.110   Transfer of permits



   13.24.120   Enforcement



   13.24.130   Tests and inspections



   13.24.140   Cooperation of other departments



   13.24.150   Notice of violation



   13.24.160   Cessation of activities



   13.24.170   Suspension



   13.24.180   Revocation



   13.24.190   Proceedings for revocation



   13.24.200   Request for hearing



   13.24.210   How hearings are requested



   13.24.220   Notice of hearing



   13.24.230   Hearing



   13.24.240   Decision of Board of Supervisors



§ 13.24.010  ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.



   The county of Orange and all of its officers, employees, and agents
hereby are authorized and empowered to enforce and administer the provisions
of this chapter within the city.



('61 Code, § 11A.1)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS.  The Board of Supervisors of the county of
Orange, California.



   DIRECTOR.  The duly appointed Administrator of the County
Environmental Management Agency, or his or her designee.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any and all liquid or solid waste substance from
any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature. It
shall include any such waste placed within containers of whatever nature
prior to and for purposes of disposal. It shall also include sewage mixed
with industrial waste; however, it shall not include domestic sewage from
residences, business buildings and institutions, containing only waste from
water closets, wash water, baths and kitchens.



   POLLUTION OF UNDERGROUND OR SURFACE WATERS.  Any condition resulting
from the depositing or discharging of industrial waste which impairs or
contributes to the impairment of the usefulness of waters for human or animal
consumption or domestic, agricultural, industrial or recreational purposes,
or any other useful purposes.



   PUBLIC AGENCY.  The United States or any department or agency thereof,
the state of California and any department or agency thereof including all
political subdivisions thereof.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  The main line sewer, publicly owned or maintained,
constructed in a street, highway, alley, place or right-of-way dedicated to
public use.



   SEWAGE.  Any waste, liquid or otherwise associated with human
habitation or of human or animal origin and includes sewage effluent and
water contaminated with offal, filth or feculent matter.



   UNDERGROUND OR SURFACE WATER.  Any surface or subterranean stream,
watercourse, lake or other body of water, and shall include water wells and
any underground or surface storage reservoir, whether natural or artificial.



('61 Code, § 11A.2)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.030  NOTICE.



   Unless otherwise expressly provided, any notice under this chapter
required to be given by the county or the Director shall be in writing and
shall be served by certified mail. Such notice shall be sent to the last
address given to the Director.



('61 Code, § 11A.3)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.040  POLLUTION OF WATER PROHIBITED.



   No person shall discharge or deposit or cause or suffer to be
discharged or deposited, from any source, any industrial waste which will or
may cause or result in the pollution of any underground or surface waters.



('61 Code, § 11A.4)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.050  PERMITS FOR DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE.



   No person shall discharge or deposit or cause or suffer to be deposited
or discharged any industrial waste into or upon any area in the city, or into
any underground or surface waters in the city where such industrial waste is
or may be deposited upon or may be carried through or over any area of the
city except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and unless he
or she shall have first secured, in the manner hereinafter provided, a permit
so to do from the Director; provided, however, a permit shall not be required
for the discharge of industrial waste into a public sewer with an ocean
outfall.



('61 Code, § 11A.5)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.060  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   Applications for permits required hereunder shall be filed with the
Director upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by the Director.
The Director may require any additional information, including plans and
specifications, which may be deemed necessary for the proper disposition of
the application.



('61 Code, § 11A.6)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.070  TIME WITHIN WHICH ACTION ON APPLICATION SHALL BE TAKEN.



   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of all of the information
requested of an applicant, the Director shall either grant or deny the permit
and immediately shall notify the applicant by certified mail of the action
taken.



('61 Code, § 11A.7)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.080  WHEN TO ISSUE PERMITS.



   A.   The Director shall issue a permit for industrial waste disposal
if it is determined that:



      1.   The material to be discharged or deposited in the manner
proposed will not cause or result in the pollution of any underground or
surface waters, as herein prohibited, and that;



      2.   Under existing circumstances and conditions, it is
reasonable and necessary to dispose of the waste in the manner proposed.



   B.   The Director may incorporate in any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter such limitations or conditions as may be reasonably necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter and may from time to time, review the
limitations or conditions which have been incorporated in any permit
thereto-fore issued, giving consideration to changed conditions, and may
(whenever it is advisable or required in order to maintain the waters of the
city and county free from pollution) alter, revise, modify, delete or add
further limitations or conditions applicable to any permit theretofore
issued. No such alterations, revisions, modifications, deletions, additions,
limitations or conditions shall be effective, however, until notice in
writing thereof shall have been served upon the permittee in the manner
provided by this chapter.



('61 Code, § 11A.8)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.090  PERMIT DOES NOT AUTHORIZE CERTAIN ACTS.



   A permit issued under this chapter does not authorize any act or acts
forbidden by any law, rule, regulation or order of any public agency or
department and such fact shall be so stated on the face of all permits issued.



('61 Code, § 11A.9)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.100  TERM OF PERMITS.



   A permit for the disposal of industrial waste shall be valid until
suspended or revoked in the manner hereinafter provided.



('61 Code, § 11A.10)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.110  TRANSFER OF PERMITS.



   The Director may transfer a permit to the successor in interest of a
permittee upon the filing by the successor of a written application therefor,
together with such evidence of transfer of title or interest as the Director
may require. A permit shall not be transferable from one location to another.
The Director shall immediately notify, by certified mail, the person
requesting a transfer of a permit of the action taken.



('61 Code, § 11A.11)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.120  ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   The Director shall enforce this chapter and shall, upon his or
her own initiative, or may upon the complaint of a third person, investigate
any violation of this chapter, or of any permit issued hereunder. For such
purpose, the Director shall have the powers of a peace officer.



   B.   The failure to comply with a notice of violation issued and
served pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor of this
chapter and each day shall constitute a separate offense punishable as
provided by law.



('61 Code, § 11A.12)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.130  TESTS AND INSPECTIONS.



   For the purpose of securing compliance with this chapter, the Director
shall make periodic tests of samples of industrial waste obtained from the
place or places of discharge or deposit, and such other tests deemed
necessary for proper administration hereof. For the purpose of making such
tests or inspections, the Director shall be permitted at all reasonable hours
to enter any premises or place where industrial waste is being or is proposed
to be discharged or deposited, or where there may be a violation of this
chapter.



('61 Code, § 11A.13)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.140  COOPERATION BY OTHER DEPARTMENTS.



   In carrying out the duties of this chapter, the Director may request
and receive the aid of any other city or county department.



('61 Code, § 11A.14)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.150  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever the Director finds that any person is acting in violation of
any provision of this chapter or of any permit issued hereunder, the Director
shall serve upon the person causing or suffering such violation to be
committed, including the permittee, if a permit has been issued, a notice of
violation. The notice shall state the act or acts constituting the violation
and shall direct that the violation be corrected within such time to be
specified in the notice as the Director may deem reasonable.



('61 Code, § 11A.15)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.160  CESSATION OF ACTIVITIES.



   Whenever the Director finds that the continued violation of any
provision of this chapter or of the conditions of any permit issued hereunder
is so aggravated that the prevention of pollution of underground or surface
waters requires the immediate cessation of the activities causing the
violation, he or she may so direct in the notice of violation. A person who
has been so notified shall immediately cease all such activities and shall
not resume them until the Director determines that all of the violations
charged in the notice have been corrected.



('61 Code, § 11A.16)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.170  SUSPENSION.



   A.   The Director may suspend a permit by giving notice thereof to
the permittee:



      1.   When a permittee fails to correct a violation within the
time specified in a notice thereof; or



      2.   When a violation is so aggravated as to require cessation
of activities as provided in § 13.24.160.



   B.   A permit suspended by the Director shall be reinstated when all
of the violations charged in a notice thereof have been corrected.



('61 Code, § 11A.17)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.180  REVOCATION.



   The Board of Supervisors may, after notice and hearing as hereinafter
provided, revoke a permit on any one (1) or more of the following grounds:



   A.   Fraud or deceit in obtaining a permit.



   B.   Failure of a permittee to correct a violation within the time
prescribed in a notice of violation.



   C.   Willful violation of any provisions of this chapter of a
condition or limitation of a permit, or of any lawful order of the Director.



('61 Code, § 11A.18)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.190  PROCEEDINGS FOR REVOCATION.



   Proceedings for the revocation of a permit may be initiated as follows:



   A.   By the Director after serving upon the permittee a copy of and
filing with the County Clerk, a written recommendation of a revocation
setting forth the grounds therefor and requesting a hearing thereon before
the Board of Supervisors; or



   B.   By the Board of Supervisors, on its own motion or upon the
complaint of a third person, by serving or causing to be served upon the
permittee and the Director a notice of intention to revoke, setting forth the
grounds therefor and designating a time and place for hearing thereon.



('61 Code, § 11A.19)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.200  REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   A person who is dissatisfied with any action of the Director may
request a hearing before the Board of Supervisors.



('61 Code, § 11A.20)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.210  HOW HEARINGS ARE REQUESTED.



   Any person aggrieved by an action of the Director may, within thirty
(30) days after receipt of a notice of the action complained of, serve upon
the Director a copy of and file with the County Clerk a written request for a
hearing before the Board of Supervisors. The request shall set forth in
concise language that particular action or actions complained of and the
reasons why the person or permittee feels aggrieved thereby. Failure to file
a request for hearing within the time prescribed herein shall constitute a
waiver of any objection to the action of the Director and his or her action
shall be final.



('61 Code, § 11A.21)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.220  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   When a request for hearing is filed with the County Clerk, the Board of
Supervisors shall set the matter for hearing and give notice of the time and
place thereof to the person requesting the hearing, the Director, and any
other person or public agency requesting notice thereof. The hearing shall be
held not more than thirty (30) days after a written request therefor has been
filed with the County Clerk and not less than ten (10) days after the
issuance of the notice thereof.



('61 Code, § 11A.22) (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.230  HEARING.



   At the time and place set for hearing, the person requesting the
hearing, the Director, and any interested person or public agency may appear
and be heard either in person or by counsel.



('61 Code, § 11A.23)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



§ 13.24.240  DECISION OF BOARD OF SUPERVISORS.



   The Board of Supervisors shall, within thirty (30) days after
conclusion of the hearing, render its decision. The Board of Supervisors may:



   A.   Confirm the action of the Director.



   B.   Direct the Director to issue a permit with or without such
conditions or limitations as the Board of Supervisors may deem appropriate.



   C.   Vacate of modify the suspension of permit.



   D.   Cancel a notice of violation or modify such notice in such
particulars as the Board of Supervisors may deem appropriate.



   E.   Direct the Director to transfer a permit.



   F.   Revoke a permit on any of the grounds specified in § 13.24.180.



   G.   Make such other disposition of the matter heard as may be
appropriate and in conformity with this chapter.



('61 Code, § 11A.24)  (Ord. 788, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 13.28:  MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICES



Section



   13.28.010   Furnishing of services; terms; statutory authority



   13.28.020   Service deposit required



   13.28.030   Payment for services; delinquency and termination of
service



§ 13.28.010  FURNISHING OF SERVICES; TERMS; STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   A.   Pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the Constitution of the
state of California, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any
successor provision or provisions thereto, the City Council finds and
declares that the furnishing of water and sewer service and the collection
and disposal of garbage and refuse constitute municipal utility services
which may be provided to persons or property within the corporate boundaries
of the city, or on an extraterritorial basis as otherwise provided by law,
directly by the city or pursuant to contract, franchise, permit or otherwise.



   B.   All such services, whether provided directly by the city or
pursuant to contract, franchise, permit or otherwise, shall be charged for as
municipal utility services and the same may be charged for on a consolidated
basis by the city.



§ 13.28.020  SERVICE DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   Every person, on making application for municipal utility services,
shall make a service deposit in accordance with and in such amounts as may be
established by City Council by ordinance, resolution, executive order or in
any other lawful fashion.



§ 13.28.030  PAYMENT FOR SERVICES; DELINQUENCY AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   No person shall fail or refuse to pay the municipal service charges
provided for in this code or established pursuant to this code. If any person
shall fail or refuse to pay the lawful charges, including both delinquent and
current charges, for any municipal utility service, or portion thereof, the
water service to the premises, regardless of tenancy, shall be shut off.
Termination of water service for failure to or refusal to pay for municipal
utility services, or any portion thereof, shall occur in accordance with all
requirements of law, including minimum requirements for notice and
opportunity to respond.



CHAPTER 13.32:  STORM WATER DRAINAGE



Section



   13.32.010   Definitions



   13.32.020   Prohibition on illicit connections and prohibited
discharges



   13.32.030   Control of urban runoff



   13.32.040   Inspections



   13.32.050   Enforcement



   13.32.060   Permits



   13.32.070   Interagency cooperation



§ 13.32.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:



   AUTHORIZED INSPECTOR or DIRECTOR.  The Director of Development
Services of the City of Brea and persons designated by and under his or her
instruction and supervision, who are assigned to investigate compliance with,
detect violations of and/or take actions pursuant to this chapter.



   CITY.  The City of Brea, Orange County, California or the County of
Orange or the Orange County Flood Control District acting on behalf of the
city, as the case may be.



   CO-PERMITTEE.  The County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control
District, and/or any one of the thirty-one (31) municipalities, including the
City of Brea, which are responsible for compliance with the terms of the
NPDES Permits.



   DAMP.  The Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, as the same
may be amended from time to time hereafter.



   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT GUIDANCE.  DAMP Chapter VII and the Appendix
thereto, entitled best management practices for new development including
non-residential construction projects, as the same may be amended from time
to time hereafter.



   DISCHARGE.  Any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching
(including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or
disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance.



   DISCHARGE EXCEPTION.  The group of activities not restricted or
prohibited by this chapter, including only:



   Discharges composed entirely of storm water; discharges subject to
regulation under current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control Board issued
NPDES permits, state general permits, or other waivers, permits or approvals
granted by an appropriate government agency; discharges from property for
which best management practices set forth in the development project guidance
are being implemented and followed; discharges to the storm water drainage
system from potable water line flushing, fire fighting activities, landscape
irrigation systems, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, and de minimis
groundwater infiltration to the storm water drainage system (from leaks in
joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance
systems); discharges from potable water sources, passive foundation drains,
air conditioning condensation and other building roof runoffs agricultural
irrigation water runoffs water from crawl space pumps, passive footing
drains, lawn watering, non-commercial vehicle washing; flows from riparian
habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; discharges of
reclaimed  water  generated  by  a  lawfully permitted water treatment
facility; public street wash waters when related to cleaning and maintenance
by, or on behalf of, the city; discharges authorized pursuant to a permit
issued under § 13.32.060 hereof; discharges allowable under the domestic
sewage exception; discharges for which the discharger has reduced to the
extent feasible the amount of pollutants in such discharge; and discharges
authorized pursuant to federal or state laws or regulations.



   In any action taken to enforce this chapter, the burden shall be on the
person who is the subject of such action to establish that a discharge was
within the scope of this DISCHARGE EXCEPTION.



   DOMESTIC SEWAGE EXCEPTION.  Discharges which are exceptions to this
chapter and excluded from the definition of prohibited discharge, as defined
herein, including only:



   Discharges composed entirely of accidental spills of, untreated
sanitary wastes (commonly called domestic sewage) and other wastes, but
limited solely to wastes that are controlled by and are within publicly owned
wastewater treatment system collection facilities immediately prior to the
accidental spill.



   ENFORCING ATTORNEY.  The City Attorney, City Prosecutor or District
Attorney acting as counsel to the City of Brea and his/her designee, which
counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein.



   EPA.  The Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.



   HEARING OFFICER.  The City Manager or his or her designee, who shall
preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue
final decisions on the matters raised herein.



   INVOICE FOR COSTS.  The actual costs and expenses  of  the  city,
including but  not  limited  to administrative overhead, salaries and
other expenses recoverable under state law, incurred during any inspection
conducted pursuant to § 13.32.040 of this chapter or where a notice of
noncompliance, administrative compliance order or other enforcement option
under § 13.32.050 of this chapter is utilized to obtain compliance herewith.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION.  Any man-made conveyance or drainage system,
pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet through which the discharge of any
pollutant to the storm water drainage system occurs or may occur. The term
ILLICIT CONNECTION shall not include legal nonconforming connections or
connections to the storm water drainage system that are hereinafter
authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at
which the connection is made.



   LEGAL NONCONFORMING CONNECTION. Connections to the storm water drainage
system existing as of the adoption of this chapter that were in compliance
with all federal, state and local rules, regulations, statutes and
administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was
established, including but not limited to any discharge permitted pursuant to
the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to
the Industrial Waste Ordinance, Chapter 13.24 of this Code.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT.  All public and private residential (whether single
family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial,
retail, and other non-residential construction projects, or grading for
fixture construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval,
grading permit, building permit or non-residential plumbing permit is
required.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL PLUMBING PERMIT.  A plumbing permit authorizing the
construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids
other than storm water, potable water, reclaimed water or domestic sewage.



   NPDES PERMITS.  The currently applicable municipal discharge permit[s]
issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region
[and/or  the  Regional Water Quality  Control  Board, San Diego Region,
as appropriate], which permit[s] establishes waste discharge requirements
applicable to storm water runoff in the city.



   PERSON.  Any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership,
government entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association,
joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent,
employee or representative of any of the above.



   POLLUTANT.  Any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances, or combination
thereof, including and not limited to:



      1.   Artificial materials (such as floatable plastics, wood
products or metal shavings);



      2.   Household waste (such as trash, paper, and plastics;
cleaning chemicals; yard wastes; animal fecal materials; used oil and fluids
from vehicles, lawn mowers and other common household equipment);



      3.   Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and
non-metals, (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium,
cyanide, phosphorus and arsenic), with characteristics which cause an adverse
effect on living organisms;



      4.   Petroleum and related hydrocarbons (such as fuels,
lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);



      5.   Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement
facilities, kennels, pens and recreational facilities, including, stables,
show facilities, or polo fields);



      6.   Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.6,
or unusual coloration, turbidity or odor;



      7.   Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction
sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of
sealants and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives  and  solvents;
disturbance  of  asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments;
application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator or battery fluids;
construction equipment washing; concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete
detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or
diluting agents; and use of super chlorinated water for potable water line
flushing);



      8.   Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen
demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon;



      9.   Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractible
organic compounds;



      10.   Those pollutants defined in § 1362(6) of the Federal
Clean Water Act; and



      11.   Any other constituent or material, including but not
limited to pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fecal coliform, fecal
streptococcus or enterococcus, or eroded soils, sediment and particulate
materials, in quantities that will interfere with or adversely affect the
beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state.



   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.  Any discharge which contains any pollutant,
from public or private property to (1) the storm water drainage system; (2)
any upstream flow, which is tributary to the storm water drainage system; (3)
any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands
area, marsh, coastal slough, or (4) any coastal harbor, bay, or the Pacific
Ocean. The term PROHIBITED DISCHARGE shall not include discharges allowable
under the discharge exception.



   SIGNIFICANT REDEVELOPMENT.  The rehabilitation or reconstruction of
public or private residential (whether single family, multi-unit or planned
unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, or other non-residential
structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading
permit, building permit or non-residential plumbing permit is required.



   STATE GENERAL PERMIT.  Either the state general industrial storm water
permit or the state general construction permit and the terms and
requirements  of either or both. In the event the  U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water
Resources Control Board, then the term STATE GENERAL PERMIT shall also refer
to any EPA administered storm water control program for industrial and
construction activities.



   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  Street gutter, channel, storm drain,
constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet or
other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the county-wide storm
water runoff system and owned, operated, maintained or controlled by city,
and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing
of storm water.



(Ord. 997, passed 8-19-97)



§ 13.32.020  PROHIBITION ON ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   A.   No person shall:



      1.   Construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit
connection.



      2.   Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.



      3.   Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or
independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate or utilize any
illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.



   B.   The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply
irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the
date of enactment of this chapter; however, legal nonconforming connections
shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following:



      1.   For all structural improvements to property installed for
the purpose of discharge to the storm water conveyance system, the expiration
of five (5) years from the adoption of this chapter.



      2.   For all nonstructural improvements to property existing
for the purpose of discharge to the storm water conveyance system, the
expiration of six (6) months following delivery of a notice to the owner or
occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has
been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state
the date of expiration of use under this chapter.



   C.   A civil or administrative violation of § 13.32.020.A. shall
occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct,
maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or
facilitate any prohibited discharge.



   D.   If an Authorized Inspector reasonably determines that a
discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely
affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the Authorized Inspector
may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the
discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following
expiration of the thirty (30) day period commencing upon delivery of the
notice. Upon expiration of the thirty (30) day period any such discharge
shall constitute a violation of § 13.32.020.A.



   E.   The owner or occupant of property on which a legal
nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing,
pursuant to the procedures set forth in §§ 13.32.050.A.6 through 10, for an
extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. A
reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the Director of Public Works
upon consideration of the following factors:



      1.   The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the
connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters;



      2.   The economic investment of the discharger in the legal
nonconforming connection; and



      3.   The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination
of the legal nonconforming connection.



(Ord. 997, passed 8-19-97)



§ 13.32.030  CONTROL OF URBAN RUNOFF.



   A.   New development and significant redevelopment.



      1.   All new development and significant redevelopment within
the city shall be undertaken in accordance with:



         a.   The DAMP, including but not limited to the
development project guidance; and



         b.   Any conditions and requirements established by the
planning agency [planning department, engineering department or building
department], which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of
pollutants in storm water runoff from the project site.



      2.   Prior to the issuance by the city of a grading permit,
building permit or non-residential plumbing permit for any new development or
significant redevelopment, the planning agency [planning department,
engineering department or building department] shall review the project plans
and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance
with § 13.32.030.A.1. If the new development or significant redevelopment
will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit or
non-residential plumbing permit, the Director shall review the project plans
and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance
with § 13.32.030.A.1 prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use
approval or, at the city's discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision
map.



      3.   Notwithstanding § 13.32.030.A.1 and .2, compliance with
the development project guidance shall not be required for construction of
one (1) single family detached residence unless the Director determines that
the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a
pollutant into a tributary to the storm water drainage system.



      4.   Compliance with the conditions and requirements of the
DAMP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply
with each provision of this chapter.



      5.   If the Director determines that the project will have a
de minimis impact on the quality of storm water runoff, then it may issue a
written waiver of the requirement for compliance with the provisions of the
development project guidance.



      6.   The owner of a new development or significant
redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and
assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements
imposed pursuant to § 13.32.030.A.1 on a new development or significant
redevelopment project.



      7.   Each failure by the owner of the property or its
successors or assigns, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and
requirements imposed pursuant to § 13.32.030.A.1 on a new development or
significant redevelopment project shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.



      8.   The Director may require that the terms, conditions and
requirements imposed pursuant to § 13.32.030.A.1 be recorded with the County
Recorder's office by the property owner. The signature of the owner of the
property or any successive owner shall be sufficient for the recording of
these terms, conditions and requirements and a signature on behalf of the
city shall not be required for recordation.



   B.   Cost recovery.  The city shall be reimbursed by the project
applicant for all costs and expenses incurred by the city in the review of
new development or significant development projects for compliance with the
DAMP. The Director may require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and
the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, with the
balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant.



   C.   Litter control.  No person shall discard any waste material,
including but not limited to rubbish or garbage of any kind (whether
generated or accumulated at a residence, business or other location), upon
any public or private property, whether occupied, open or vacant, including
but not limited to any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, open area or
point of entry to the storm water drainage system. Every person occupying or
having charge and control of property on which a prohibited disposal of waste
materials occurs shall cause the proper collection and disposal of same.



(Ord. 997, passed 8-19-97)



§ 13.32.040  INSPECTIONS.



   A.   Scope of inspections.



      1.   Right to inspect.  Prior to commencing any inspection as
hereinbelow authorized, the Authorized Inspector shall obtain either the
consent of the owner or occupant of the property or shall obtain an
administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant.



      2.   Entry to inspect.  The Authorized Inspector may enter
property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street,
inlet, gutter, storm drain or the storm water drainage system located within
the jurisdiction of the city.



      3.   Compliance assessments.  The Authorized Inspector may
inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter,
including but not limited to (1) identifying products produced, processes
conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the
property, (2) identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process
water systems and pollutants, (3) investigating the natural slope at the
location, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems, (4)
establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property,
whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system, (5) locating any
illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge, (6) evaluating
compliance with any permit issued pursuant to § 13.32.050 hereof; and (7)
investigating the condition of any legal nonconforming connection.



      4.   Portable equipment.  For purposes of verifying
compliance with this chapter, the Authorized Inspector may inspect any
vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment.



      5.   Records review.  The Authorized Inspector may inspect
all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or
processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material
and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams,
material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans,
pollution prevention plans, state general permits, storm water pollution
prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating
to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming
connection or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of
pollutants to the storm water drainage system.



      6.   Sample and test.  The Authorized Inspector may inspect,
sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing),
process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any
container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of
determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm water
drainage system. The Authorized Inspector may investigate the integrity of
all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming
connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests,
including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The
Authorized Inspector may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or
drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document
conditions on the property.



      7.   Monitoring.  The Authorized Inspector may erect and
maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or
potential source of discharge to the storm water drainage system.



      8.   Test results.  The owner or occupant of property subject
to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of
all monitoring and test results conducted by the Authorized Inspector.



(Ord. 997, passed 8-19-97)



§ 13.32.050  ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   Administrative remedies.



      1.   Notice of noncompliance.  The Authorized Inspector may
deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person
responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a notice of
noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance
with § 13.32.050.A.5.



         a.   The notice of noncompliance shall identify the
provision(s) of this chapter or the applicable permit which has been
violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued
noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner,
occupant and/or person.



         b.   The notice of noncompliance shall state a
compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant and/or person;
provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed ninety (90) days
unless the Authorized Inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional
ninety (90) days where good cause exists for the extension.



      2.   Administrative compliance orders.



         a.   The Authorized Inspector may issue an
administrative compliance order. The administrative compliance order shall be
delivered in accordance with § 13.32.050.A.5. The administrative compliance
order may be issued to:



            (1)   The owner or occupant of any property
requiring abatement of conditions on the property that cause or may cause a
prohibited discharge or an illicit connection in violation of this chapter;



            (2)   The owner of property subject to terms,
conditions or requirements imposed on a project in accordance with §
13.32.050.A.1 to ensure adherence to those terms, conditions and requirements.



            (3)   A permittee subject to the requirements of
any permit issued pursuant to § 13.32.060 hereof to ensure compliance with
the terms, conditions and requirements of the permit.



            (4)   Any person responsible for an illicit
connection or prohibited discharge.



         b.   The administrative compliance order may include the
following terms and requirements:



            (1)   Specific steps and time schedules for
compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent the imminent threat of a
prohibited discharge, including but not limited to a prohibited discharge
from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area;



            (2)   Specific steps and time schedules for
compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection;



            (3)   Specific requirements for containment,
cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper
disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact storm water runoff;



            (4)   Any other terms or requirements reasonably
calculated to prevent the imminent threat of or continuing violations of this
chapter, including, but not limited to requirements for compliance with best
management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, State of
California or regional agency;



            (5)   Any other terms or requirements reasonably
calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and
requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto.



      3.   Cease and desist orders.



         a.   The Authorized Inspector may issue a cease and
desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with
§ 13.32.050.A.5. A cease and desist order may direct the owner or occupant
of any property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this
chapter to:



            (1)   Immediately discontinue any illicit
connection or prohibited discharge to the storm water drainage system;



            (2)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of
water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any
provision of this chapter;



            (3)   Immediately discontinue any other violation
of this chapter;



            (4)   Clean up the area affected by the violation.



         b.   The Authorized Inspector may direct by cease and
desist order that the owner of any property or any permittee under any permit
issued pursuant to § 13.32.060 hereof:



            (1)   Immediately cease any activity not in
compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable
permit.



      4.   Recovery of costs.  The Authorized Inspector may deliver
to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee or any other person
who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative order, an
invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be delivered in accordance with
§ 13.323.050.A.5. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable
to the city for the actual costs incurred by the city in issuing and
enforcing any notice or order.



         a.   If any owner or occupant, permittee or any other
person subject to an invoice for costs fails to either pay the invoice for
costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance with §
13.32.050.A.6, then the Enforcing Attorney may institute collection
proceedings.



      5.   Delivery of notice.  Any notice of noncompliance,
administrative compliance order, cease and desist order or invoice of costs
to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject
to the following:



         a.   The notice shall state that the recipient has a
right to appeal the matter as set forth in § 13.32.050.A.6 through A.10
hereof.



         b.   Delivery shall be deemed complete upon (1) personal
service to the recipient; (2) deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for
first class delivery; or (3) facsimile service with confirmation of receipt.



         c.   Where the recipient of notice is the owner of the
property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently
issued equalized assessment roll.



         d.   Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot
be located after the reasonable efforts of the Authorized Inspector, a notice
of noncompliance or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after
posting on the property for a period often (10) business days.



      6.   Administrative hearing for notices of noncompliance
administrative compliance orders, invoices for costs and adverse
determinations.  Except as set forth in § 13.32.050.A.8, below, any person
receiving a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, a
notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs, or any person
who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter,
may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, these administrative appeal procedures shall
not apply to criminal proceedings initiated to enforce this chapter.



      7.   Request for administrative hearing.  Any person
appealing a notice of noncompliance, an administrative compliance order, a
notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs or an adverse
determination shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof, file a
written request for an administrative hearing, accompanied by an
administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution, with the
Office of the City Clerk, with a copy of the request for administrative
hearing mailed on the date of filing to the Director. Thereafter, a hearing
on the matter shall be held before the Hearing Officer  within 
forty-five  (45) business days of the date of filing of the written request
unless, in the reasonable discretion of the Hearing Officer and pursuant to a
written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is
granted.



      8.   Administrative hearing for cease and desist orders and
emergency abatement actions.  An administrative hearing on the issuance of a
cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be
held within five (5) business days following the issuance of the order or the
action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the
hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist
order or the emergency abatement. A request for an administrative hearing
shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order
or the emergency abatement action.



      9.   Hearing proceedings.  The Authorized Inspector shall
appear in support of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs or
emergency abatement action, and the appealing party shall appear in support
of withdrawal of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs, or in
opposition to the emergency abatement action. The city shall have the burden
of supporting any enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the
evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other
documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case.



      10.   Final decision and appeal.  The final decision of the
Hearing Officer shall issue within ten (10) business days of the conclusion
of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid,
to the appealing party. The final decision shall include notice that any
legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the
provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5 and § 1094.6 and
shall be commenced within ninety (90) days following issuance of the final
decision.



      Notwithstanding this subparagraph 10., the final decision of the
Hearing Officer in any preceding determining the validity of a cease and
desist order or following  an  emergency abatement  action shall be mailed
within five (5) business days following the conclusion of the hearing.



      11.   City abatement.  In the event the owner of property,
the operator of a facility, a permittee or any other person fails to comply
with any provision of a compliance schedule issued to such owner, operator,
permittee or person pursuant to this chapter, the Authorized Inspector may
request the Enforcing Attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other
appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition
and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the city in obtaining and
carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be
recovered pursuant to § 13.32.050.B.4.



   B.   Nuisance.  Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of
this chapter, including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any
illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall
constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance pursuant to California Government Code § 38771.



      1.   Court order to enjoin or abatement.  At the request of
the Director, the Enforcing Attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or
abate the nuisance.



      2.   Notice to owner and occupant.  Prior to seeking any
court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the
Director shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the
owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened
nuisance is occurring.



      3.   Emergency abatement.  In the event the nuisance
constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the
Director of Public Works may enter the property from which the nuisance
emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any property affected by the
nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be
provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect
the public safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior
notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial
warrant.



         a.   An imminent danger shall include, but is not
limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants,
where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public
safety or the environment.



         b.   Notwithstanding the authority of the city to
conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing pursuant to
§ 13.32.050.A.8 shall follow the abatement action.



      4.   Reimbursement of costs.  All costs incurred by the city
in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all other
expenses recoverable under state law, shall be recoverable from the person(s)
creating, causing, committing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.



      5.   Nuisance lien.  All costs shall become a lien against
the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation
against the owner thereof in accordance with California Government Code §
38773.1 and § 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any
lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by
California Government Code § 38773.1.



         a.   At the direction of the Director, the Enforcing
Attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a
nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the
County Assessor of a special assessment against the property in accord with
the conditions and requirements of California Government Code § 38773.5.



(Ord. 997, passed 8-19-97)



§ 13.32.060  PERMITS.



   A.   Discharge permit procedure.



      1.   Permit.  On application of the owner of property or the
operator of any facility, which property or facility is not otherwise subject
to the requirements of a state general permit or a national pollution
discharge elimination system permit regulating  storm water discharges, the
Director  may issue a permit authorizing the release of non-storm water
discharges to the storm water drainage system if:



         a.   The discharge of material or constituents is
reasonably necessary for the conduct of otherwise legal activities on the
property; and



         b.   The discharge will not cause a nuisance, impair the
beneficial uses of receiving waters, or cause any reduction in established
water quality standards.



      2.   Application.  The applicant shall provide all
information requested by the Director for review and consideration of the
application, including but not limited to specific detail as to the
activities to be conducted on the property, plans and specifications for
facilities located on the property, identification of equipment or processes
to be used on-site and other information as may be requested in order to
determine the constituents, and quantities thereof, which may be discharged
if permission is granted.



      3.   Permit issuance.  The permit shall be granted or denied
by the Director, no later than sixty (60) business days following the
completion and acceptance of the application as determined by the Director.



         a.   The applicant shall be notified in Person or by
first-class mail, postage prepaid, of the action taken.



      4.   Permit conditions.  The permit may include terms,
conditions and requirements to ensure compliance with the objectives of this
chapter and as necessary to protect the receiving waters, including but not
limited to:



         a.   Identification of the discharge location on the
property and the location at which the discharge will enter the storm water
drainage system;



         b.   Identification of the constituents and quantities
thereof to be discharged into the storm water drainage system;



         c.   A change to the permit is necessary to ensure
compliance with the objectives of this chapter or to protect the quality of
receiving waters.



      The permittee, or in the case of a general permit, each person
who has filed an application pursuant to § 13.32.060.A.5, shall be informed
of any change in the permit terms and conditions at least forty-five (45)
business days prior to the effective date of the modified permit.



         c.   Specification of pollution prevention techniques
and structural or non-structural control requirements as reasonably necessary
to prevent the occurrence of potential discharges in violation of this
chapter;



         d.   Requirements for self-monitoring of any discharge;



         e.   Requirements for submission of documents or data,
such as technical reports, production data, discharge reports,
self-monitoring reports and waste manifests; and



         f.   Other terms and conditions appropriate to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the protection of
receiving waters, including requirements for compliance with best management
practices guidance documents approved by any federal, State of California or
regional agency.



      5.   General permit.  In the discretion of the Director, the
permit may, in accordance with the conditions identified in § 13.32.060.A.4,
be prepared as a general permit applicable to a specific category of
activities. If a general permit is issued, any person intending to discharge
within the scope of the authorization provided by the general permit may do
so by filing an application to discharge with the Director. No discharge
within the scope of the general permit shall occur until such application is
so filed.




      Notwithstanding the foregoing in this subparagraph 5, the
Director, in his or her discretion, may eliminate the requirement that an
application for a general permit be filed for any specific activity for which
a general permit has been issued.



      6.   Permit fees.  The permission to discharge shall [may] be
conditioned upon the applicant's payment of the city's costs, in accordance
with a fee schedule adopted by separate resolution, as follows:



         a.   For individually issued permits, the costs of
reviewing the permit application, preparing and issuing the permit, and the
costs reasonably related to administrating this permit program.



         b.   For general permits, the costs of reviewing the
permit application, that portion of the costs of preparing the general permit
which is reasonably attributable to the permittee's application for the
general permit, and the costs reasonably related to administering the general
permit program.



   B.   Permit suspension, revocation or modification.



      1.   The Director may suspend or revoke any permit when it is
determined that:



         a.   The permittee has violated any term, condition or
requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this chapter; or



         b.   The permittee's discharge or the circumstances
under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer
appropriate to except the discharge from the prohibitions on prohibited
discharge contained within this chapter; or



         c.   The permittee fails to comply with any schedule for
compliance issued pursuant to this chapter; or



         d.   Any regulatory agency, including EPA or a Regional
Water Quality Control Board having jurisdiction over the discharge, notifies
the city that the discharge should be terminated.



      2.   The Director may modify any permit when it is determined
that:



         a.   Federal or state law requirements have changed in a
manner that necessitates a change in the permit; or



         b.   The permittee's discharge or the circumstances
under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to
modify the permit's terms, conditions or requirements; or



      3.   The determination that a permit shall be denied,
suspended, revoked or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the
same procedures applicable to appeal of an administrative compliance order
hereunder. In the absence of a judicial order to the contrary, the permittee
may continue to discharge pending issuance of the final administrative
decision by the Hearing Officer.



   C.   Permit enforcement.



      PENALTIES.  Any violation of the terms, conditions and
requirements of any permit issued by the Director shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and subject the violator to the administrative,
civil and criminal remedies available under this chapter.



   D.   Compliance.  Compliance with the terms, conditions and
requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve
the permittee from compliance with all federal, state and local laws,
regulations and permit requirements, applicable to the activity for which the
permit is issued.



      1.   Limited permittee rights.  Permits issued under this
chapter are for the person or entity identified therein as the
“Permittee” only, and authorize the specific operation at the specific
location identified in the permit. The issuance of a permit does not vest the
permittee with a continuing right to discharge.



      2.   Transfer of permits.  No permit issued to any person may
be transferred to allow:



         a.   A Discharge to the storm water drainage system at a
location other than the location stated in the original permit; or



         b.   A discharge by a person other than the person named
in the permit, provided however, that the city may approve a transfer if
written approval is obtained, in advance, from the Director.



      3.   Compliance disclaimer.  Full compliance by any person or
entity with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to
comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory
requirements, which may be required for the control of the discharge of
pollutants into storm water and/or the protection of storm water quality.



(Ord. 997, passed 8-19-97)



§ 13.32.070  INTERAGENCY COOPERATION.



   A.   The city intends to cooperate with other agencies with
jurisdiction over storm water discharges to ensure that the regulatory
purposes underlying storm water regulations promulgated pursuant to the Clean
Water Act (33 USC § 1251, et seq.) are met.



   B.   The city may, to the extent authorized by law, elect to
contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry
out the planning approvals, inspections, permits and enforcement authorized
by this chapter.



(Ord. 997, passed 8-19-97)



TITLE 14:  SUSTAINABLE PROVISIONS



   Chapter




      14.00   WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS





      14.04   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS





      14.08   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS




CHAPTER 14.00:  WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS



Section



   14.00.010   Title



   14.00.020   Purpose and findings



   14.00.030   Applicability



   14.00.040   Implementation procedures



   14.00.050   Landscape water use standards



   14.00.060   Delegation



   14.00.070   Definitions



§ 14.00.010  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Water Efficient Landscape
Ordinance of the City of Brea.”



(Ord. 1179, passed 12-15-15)



§ 14.00.020  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   A.   The State Legislature has found that:



      1.   The waters of the state are of limited supply and are
subject to ever increasing demands;



      2.   The continuation of California’s economic prosperity is
dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;



      3.   It is the policy of the state to promote the conservation
and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;



      4.   Landscapes are essential to the quality of life in
California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an
enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion,
offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;



      5.   Landscape design, installation, maintenance, and
management can and should be water efficient; and



      6.   Article X, § 2 of the California Constitution specifies
that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for
the beneficial use to be served, and the right does not and shall not extend
to waste or unreasonable method of use of water.



   B.   The City of Brea hereby finds that:



      1.   Orange County has an established, large reclaimed water
infrastructure system;



      2.   Allocation-based and tiered water rate structures allow
public agencies to document water use in landscapes;



      3.   Incentive-based water use efficiency programs have been
actively implemented within Orange County since before 1991;



      4.   Current local design practices in new landscapes strive
to achieve the intent of the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance
water use goals;



      5.   All water services within the city are metered and billed
based on volume of use;



      6.   Orange County is a leader in researching and promoting
the use of smart irrigation controllers with more than twelve thousand, nine
hundred (12,900) installations as of June 2009 and promotion of sustainable
landscape transformation with more than thirty million (30,000,000) square
feet of turf removal;



      7.   All new irrigation controllers sold after 2012 within
Orange County will be smart irrigation controllers;



      8.   Landscape plan submittal and review has been a long
standing practice in Brea;



      9.   The average rainfall in Orange County is approximately
twelve (12) inches per year; and



      10.   The local water purveyor is implementing budget-based
tiered-rate billing and/or enforcement of water waste prohibitions for all
existing metered landscaped areas throughout its service area, which includes
the City of Brea in its entirety.



   C.   Consistent with these findings, the purpose of this chapter is
to establish an alternative model acceptable under Governor Brown’s April
1, 2015 Drought Executive Order (B-19-25) as being at least as effective as
the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance in the context of
conditions in the city in order to:



      1.   Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances
with neighboring local and regional agencies;



      2.   Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while
recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as
possible;



      3.   Establish a structure for planning, designing,
installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new
construction and rehabilitated projects;



      4.   Establish provisions for water management practices and
water waste prevention for existing landscapes;



      5.   Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum
applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use
to the lowest practicable amount; and



      6.   Encourage the use of economic incentives that promote the
efficient use of water, such as implementing a budget-based tiered-rate
structure, providing rebate incentives and offering educational programs.



(Ord. 1179, passed 12-15-15)



§ 14.00.030  APPLICABILITY.



   A.   This chapter shall apply to the following landscape projects:



      1.   New landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area
equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet, requiring a building
or landscape permit, plan check or design review;



      2.   Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate
landscaped area equal to or greater than two thousand, five hundred (2,500)
square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design
review;



      3.   New or rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate
landscape area of two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet or less may
comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the
prescriptive measures contained in Appendix A of the Guidelines;



      4.   New or rehabilitated projects using treated or untreated
graywater or rainwater capture on site, any lot or parcels within the project
that has less than two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet of
landscape area and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement
(estimated total water use) entirely with the treated or untreated graywater
or through stored rainwater capture on site is subject only to Appendix A of
the Guidelines; and



      5.   At cemeteries, §§ 2.9, 2.10, and Appendix C of the
Guidelines shall apply to new landscape installations and §§ 2.9, 2.10, and
3 of the Guidelines shall apply to landscape rehabilitation projects.



   B.   This chapter does not apply to:



      1.   Registered local, state, or federal historical sites;



      2.   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a
permanent irrigation system;



      3.   Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a
permanent irrigation system; or



      4.   Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and
arboretums open to the public.



(Ord. 1179, passed 12-15-15)



§ 14.00.040  IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES.



   A.   Prior to installation, a landscape documentation package shall
be submitted to the city for review and approval of all landscape projects
subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any landscape documentation
package submitted to the city shall comply with the provisions of the
Guidelines.



   B.   The landscape documentation package shall include a
certification by a professional appropriately licensed in the State of
California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have
been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and
are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Guidelines.



      1.   Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the
city for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations. Water
use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the
Guidelines and shall be provided to the local water purveyor, as appropriate,
under procedures determined by the city.



      2.   Verification of compliance of the landscape installation
with the approved plans shall be obtained through a certification of
completion in conjunction with a certificate of use and occupancy or permit
final process, as provided in the Guidelines.



(Ord. 1179, passed 12-15-15)



§ 14.00.050  LANDSCAPE WATER USE STANDARDS..



   A.   For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation
projects subject to subparagraph 14.00.030.A., the estimated applied water
use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the MAWA calculated
using an ET adjustment factor of 0.7, except for special landscaped areas
where the MAWA is calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 1.0; or the
design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently
water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the city; as provided in the
Guidelines.



   B.   Irrigation of all landscaped area, notwithstanding the date of
installation, shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and
requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water
conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the
local water purveyor or as mutually agreed by local water purveyor and the
city.



(Ord. 1179, passed 12-15-15)



§ 14.00.060  DELEGATION.



   The city may delegate to, or enter into a contract with, a local agency
to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this
chapter on behalf of the city.



(Ord. 1179, passed 12-15-15)



§ 14.00.070  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:



   AGGREGATE LANDSCAPE AREAS.  Pertains to the areas undergoing
development as one project or for production home neighborhoods or other
situations where multiple parcels are undergoing development as one project,
but will eventually be individually owned.



   APPLIED WATER.  The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system
to the landscape.



   BUDGET-BASED TIERED-RATE STRUCTURE.  Tiered or block rates for
irrigation accounts charged by the retail water agency in which the block
definition for each customer is derived from lot size or irrigated area and
the evapotranspiration requirements of landscaping.



   COMMUNITY AESTHETICS EVALUATION.  While not subject to a permit, plan
check or design review, the COMMUNITY AESTHETICS EVALUATION may be performed
to ensure the aesthetic standards of the community and irrigation efficiency
intent is maintained.



   ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT.  A project where the site is
intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.



   ESTIMATED APPLIED WATER USE.  The average annual total amount of water
estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as
provided in the Guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration
rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the
relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system.



   ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR or ETAF. 



      1.   Is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation
efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the Guidelines.
The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration,
using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that
influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific
landscaped area.



      2.   A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant
factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation
efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71),
which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this
chapter and the Guidelines, except that the ETAF for a special landscape area
shall not exceed 1.0.



   GUIDELINES. The Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient
Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by the city, which describes procedures,
calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this chapter.



   HARDSCAPES.  Any durable material or feature (pervious and
non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or
walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped
area and not considered HARDSCAPES for purposes of this chapter.



   IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY.  The measurement of the amount of water
beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. IRRIGATION
EFFICIENCY is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system
characteristics and management practices. The IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY for
purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for
drip systems.



   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR.  A person licensed by the State of California to
construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of
landscape systems.



   LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE.  The documents required to be
provided to the city for review and approval of landscape design projects, as
described in the Guidelines.



   LANDSCAPE PROJECT.  Total area of landscape in a project, as provided
in the definition of “landscaped area,” meeting the requirements under §
14.00.030 of this chapter.



   LANDSCAPED AREA.  All the planting areas, turf areas, and water
features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water
allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The LANDSCAPED AREA
does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways,
parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or
non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for
non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).



   LOCAL AGENCY.  A city or county, including a charter city or charter
county, that is authorized to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of
the provisions of this chapter. The LOCAL AGENCY may be responsible for the
enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this chapter including, but not
limited to, design review, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of
a landscape project.



   LOCAL WATER PURVEYOR.  Any entity, including a public agency, city,
county, or private water company that provides retail water service.



   MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE or MAWA.  The upper limit of annual
applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in § 2.2 of
the Guidelines. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration,
the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated
applied water use shall not exceed the MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE.MAWA =
(ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)]



   MINED-LAND RECLAMATION PROJECTS.  Any surface mining operation with a
reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and
Reclamation Act of 1975.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of this chapter, a new building with
a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt
without an associated building.



   NON-PERVIOUS.  Any surface or natural material that does not allow for
the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.



   PERMIT.  An authorizing document issued by local agencies for new
construction or rehabilitated landscape.



   PERVIOUS.  Any surface or material that allows the passage of water
through the material and into the underlying soil.



   PLANT FACTOR or PLANT WATER USE FACTOR.  A factor, when multiplied by
ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of
this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to
0.1; the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3; the plant
factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant
factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. PLANT FACTORS cited in
this chapter are derived from the publication Water Use Classification of
Landscape Species. PLANT FACTORS may also be obtained from horticultural
researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as
approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).



   RECYCLED WATER or RECLAIMED WATER.  Treated or recycled waste water of
a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and
water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.



   REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION or ETo.  A standard measurement of
environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given
expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A of
the Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field
of four (4)- to seven (7)-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered.
REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION is used as the basis of determining the maximum
applied water allowances.



   REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE.  Any re-landscaping project that meets the
applicability criteria of Section 1.1(a), where the modified landscape area
is greater than two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet.



   SMART IRRIGATION CONTROLLER.  An automatic irrigation controller
utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data with
non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all
irrigation systems, recommending U.S. EPA WaterSense labeled devices as
applicable.



   SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA.  An area of the landscape dedicated solely to
edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with
recycled water, water features using recycled water, and recreational areas
dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and
where turf provides a playing surface.



   TURF.  A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass,
Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are
cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St.
Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.



   VALVE.  A device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation
system.



   WATER FEATURE.  A design element where open water performs an
aesthetic or recreational function. WATER FEATURES include ponds, lakes,
waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where
water is artificially supplied). The surface area of WATER FEATURES is
included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed
wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm
water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for
water treatment or storm water retention are not WATER FEATURES and,
therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.



(Ord. 1179, passed 12-15-15)



CHAPTER 14.04:  SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS



Section



   14.04.010   Purpose



   14.04.020   Definitions



   14.04.030   Application process



   14.04.040   Solar panel standards



§ 14.04.010  PURPOSE.



   A.   In amending the Solar Rights Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.5,
the State Legislature has found that:



      1.   In recent years, the state has both encouraged the
development of innovative distributed generation technology and prioritized
the widespread adoption of solar power as a renewable energy resource through
programs such as the California Solar Initiative.



      2.   Rooftop solar energy is a leading renewable energy
technology that will help this state reach its energy and environmental goals.



      3.   To reach the state's Million Solar Roofs goal, hundreds
of thousands of additional rooftop solar energy systems will need to be
deployed in the coming years.



      4.   Various studies, including one by the Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, show that, despite the 1978 California Solar Rights Act,
declaring that the “implementation of consistent statewide standards to
achieve the timely and cost-effective installation of solar energy systems is
not a municipal affair ... but is instead a matter of statewide concern,”
the permitting process governing the installation of rooftop solar energy
systems varies widely across jurisdictions and, contrary to the intent of the
law, is both an “obstacle” to the state's clean energy and greenhouse
reduction goals and a “burdensome cost” to homeowners, businesses,
schools, and public agencies.



      5.   The United States Department of Energy, through its
SunShot Initiative, has distributed millions of dollars in grants to local
and state governments, including California jurisdictions, and nonprofit
organizations to reduce the costs of distributed solar through streamlined
and standardized permitting.



      6.   A modernized and standardized permitting process for
installations of small-scale solar distributed generation technology on
residential rooftops will increase the deployment of solar distributed
generation, help to expand access to lower income households, provide solar
customers greater installation ease, improve the state's ability to reach its
clean energy goals, and generate much needed jobs in the state, all while
maintaining safety standards.



   B.   Based on the foregoing, the City Council hereby finds as
follows:



      1.   Residential rooftop solar and energy efficiency systems
are a valuable renewable energy source enhancing the state's clean energy and
greenhouse reduction goals.



      2.   The city, as the local building permit regulator, in
enacting this chapter is implementing a streamlined solar energy permitting
process within its jurisdiction.



      3.   Consistent with these findings, the purpose of this
chapter is to codify and implement the city's streamline permitting process
in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.5.



(Ord. 1178, passed 9-15-15)



§ 14.04.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following:



      1.   Email;



      2.   Internet; or



      3.   Fax



   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. All of the following:



      1.   A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal; and



      2.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable
state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or
amended by the city and Cal. Civil Code § 714(c)(3); and



      3.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or
duplex family dwelling; and



      4.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the
maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Has the same meaning set forth in Cal. Civil Code
§ 801.5(a)(1) and (2), as such section or subdivision may be amended,
renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.



(Ord. 1178, passed 9-15-15)



§ 14.04.030  APPLICATION PROCESS.



   A.   Prior to installing small residential rooftop solar energy
system, a residential solar installation application shall be submitted to
the city's Building Division for review and approval. The application shall
contain all information and supporting documentation required by the
provisions of the most recent California Solar Permitting Guidebook
checklist, or a similar checklist deemed equal by the Building Official for
small rooftop solar energy systems (“checklist”).



   B.   The applicant may submit the permit application and supporting
documentation to the city's Building Division by personal, mailed, or
electronic submittal, together with any required permit processing and
inspection fee as may be established by resolution of the City Council. In
the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant
on all forms, applications and other documentation may be used in lieu of a
wet signature.



   C.   Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:



      1.   Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through
the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support
structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and
adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated
with the system to the building foundation; and



      2.   At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's
reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that
the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and
bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized,
based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new
photovoltaic electrical loads.



      3.   Verify all applicable standards are consistent with the
provisions contained in the California Solar Permitting Guidebook as adopted
by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research.



   D.   At time of submittal the city shall review the application and
shall:



      1.   Confirm the application, and supporting documents are
complete and meet the requirements of the checklist, and that the system is
consistent with this chapter. Upon confirmation, the city shall approve the
application and issue all required permits or authorizations.



      2.   Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the city shall
issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the
application and any additional information required to be eligible for
expedited permit issuance.



   E.   For a small residential rooftop solar energy system meeting the
requirements of this chapter, only one inspection shall be required, which
shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by
the Building Official and Fire Chief. If a small residential rooftop solar
energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection at the applicant's
expense may be conducted.



(Ord. 1178, passed 9-15-15)



§ 14.04.040  SOLAR PANEL STANDARDS.



   A.   A small residential rooftop solar energy system shall meet all
applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by state and
local permitting authorities.



   B.   Solar energy systems for heating water in single family
residences and solar collectors used for heating water in commercial or
swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency
as defined in the California Plumbing and Mechanical Codes.



   C.   A small residential rooftop solar energy system shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.



(Ord. 1178, passed 9-15-15)



CHAPTER 14.08:  ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS



Section



   14.08.010   Purpose



   14.08.020   Definitions



   14.08.030   Expedited permitting process



   14.08.040   Permit application processing



   14.08.050   Prohibited uses



   14.08.060   Technical review and appeal of conditions or denial



   14.08.070   Electric vehicle charging station installation
requirements



§ 14.08.010  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to fulfill the requirements of Cal.
Gov’t Code § 65850.7 and to promote and encourage the use of electric
vehicles through the creation of an expedited, streamlined permitting process
for electric vehicle charging stations, while protecting public health and
safety and preventing adverse impacts in the installation and use of such
charging stations.



(Ord. 1194, passed 10-3-17)



§ 14.08.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL.  The utilization of one or more of the following:



      1.   Electronic mail or email.



      2.   The internet.



      3.   Facsimile.



   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION or CHARGING STATION.  Any level of
electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in
compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on
the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.



   SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT.  A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.



(Ord. 1194, passed 10-3-17)



§ 14.08.030  EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCESS.



   Consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7, the Building Official
shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric
vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with
which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible
for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined, permitting process and
checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current
version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting
Checklist” of the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness
Guidebook, published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The
city’s adopted checklist and any other required permitting documentation
shall be published on the city’s website.



(Ord. 1194, passed 10-3-17)



§ 14.08.040  PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING.



   A.   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the
applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging
station will not have any specific, adverse impact on health and safety of
the public, including building occupants. Information required to be provided
by the applicant for verification includes: electrical system capacity and
loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building
infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated
conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking; any
additional information required by the building official to complete such
verification due to unusual or unique circumstances.



   B.   A permit application that satisfies the information
requirements in the city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and
shall be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that
the permit application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the
city’s adopted checklist, and are consistent with all applicable laws and
health and safety standards, including the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 65850.7(f), the Building Official shall approve the application and issue
all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to
energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is
granted by the city. If the Building Official determines that the permit
application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice
to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any
additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.



   C.   The Building Official shall allow for electronic submittal of
permit applications and any additional application documentation required by
this chapter. In accepting such permit applications, the Building Official
shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other
documentation in lieu of a wet signature by an applicant.



(Ord. 1194, passed 10-3-17)



§ 14.08.050 PROHIBITED USES.



   The issuance of an electric vehicle charging station permit shall
authorize only the installation of such permitted station, in accordance with
all permit requirements. Following its installation, the permitted electric
charging station shall be used solely for the purpose of charging electric
vehicles. No signage or advertising of any kind, other than labeling
identifying the manufacturer, shall be attached to the charging station. Any
use of a permitted charging station for commercial purposes, i.e., requiring
payment or rendering of anything of value as a condition of use of the
permitted charging station, shall constitute a commercial use of the property
where the charging station is located for purposes of the city’s Zoning
Code, and shall render the permit issued pursuant to this chapter null and
void.



(Ord. 1194, passed 10-3-17)



§ 14.08.060  TECHNICAL REVIEW AND APPEAL OF CONDITIONS OR DENIAL.



   A.   It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the installation
of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to their
permitting, while maintaining authority of the Building Official to address
higher priority life-safety situations, consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code §
65850.7. If the Building Official makes a specific, written finding based on
substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a
specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this
chapter, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit. No
complete application satisfying the requirements of this chapter shall be
denied unless the city makes written findings, based on substantial evidence,
that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the
public health or safety, and there is no “feasible method to satisfactorily
mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact”, (as that term is defined
in Ca. Gov’t Code § 65850.7(i)(1)).



   B.   Any decision of the Building Official to impose conditions or
deny a permit may be appealed in accordance with the procedures established
by the Board of Appeals, as set forth in Appendix B of the City Building
Code, or any successor provisions thereto.



   C.   In the technical review of a charging station permit
application, consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7, the Building
Official shall not condition the approval for any such permit on the approval
of such system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code §
4080.



(Ord. 1194, passed 10-3-17)



§ 14.08.070  ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the
requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive
Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited
testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the
Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.



   B.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and
associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective
devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable
provisions of the California Electrical Code.



   C.   Electrical loads resulting from the installation of electric
vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of
all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of
the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be
considered a continuous load.



   D.   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric
vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California
Building or Residential Code, as applicable, based on the occupancy, and the
provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of
charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements.



(Ord. 1194, passed 10-3-17)



Brea City Code


City of Brea, California
City Code




Contains 2019 S-24, current through
Ordinance 1209, passed 3-5-19










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




PART II:  DEVELOPMENT CODE



TITLE 15:  BUILDING AND
CONSTRUCTION SAFETY



   Chapter



   DIVISION I — UNIFORM CODES



      15.00   RESERVED



      15.04   ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



      15.08   BUILDING CODE



      15.10   RESIDENTIAL CODE



      15.12   ELECTRICAL CODE



      15.16   MECHANICAL CODE



      15.20   PLUMBING CODE



      15.24   GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE



      15.28   ENERGY CODE



      15.30   GRADING AND EXCAVATION CODE



      15.32   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



      15.34   HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE



      15.36   EXISTING BUILDING CODE



   DIVISION II — BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS



      15.200   MOVING AND RELOCATING BUILDINGS IN CITY



      15.204   MOVING BUILDINGS THROUGH OR FROM CITY



      15.208   DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS



      15.212   ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES



      15.216   WEED AND REFUSE ABATEMENT



      15.220   SWIMMING POOLS



DIVISION I — UNIFORM CODES



CHAPTER 15.00:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 15.04:  ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



Section



   15.04.010   2016 California Administrative Code adopted



   15.04.020   Conflicting provisions



§ 15.04.010  2016 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Administrative
Code is hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be and become the
Administrative Code of the City of Brea.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.04.020  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   In the event of a conflict between any provision contained in the
Administrative Code and the administrative provisions of the city’s
building codes, the more specific provision shall be given effect, unless
another applicable provision is determined by the Building Official to more
fully provide for the public health and safety and/or will more fully promote
the intent of the city’s building codes.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 15.08:  BUILDING CODE




Section




   15.08.010   2016 California Building Code  adopted



   15.08.020   2016 California Building Code - Amendments



§ 15.08.010  2016 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE ADOPTED. 



   The 2016 California Building Code, including JAppendices B and J, and
incorporating the 2015 International Building Code as published by the
International Code Council, hereby is adopted in its entirety as the Building
Code of the City of Brea, together with the amendments, additions, deletions
and exceptions set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.08.020  2016 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   The California Building Code is hereby amended as follows:



   105.2 Work exempt from permit- Amended.



   105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit  requirements of
this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done
in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws
or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:



   Building:



   1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed 120 square feet (11 m2).



   2.   Masonry fences not over 5 feet (1524 mm) high.



   3.   Oil derricks.



   4.   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.



   5.   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does
not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or
width does not exceed 2:1.



   6.   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of
an accessible route.



   7.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops
and similar finish work.



   8.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.



   9.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy
that are less than 18 inches (457 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18
925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.



   10.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.



   11.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached
one- and two-family dwellings.



   12.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not
project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not
require additional support of Groups R-3 and U occupancies.



   13.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and
partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.



   Electrical:



      Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.



      Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of
this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and
television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power
supply and the installations of towers and antennas.



      Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.



   Gas:



   1.   Portable heating appliance.



   2.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.



   Mechanical:



   1.   Portable heating appliance.



   2.   Portable ventilation equipment.



   3.   Portable cooling unit.



   4.   Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or
cooling equipment regulated by this code.



   5.   Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or
make it unsafe.



   6.   Portable evaporative cooler.



   7.   Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (5 kg)
or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.



   Plumbing:



   1.   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent
pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil,
waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and
replace the same with the new material, such work shall be considered as new
work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this
code.



   2.   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets,
provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.



   Section 903.2 Where required - Amended.



   903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings
and structures shall be provided in the following locations:



   1.   New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12, an automatic fire-extinguishing system
shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area, as
defined in Section 202, exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2), or the building
is more than two stories in height, regardless of fire areas or allowable
area.



   2.   New buildings in the VHFHSZ: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided in all new occupancies in the VHFHSZ.



   3.   Existing buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions
of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing
building when an addition occurs and when one of the following conditions
exists:



      a.   When the addition is 50% or more of the existing building
area and the resulting building area, as defined in Section 202, exceeds
5,000 square feet (465 m2); or



      b.   When the addition exceeds 2,000 (185.81 m2) square feet
and the resulting building area, as defined in Section 202, exceeds 5,000
square feet (465 m2); or



      c.   An additional story is added above the second floor
regardless of fire areas or allowable area.



      Exception: Group R-3 occupancies. Group R-3 occupancies shall
comply with Section 903.2.8.



   Section [F]903.2.8 Group R - Amended.



   903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R
fire area as follows:



   1.   New buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout all new buildings.



   2.   Existing buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists:



      a.   When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building
area, as defined in Section 202, or greater than 1,000 square feet (92.903
m2) within a two year period; or



      b.   An addition when the existing building is already
provided with automatic sprinklers; or



      c.   When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially
renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building
Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system
would be similar as in a new building.



   3.   Existing buildings in the Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the
following conditions exists:



      a.   When an addition is 33% of more of the existing building
area, as defined in Section 202, or greater than 1,000 square feet (93.902
m2) within a two year period; or



      b.   An addition when the existing building is already
provided with automatic sprinklers; or



      c.   When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially
renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building
Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system
would be similar as in a new building.



   Section 916 Emergency responder radio coverage - Added.



   SECTION 916.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings.



   Existing buildings that do not have approved radio coverage for
emergency responders within the building, based upon the existing coverage
levels of the public safety communications systems of the jurisdiction at the
exterior of the building, shall be equipped with such coverage according to
one of the following:



   1.   Where an existing wired communication system cannot be repaired
or is being replaced, or where not approved in accordance with Section 510.1,
Exception 1, of the Brea Fire Code.



   2.   Within a time frame established by the adopting authority.



   3.   The emergency responder radio coverage shall comply with the
following Brea Fire Department guidance document:



   ‘Information for Digital Antenna Systems (DAS)/Bi-Directional
Amplification (BDA) Systems’



   Table 1505.1 - Amended.



   TABLE 1505.1a
   MINIMUM ROOF COVERING
   CLASSIFICATIONS
   TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION



 

IA
 
IB
 
IIA
 
IIB
 
IIIA
 
IIIB
 
IV
 
VA
 
VB


A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A



 



   For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.



   a. Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A.



   Section 1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas - Amended.



   1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof
covering of every existing structure where more than 20 percent of the total
roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of
every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair
or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a
fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.



   Section 1505.5 Non-classified roofing - Deleted.



   Section 1505.7 Special purpose roofs - Deleted.



   Section 1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation
walls - Amended.



   1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls.
Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top
and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance
with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used
for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.



   Section 1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction -
Amended



   1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction. Where a
specific design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings supporting
walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed in
accordance with Table 1809.7. Prescriptive footings in Table 1809.7 shall not
exceed one story above grade plane for structures assigned to Seismic Design
Category D, E or F.



   TABLE 1809.7
   PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF
   LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION a, b, c, d, e



 

NUMBER OF FLOORS SUPPORTED BY THE FOOTING f
 
WIDTH OF FOOTING (inches)
 
THICKNESS OF FOOTING (inches)


1
 
12
 
6


2
 
15
 
6


3
 
18
 
8


For SI:   1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm

a.   Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.

b.   The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the
elevation of the top of the footing.

c.   See Section 1908 for additional requirements for concrete footings of
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.

d.   For thickness of foundation walls, see Section 1807.1.6.

e.   Footings shall be permitted to support a roof addition to the
stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as
required for supporting one floor.



 



   Section 2304.10.1 Fastener requirements - Amended.



   2304.10.1 Fastener requirements. Connections for wood members shall be
designed in accordance with the appropriate methodology in Section 2301.2.
The number and size of fasteners connecting wood members shall not be less
than that set forth in Table 2304.10.1. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.1
shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned
to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.



      Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic
forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing
and approved by the building official.



   Section 2308.6.8.1 Foundation requirements - Amended.



   2308.6.8.1 Foundation requirements. Braced wall lines and interior
bearing walls shall be supported by continuous foundations.



   Section 3102B Definitions - Amended by adding new definition.



   Swimming pools. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational
bathing or wading that contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes
in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and
fixed-in-place wading pools.



   Section 3119B.1 Pool enclosure - Amended.



   Section 3119B.1 Enclosure. The top of the barrier shall be at least 60
inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from
the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the
bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches measured on the side of the barrier
that faces away from the swimming pool.



   Appendix B Board of Appeals - Adopted.



   Appendix B of the California Building Code is hereby adopted by
reference in its entirety with no amendments.



   Appendix J Grading - Adopted.



   Appendix J of the California Building Code is hereby adopted by
reference in its entirety with no amendments.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 15.10:  RESIDENTIAL CODE



Section



   15.10.010   2016 California Residential Code adopted



   15.10.020   2016 California Residential Code — Amendments



§ 15.10.010  2016 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2016 California Residential Code, incorporating the 2015
International Residential Code as published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety as the Residential Building Code
of the City of Brea, together with the amendments, additions, deletions and
exceptions set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.10.020  2016 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE — AMENDMENTS.



   The California Residential Code is hereby amended as follows:



   Table R301.2(1) - Amended.




TABLE R301.2(1)





CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA




 


GROUND SNOW LOAD

 

WIND DESIGN

 

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORYf

 

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

 

WINTER DESIGN



TEMPe

 

ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIREDh

 

FLOOD HAZARDSg

 

AIR FREEZING INDEXi

 

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPj




Speedd (mph)

 

Topographic effectsk

 

Special wind regionl

 

Wind borne debris zonesm

 

Weatheringa

 

Frostline Depthb

 

Termitec




Zero

 

110

 

No

 

No

 

No

 

D2 or E

 

Negligible

 

12 - 24"

 

Very heavy

 

43

 

No

 

See Exhibit B

 

0

 

65.1



For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.   Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry
than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The
weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e.,
“negligible,” “moderate” or “severe”) for concrete as determined
from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry
units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C
145, C 216 or C 652.

b.   The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in
Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column
with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.

c.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the
need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local
subterranean termite damage.

d.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind
speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)].Wind exposure category
shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section
R301.2.1.4.

e.   Temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local
weather experience as determined by the building official.

f.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the
seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.

g.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the
date of the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood Insurance Program
(date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood
hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel
numbers and dates of all currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood
hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended.

h.   In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1,
R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of
local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in
this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in
this part of the table with "NO."

i.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the
100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or
from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table
"Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)" at www.ncdc.noaa.qov/fpsf.html.

j.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean
annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air
Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

k.   In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local
historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic
wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table
with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this
part of the table.

l.   In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical
data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this
part of the table with “YES” and identify any specific, requirements.
Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

m.   In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall
indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). otherwise, the jurisdiction
shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table.



 



   Section R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations- Exception - Deleted.



   Section R902.1 Roofing covering material - Amended.



   R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with
materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Minimum Class A roofing
shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Classes A roofing
required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL
790 or ASTM E 108.



   Exceptions:



      1.   Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of
brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck.



      2.   Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper
shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or
slate installed on noncombustible decks.



   Section R902.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas - Amended.



   R902.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas. The entire roof covering of
every existing structure where more than 20 percent of the total roof area is
replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new
structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or
replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a
fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.



   Section R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes - Amended.



   R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes.
Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles
complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the
full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which
have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A roofs.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 15.12:  ELECTRICAL CODE



Section



   15.12.010   2016 California Electrical Code adopted



   15.12.020   2016 California Electrical Code - Amendments



§ 15.12.010  2016 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Electrical
Code, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National
Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted in its entirety as the
Electrical Code of the City of Brea, regulating and controlling the
installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use and other operation of
electrical wiring, connections, fixtures and electrical appliances on
premises within the city.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.12.020  2016 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 15.16:  MECHANICAL CODE



Section



   15.16.010   2016 Mechanical Code adopted



   15.16.020   2016 California Mechanical Code - Amendments



§ 15.16.010  2016 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Mechanical
Code, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the IAMPO, is
hereby adopted in its entirety as the Mechanical Code of the City of Brea,
regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of
materials, location, operation and maintenance of heating, ventilating,
cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat
producing appliances.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.16.020  2016 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 15.20:  PLUMBING CODE



Section



   15.20.010   2016 California Plumbing Code adopted



   15.20.020   2016 California Plumbing Code - Amendments



§ 15.20.010  2016 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE  ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Plumbing Code,
based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted in its
entirety as the Plumbing Code of the City of Brea, regulating erection,
installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use
of plumbing systems within the city.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.20.020  2016 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]




(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)




CHAPTER 15.24:  GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE



Section



   15.24.010   2016 California Green Building Standards Code adopted



   15.24.020   2016 California Green Building Standards Code -
Amendments



§ 15.24.010  2016 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Green Building
Standards Code is hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be and become the
Green Building Standards Code of the City of Brea.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.24.020  2016 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 15.28:  ENERGY CODE



Section



   15.28.010   2016 California Energy Code adopted



   15.28.020   2016 California Energy Code - Amendments



§ 15.28.010  2016 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Energy Code, is
hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be and become the Energy Code of the
City of Brea, regulating erection, installation, alteration, repair,
relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of energy systems.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.28.020  2016 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]




(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)




CHAPTER 15.30:  GRADING AND EXCAVATION CODE



Section



   15.30.010   Orange County Grading and Excavation Code adopted



   15.30.020   Orange County Grading and Excavation Code - Amendments



§ 15.30.010  ORANGE COUNTY GRADING AND EXCAVATION CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the Orange County Grading and
Excavation Code, is hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be and become
the Grading and Excavation Code of the City of Brea, regulating grading and
excavation of sites.



(Ord. 1146, passed 1-18-11)



§ 15.30.020  ORANGE COUNTY GRADING AND EXCAVATION CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]




(Ord. 1146, passed 1-18-11)




CHAPTER 15.32:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



Sections



   15.32.010   2015 International Property Maintenance Code adopted



§ 15.32.010  2015 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.



   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted in its entirety as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Brea, regulating and controlling the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures;
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such
existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; provided, however, that notwithstanding the
adoption of this code, the city may utilize and enforce any other provision
of any code of the city relating to property maintenance.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 15.34:  HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE



Section



   15.34.010   2016 California Historical Building Code adopted



   15.34.020   2016 California Historical Building Code - Amendments



§ 15.34.010  2016 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Historical
Building Code, is hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be and become the
Historical Building Code of the City of Brea, regulating for the
preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, relocation or reconstruction of
buildings or properties designated as qualified historical buildings or
properties.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.34.020  2016 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 15.36:  EXISTING BUILDING CODE



Section



   15.36.010   2016 California Existing Building Code adopted



   15.36.020   2016 California Existing Building Code — Amendments



§ 15.36.010  2016 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2016 California Existing
Building Code, is hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be and become the
Existing Building Code of the City of Brea, regulating the alteration,
repair, addition and change of occupancy of existing structures.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.36.020  2016 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE — AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



DIVISION II — BUILDING AND
PROPERTY REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 15.200:  MOVING AND RELOCATING BUILDINGS IN CITY



Section



   15.200.010   Definitions



   15.200.020   Prohibited generally, exceptions



   15.200.030   Conditional use permit required for relocation to
another lot within the city



   15.200.040   Relocation on same lot



   15.200.050   Compliance with zoning regulations



   15.200.060   Time limit on completion of relocation



   15.200.070   Final inspection



§ 15.200.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  Any structure designed, intended or used for the housing,
storage or enclosing of vehicles, persons, animals or material and shall
include industrial, commercial, residential and accessory buildings.



   DEMOLITION.  The dismantling of a building for the salvage of
materials therein.



   LOT.  A parcel of real property as defined in any of the following
subsections.



      1.   A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of
land with a number or other designation on the latest plot including such
property recorded in the office of the County Recorder.



      2.   An area or parcel of land used or capable of being used
for building with yards or other open spaces as required by the subdivision
and zoning laws of the city; provided, such area or parcel contains not less
than the prescribed number of square feet required in the zone in which such
parcel is located; and provided, that each such parcel has permanent, legal
access to a public street.



('61 Code, § 7.22)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.200.020  PROHIBITED GENERALLY, EXCEPTIONS.



   A.   Generally.  No person shall move any building from any place
outside the city to any place within the city except as otherwise provided in
paragraphs B., C. or D. below, or § 15.200.030.



('61 Code, § 7.23)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 542, passed  - - )



   B.   Through structures.  The provisions of paragraph A. above
shall not preclude any person from transporting a building through the city
to a place outside the city upon compliance with § 15.204.010 and §§
15.204.040 to 15.204.110.



('61 Code, § 7.24)



   C.   Temporary structures.  The provisions of paragraph A. above
shall not preclude the trans-porting into or the use within the city of
temporary facilities in accordance with or as required by other applicable
regulations, such as construction offices, storage sheds, portable sanitation
facilities, tents, bleacher seats, construction barricades and the like, for
use and if used only in connection with construction or other temporary
activity lawfully conducted within the city.



('61 Code, § 7.25)



   D.   Prefabricated disaster shelters.  The provisions of paragraph
A. above shall not prohibit the installation of a prefabricated disaster
shelter in accordance with applicable regulations.



('61 Code, § 7.26)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.200.030  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED FOR RELOCATION TO ANOTHER LOT
WITHIN THE CITY.



   A.   Permit required.  Any person desiring to move, or cause to be
moved, any building or any section or portion of any building from one (1)
lot located either within or without the city to any other lot within the
city shall first obtain a conditional use permit therefor from the city in
accordance with the standards, criteria and procedures governing the issuance
of such permits from time to time. In addition to any and all matters
required by such conditional use permit procedure to be included in such an
application, and in addition to those matters set forth in paragraphs C. and
D. below, the application shall specify the type of building to be moved, the
location of the same, the location to which and the route and length of route
over or along which such building or section or portion of such building is
to be moved, the number of sections in which the same will be moved, and the
time within which such removal will be completed.



   B.   Compliance with city ordinances, and the like.  Nothing
contained in this chapter shall excuse any applicant for a conditional use
permit related to the relocation of any building from complying with any
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of the city or any other
governmental agency related to the demolition of buildings or structures. Any
such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation shall be applicable to the
site from which any building or structure or any portion thereof is removed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   C.   Plot plan.  Any application referred to in paragraph A. above
shall also include an original plot plan in map format and fifteen (15)
copies thereof showing the following:



      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.



      2.   North arrow and scale (drawings shall be oriented to the
north and shall not be less in scale than one (1) inch equal to thirty (30)
feet).



      3.   Parcel specifications as follows:



         a.   Fully dimensioned subject parcel boundaries.



         b.   Abutting street information:



            (1)   Name of streets.



            (2)   Existing and proposed street widths.



            (3)   Parkway widths.



            (4)   Sidewalk dimensions.



            (5)   Access and driveway dimensions.



            (6)   Median strips and traffic islands.



         c.   Name, location and width of closest intersecting
street.



         d.   Existing contours and water courses if applicable.



         e.   Location and dimensions of all existing or proposed
easements.



      4.   Proposed development and modification.



         a.   All existing and proposed structures and physical
features.



         b.   Exterior building dimensions.



         c.   Setbacks with dimensions.



         d.   Distances between buildings.



         e.   Height of structures.



         f.   Treatment of open spaces, including landscaped
areas.



         g.   Walls and fences.



         h.   Trash areas.



         i.   Use of building.



         j.   Parkway trees.



      5.   Parking area.



         a.   Layout and dimensions of all parking stalls.



         b.   Dimensions of all access ways, turn-around areas,
driveways, alleys and walks.



         c.   Off-street loading space and facilities.



         d.   Surface type.



         e.   Screening and landscaping (including curbs).



      6.   Map legend.



         a.   Net acreage of parcel.



         b.   Gross floor area for all buildings.



         c.   Percentage of land covered by structures.



         d.   Number of beds, bowling lanes, billiard tables,
guest rooms or dwelling units or seating area, whichever is applicable in the
computation of the parking requirements pursuant to the zoning ordinance,
Title 20, as amended or any successor ordinance.



         e.   Proposed off-street parking.



         f.   Required off-street parking.



         g.   Percentage of landscaping for total site.



   D.   Any application referred to in paragraph A. above shall also be
accompanied by at least two (2) photographs of the building, final elevations
of the front, sides and rear of the building, indications of exterior colors
and surface materials, including walls and fences, and the written consent of
the owner of the building for the Building Official to enter the building at
reasonable times for the purpose of making all inspections required by this
section.



   E.   Upon completion of the relocation and upon request by the
permit holder, the Director of Development Services shall cause an inspection
of the relocated building to occur. The provisions of Title 20, the zoning
ordinance, as amended from time to time, shall apply to any building so
relocated.



('61 Code, § 7.27)  (Ord. 538, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 542, passed  - - )



§ 15.200.040  RELOCATION ON SAME LOT.



   No person shall relocate a building constructed on a lot in the city
upon the same lot except in compliance with the provisions of this section
and §§ 15.200.050 through 15.200.070, inclusive.



('61 Code, § 7.28)  (Ord. 542, passed  - - )



   A.   Application.  Every person intending to relocate any building
in the city shall first file with the Building Official an application for a
move examination. Each such application shall be accompanied by detailed
plans and specifications in duplicate of the building proposed to be moved.
The application shall include or be accompanied by each of the following:



      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of
the building proposed to be relocated.



      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be in charge of and responsible for the relocation of the building and
for compliance with all the requirements of this paragraph.



      3.   The street address and the legal description of the
property upon which the building to be relocated is situated and the street
address that will become applicable to the building upon its relocation.



      4.   A plot plan showing the proposed new location of the
building.



      5.   A floor plan showing the arrangement and size of each
room and the type and size of each window therein.



      6.   A plan of the foundation to be provided at the proposed
new site.



      7.   Elevations showing the proposed finished appearance of
the front, sides and rear of the building.



      8.   Structural details of any additions or alterations to be
made to the building.



      9.   A photograph of the building proposed to be relocated.



('61 Code, § 7.29)



   B.   Compliance with code provisions pre-requisite to issuance.  No
permit for the relocation of any building within the city shall be issued if,
in the opinion of the Building Official, such building does not comply with
every applicable provision of this code; provided, however, that if such
building may be made to conform with the provisions of this code, a
relocation permit may be issued if concurrently application is made for and
the required permits obtained for all alterations, repairs, additions and
foundations necessary to make such building comply with all applicable
provisions of this code.



('61 Code, § 7.30)



   C.   Examination of building, relocation plans.



      1.    Upon the filing of an application pursuant to paragraph
A. above and payment of the fee prescribed in paragraph D.1. below, the
Building Official shall examine the building therein described, shall review
the plans and specifications submitted with such application and shall
inspect the proposed new location of such building. The Building Official
shall thereupon notify the applicant personally or by mail of the results of
such examination and of the city's additional requirements, if any, for
relocating such building.



      2.   If the applicant does not apply for and obtain the
relocation permit and building permit within ninety (90) days after the
giving of such notice, he or she shall be required to request a move
re-examination and to pay the fee specified for such re-examination.



('61 Code, § 7.31)



   D.   Fees and deposits.  Before issuance of a permit for the
relocation of any building within the city, the sums specified by resolution
of the City Council for inspection and other fees, including building and
related permits, shall be paid.



('61 Code, § 7.7.32) (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.200.050  COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS.



   Every building or structure relocated within the city shall comply with
all the provisions of the zoning ordinances of the city.



('61 Code, § 7.33)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.200.060  TIME LIMITATION ON COMPLETION OF RELOCATION.



   The relocation of any building or structure within the city shall be
completed in all respects within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the
permit therefor.  Unless extended by the Building Official for good cause,
every such relocation permit shall expire and be of no effect after thirty
(30) days from date of issuance. Relocation shall not be deemed completed
until the building is lowered onto its foundation at the new site, all
exterior damage to the building caused by the relocation has been repaired
and the former building site is cleared of all debris, footings and
foundations and the site levelled to finished grade.



('61 Code, § 7.34)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.200.070  FINAL INSPECTION.



   Upon completion of the relocation of a building within the city, the
person owning the same shall request an inspection from the Building
Official. The Building Official shall thereupon cause an inspection of the
building to be made, and if he or she finds that all the provisions of this
chapter have been complied with, he or she shall issue a written statement to
such effect.



('61 Code, § 7.35)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 15.204:  MOVING BUILDINGS THROUGH OR FROM CITY



Section



   15.204.010   Removal permit



   15.204.020   Liability insurance required



   15.204.030   Performance bond



   15.204.040   Approval of route and time of operation; authority of
Chief of police to change route



   15.204.050   Utility clearance



   15.204.060   Disconnection of utilities



   15.204.070   House mover to have state license



   15.204.080   Liability for damages



   15.204.090   Wheels or rollers on equipment



   15.204.100   Lighting of building



   15.204.110   Parking building on street or public property



   15.204.120   Condition of site from which building moved



§ 15.204.010  REMOVAL PERMIT.



   A.   Required.  No person shall move any building through or from
the city without first having obtained a removal permit therefor.



('61 Code, § 7.36)



   B.   Application.  Every person desiring to move a building from
the city shall file an application for a removal permit on a form provided by
the Building Official for such purpose. Each application for a removal permit
shall contain the following:



      1.   The street address and the legal description of the
property from which the building is to be removed and to which it is to be
moved.



      2.   The name, address and phone number of the owner of the
building to be moved.



      3.   The name, address and phone number of the contractor who
will move the building and his or her state contractor's license number.



      4.   The name, address and telephone number of the person in
charge, if he or she is not the owner, who will be responsible for all moving
operations under the permit being applied for, including final clearance of
the site.



      5.   The route proposed to be used for the moving of such
building and the date and hour of the proposed moving and such other
information as may be required by the Building Official.



      6.   The maximum height above street level that any portion of
the building will be while being moved.



      7.   Each such application shall be signed by the applicant or
his or her authorized agent. If signed by an agent, the agent may be required
to submit evidence of his or her authority to so sign the application.



('61 Code, § 7.37)



   C.   Filing of fees and documents.



      1.   Before issuance of a permit for the removal of a building
from the city, the applicant shall deposit within the city the sums and
documents prescribed in the following paragraphs.



         a.   Insurance endorsement.  An endorsement of
insurance coverage in the amounts specified in § 15.204.020, issued by a
corporation authorized to do insurance business within the state, which
endorsement shall provide that the insurance thereby represented will not be
cancelled, reduced or allowed to expire unless written notice be sent to the
city at least ten (10) days in advance of any such cancellation, reduction or
expiration. All such insurance endorsement shall be submitted to the City
Attorney for  approval before acceptance by the city.



         b.   Cash bond.  A cash bond in the amount specified by
City Council resolution.



         c.   Permit fee.  A house moving permit fee in an
amount set by Council resolution.



         d.   Route inspection fee.  A route inspection fee as
set by Council resolution.



         e.   Other fees.  All fees required by any applicable
ordinance of the city.



      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
state, any political subdivision thereof or to any governmental agency when
moving a building by its own personnel.



('61 Code, § 7.38)



   D.   Posting on building being moved.  The permit issued pursuant
to this article shall be posted on the front of the building being moved.



('61 Code, § 7.39)



(Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.020  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Every person moving a building from or through the city shall take out
and maintain public liability insurance to protect against loss from
liability for damages on account of bodily injury, including death, and to
protect against loss for liability or damages to any property caused directly
or indirectly by the moving of the building. Such insurance policy shall be
maintained in full force and effect during the moving of the structure in
amounts as specified by resolution of the City Council. The provisions of
this section as to insurance shall not be construed as limiting in any way
the extent to which the permittee may be held responsible for the payment of
damages.



('61 Code, § 7.40)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.030  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   A.   To guarantee the compliance by an applicant with the provisions
of this chapter, the removal of the building within the time specified by
this chapter and the final clearance of the building site, every person
moving a building from the city shall deposit with the city a cash bond in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council.



   B.   Upon notification by the Building Official that the removal has
been completed and the site cleared, the City Treasurer shall refund to the
depositor the amount of the cash bond deposited, after first deducting
therefrom all fees and penalties payable to the city under the provisions of
this chapter, the cost, as determined by the City Engineer, of repairing or
replacing any public property damaged by the moving of the building and the
sum of ten ($10) dollars per day for each day beyond the limit specified in
the permit for the completion of the removal and the clearance of the site in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



('61 Code, § 7.41)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.040  APPROVAL OF ROUTE AND TIME OF OPERATION; AUTHORITY OF CHIEF
OF POLICE TO CHANGE ROUTE.



   No removal permit shall be issued by the Building Official without a
route, time and date first approved by the Chief of Police. In the event of
any emergency requiring the use of city streets for any purpose with which
the moving of a building would interfere, the Chief of Police shall have the
authority to require a change of the route to avoid such interference.



('61 Code, § 7.42)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.050  UTILITY CLEARANCE.



   A.   No route shall be approved by the Chief of Police unless the
applicant furnishes a certificate from each public utility company
maintaining or operating facilities along such route that its facilities will
not be required to be relocated or interrupted by the moving of the building
along such route or that arrangements have been made by the applicant for the
removal, relocation or restoration of such utility company's facilities with
which the moving of the building along such route will interfere.



   B.   If the highest point of the building when loaded and ready for
moving is more than sixteen (16) feet above the ground surface, the cost of
rearranging, protecting and restoring the equipment of any public utility
affected shall be borne by the permittee.



('61 Code, § 7.43)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.060  DISCONNECTION OF UTILITIES.



   No removal permit shall be issued until all utility services have been
shut off and disconnected from the building to be moved.



('61 Code, § 7.44)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.070  HOUSE MOVER TO HAVE STATE LICENSE.



   No person except a house mover licensed by the state shall remove any
building from or through the city.



('61 Code, § 7.45)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.080  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   Every person removing a building from the city shall make good all
damages or injuries caused by the moving thereof.



('61 Code, § 7.46)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.090  WHEELS OR ROLLERS ON EQUIPMENT.



   The wheels and rollers of all equipment used in moving of buildings
shall have sufficient tire or bearing width to prevent grooving, marring or
damaging of any street, alley or public property upon which the same may be
used.



('61 Code, § 7.47)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.100  LIGHTING OF BUILDING.



   Every building, while being moved upon any street, alley or public
property, shall at all times between sunset and sunrise be illuminated by
adequate warning devices placed at each corner of the building and at the end
of any projection thereof.



('61 Code, § 7.48)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.110  PARKING BUILDING ON STREET OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall place or park any building upon any public street,
alley or property without the prior written approval of the Chief of Police
and of the Chief of the Fire Department.



('61 Code, § 7.49)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.204.120  CONDITION OF SITE FROM WHICH BUILDING MOVED.



   The site in the city from which a building is removed shall be cleared
of all foundations, drive-ways and walkways and all portions thereof, shall
have all loose combustible materials and debris removed therefrom, and all
excavations shall be filled in with soil free of debris, all of which shall
be accomplished within thirty (30) days from the time such building is
removed.



('61 Code, § 7.50)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 15.208:  DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS



Section



   15.208.010   Demolition permit



   15.208.020   Disconnection of utilities



   15.208.030   Person demolishing building to be licensed; exception



   15.208.040   Liability for damages; dust control



   15.208.050   Site clearance



   15.208.060   Time limit for completion of demolition; extension of
time limit



§ 15.208.010  DEMOLITION PERMIT.



   A.   Required.  No person shall demolish any building or structure
within the city unless a valid permit therefor has been obtained and is in
effect as provided in this chapter.



('61 Code, § 7.51)



   B.   Application.  Before a permit required by paragraph A. above
may be issued, an application therefor must be filed with the Division of
Building and Safety setting forth the following information:



      1.   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
building to be demolished.



      2.   The address or legal description of the property upon
which is situated the building intended to be demolished.



      3.   The name, address and telephone number of the person that
will demolish the building for which permit application is made.



      4.   The state contractor's license number of the person
described in paragraph B.3. if such person is not the same as the person
described in paragraph B.1. hereof.



      5.   A precise description of the portion of the building to
be demolished.



      6.   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be in charge of and responsible for all demolition operations under the
permit being applied for, including final clearance of the site.



('61 Code, § 7.52)



   C.   Fees and deposits.  Prior to the issuance of a permit under
this chapter, all fees and deposits therefor, as established by resolution of
the City Council, shall be paid and made to or with the city.



   D.   Applicability to demolition by state, political subdivisions
and governmental agencies.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the state, any political subdivisions thereof or to any govern-mental
agency when demolishing a building by its own personnel.



('61 Code, § 7.54)



   E.   Posting.  The permit required by this chapter shall be
conspicuously posted in the immediate vicinity of the building being
demolished.



('61 Code, § 7.55)



(Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.208.020  DISCONNECTION OF UTILITIES.



   No demolition permit shall be issued until all utility services have
been shut off and disconnected from the building to be moved.



('61 Code, § 7.56)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.208.030  PERSON DEMOLISHING BUILDING TO BE LICENSED; EXCEPTION.



   No person except a person properly licensed therefor shall demolish any
building; provided, however, that the owner of a building may demolish his or
her own building provided he or she owns the property on which the building
stands.



('61 Code, § 7.57)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.208.040  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; DUST CONTROL.



   A person demolishing a building shall be responsible for all damages or
injuries caused by such demolition and shall cause all dry or dusty materials
or debris to be wet down to lay the dust.



('61 Code, § 7.58)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.208.050  SITE CLEARANCE.



   All combustible materials or debris remaining at the site at the
completion of the work shall be removed, all cement, steel or other building
material removed to a point even with the finished grade and all excavations
filled in to average grade with soil free of debris.



('61 Code, § 7.59)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



§ 15.208.060  TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLETION OF DEMOLITION; EXTENSION OF TIME
LIMIT.



   The demolition of any building shall be completed within thirty (30)
days of the time it is begun except that the Building Official may for good
cause grant one (1) extension of an additional thirty (30) days. Demolition
shall not be deemed completed until the provisions of § 15.208.050 have been
complied with.



('61 Code, § 7.60)  (Ord. 372, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 15.212:  ABATEMENT OF
PUBLIC NUISANCES



Section



   15.212.010   Abatement of public nuisances; purpose and intent



   15.212.020   Definitions



   15.212.030   Declaration of nuisance



   15.212.040   Notice to abate



   15.212.050   Hearing before Director



   15.212.060   Order to abate



   15.212.070   Appeal



   15.212.080   Notice of City Council determination



   15.212.090   Owner to abate



   15.212.100   City to abate



   15.212.110   Costs of abatement



   15.212.120   Assessment and collection of costs



   15.212.130   Alternative procedures



§ 15.212.010  ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES; PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   In accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 it is
the intent of the City Council, by the adoption of this chapter, to provide a
procedure for the abatement of public nuisances within the city in order to
effectively combat hazards to the public health, safety and welfare.



('61 Code, § 18C.1)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Development Services or his or her designee.



   HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS.  Any building or structure which is vacant,
abandoned, partially destroyed, structurally unsafe or left in a state of
partial construction, including excavations there for and construction sites,
and is hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare.



   HAZARDOUS POOL.  Any pool, pond, excavation or other body of water
which is abandoned, neglected, unattended, unfiltered or not otherwise
maintained or which is lacking security fencing as required by state law or
city code. Any such hazardous pool may include a pool, pond, excavation or
other body of water in such a condition so that the water therein becomes
polluted including, but not limited to, bacterial growth, algae, remains of
insects, animals, reptiles, birds, fish or other life forms, refuse, rubbish,
debris, papers and any other matter resulting in a hazard to the public
health, safety or welfare.



   ILLEGAL STORAGE OF VEHICLES.  Maintaining, storing or keeping, or
permitting or allowing to be maintained, stored or kept any trailer, boat,
boat and trailer, recreational vehicle, motor vehicle, mobile equipment of
any type or nature on any property in violation of the Brea zoning ordinance
as the zoning ordinance exists as of the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter or as the same may be amended from time to time.



   REFUSE, WATER and ILLEGAL STORAGE.  Maintaining, storing or keeping,
or permitting or allowing to be maintained, stored or kept, machinery,
equipment, or parts thereof, or furniture, household appliances, construction
material, packing boxes, paper, cardboard, debris, rubbish, refuse, garbage
or similar matter on any property in violation of the Brea zoning ordinance
as the zoning ordinance exists as of the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter or as the same may be amended from time to time
after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.



('61 Code, § 18C.2)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.030  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   The City Council, in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code
§ 38771, finds and declares that those conditions defined in § 15.212.020,
pertaining to hazardous buildings, hazardous pools, refuse, waste and illegal
storage and illegal storage of vehicles, existing or permitted or allowed to
exist on any property within the city by any person, firm or corporation,
constitute public nuisances subject to the abatement procedures set forth in
this chapter.



('61 Code, § 18C.3)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.040  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   A.   Issuance.  Upon determination by the Director that a public
nuisance exists, as defined in this chapter, on any property within the city,
the Director shall cause a notice to be issued to the owners of the affected
property upon which the nuisance exists.



('61 Code, § 18C.4)



   B.   Form and content.  The notice to abate provided for in
paragraph A. above shall be headed “NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE” in letters
not less than one (1") inch in height and which shall, in legible characters,
direct the abatement of the nuisance referring to this chapter for
particulars. The notice shall indicate the nature of the alleged nuisance,
the assessor's parcel number and street address, if any, of the property
involved, and shall contain a description of the property in general terms
reasonably sufficient to identify the location and extent of the nuisance.
The notice shall further specify the date, time and location of a hearing
before the Director, which date, time and location of hearing shall be not
less than seven (7) days after the date of issuance of the notice. The
hearing shall be conducted to determine whether or not a public nuisance, as
defined in this chapter, exists and shall be conducted by the Director who
shall act as the hearing officer.



('61 Code, § 18C.5)



   C.   Service of notice.



      1.   The notice, in form and content as required by paragraph
B. above, shall be served by the following method:



         a.   By posting the notice at a conspicuous place on the
land, or upon the premises, or upon any structure thereon, or upon the
abutting public right-of-way; and



         b.   By sending a copy of the notice by certified mail
addressed to the owner or other person in charge or control of the property,
at the address shown on the last available assessment roll. The notice shall
be placed in the United States mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed
served upon placing in the United States mail, postage prepaid.



      2.   Failure of the owner or other person in charge of or
control of the property to actually receive such notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings under this chapter.



('61 Code, § 18C.6)



(Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.050  HEARING BEFORE DIRECTOR.



   At the time, date and place of the hearing to be conducted to determine
whether or not a public nuisance exists, as defined in this chapter, the
Director shall consider the evidence available, including, but not limited
to, applicable staff reports and related material. The Director shall give
any interested person a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection
therewith. Based upon the evidence so presented at the hearing, the Director
shall determine whether a public nuisance exists.



('61 Code, § 18C.7)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.060  ORDER TO ABATE.



   In the event the Director determines that a public nuisance exists, as
defined in this chapter, the decision shall be final and conclusive in the
absence of an appeal as provided in this chapter. The Director shall, within
five (5) working days after the close of the hearing, provide written notice
of the decision to the owner or other person in charge or control of the
premises and to any other person requesting the same. The notice of decision
shall contain an order of abatement, if a nuisance is found to exist, and
shall set forth the nature of the nuisance, its location and the time and
manner for its abatement and shall be, served in accordance with the
provisions of § 15.212.040.C.1.b. Where an appeal is filed as provided in
this chapter, such order of abatement shall be suspended pending the review
of such determination in the manner set forth in this chapter.



('61 Code, § 18C.8)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.070  APPEAL.



   A.   The owner or other person in control or in charge of the
property may appeal the decision of the Director to the City Council. Any
such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk, in writing, within ten (10)
business days from the date the notice of decision is issued by the Director
in accordance with the provisions of § 15.212.060. The appeal, in writing,
shall be accompanied by the fee required for the taking of any such appeal,
which fee shall be set by the City Council by resolution. Upon the receipt of
an appeal in writing, with the appropriate fee therefor, the City Clerk shall
set the appeal for a hearing before the City Council.



('61 Code, § 18C.9)



   B.   At the time and place set for the appeal hearing before the
City Council, the City Council shall review the decision of the Director and
shall afford the appellant a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection
therewith. Upon consideration of the evidence presented to the Council at the
hearing on the appeal, the City Council may sustain the action of the hearing
officer, modify the action with respect to any particulars set forth in the
order to abate issued by the hearing officer or may find that no public
nuisance exists. The City Council may continue the hearing on the appeal from
time to time if such continuance is deemed warranted in the Council's sole
discretion.



   C.   Upon conclusion of the hearing before the City Council on the
appeal, the City Council shall, within thirty (30) days, issue its resolution
making its findings and determinations with respect to the appeal. The
resolution, in the event that Council determines that a public nuisance
exists, shall set forth the nature of the nuisance, its location and the time
and manner for its abatement. The decision of the City Council shall be final
and conclusive.



('61 Code, § 18C.10)



(Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.080  NOTICE OF CITY COUNCIL DETERMINATION.



   A copy of the resolution adopted by the City Council shall be mailed to
the owner, or other person in control or in charge of the premises within
five (5) working days after the adoption thereof in accordance with §
15.212.040.C.1.b.



('61 Code, § 18C.11)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.090  OWNER TO ABATE.



   Upon issuance of an order to abate by the Director, in accordance with
the provisions of § 15.212.060 or, in the event of an appeal, upon the
mailing of notice of the City Council's determination concerning any appeal,
the owner or other person in charge or in control of the property shall
comply with any such order to abate in accordance with the terms, conditions,
timeliness and methods of abatement set forth therein.



('61 Code, § 18C.12)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.100  CITY TO ABATE.



   In the event the owner or other person in charge of or control of the
property fails or neglects to remove or to otherwise abate the nuisance in
accordance with the order issued by the Director or the City Council,
whichever is applicable, the Director, through city employees authorized by
the Director, shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may
be done by city crews or by private contractor. A report of the proceedings
and an accurate account of the cost of abating the nuisance on each separate
property shall be filed with the Director.



('61 Code, § 18C.13)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.110  COSTS OF ABATEMENT.



   A.   Costs; notice. 



      1.   Whenever the Director is required to cause the abatement
of a public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the
Director shall keep an accounting of the costs thereof, including incidental
expenses concerning such abatement. The term “incidental expenses” shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the
city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection
of the abatement work, the costs of printing and mailing required under this
chapter including the costs of attorneys fees. Upon abatement of the
nuisance, the Director shall cause to be prepared an itemized statement of
costs and set the same for a hearing before the Director. Upon receipt of the
report itemizing the costs and expenses incurred in abating the nuisance,
including incidental expenses, the Director shall cause a notice of hearing
to be issued which form of notice shall be headed in letters not less than
one (1") inch in height as follows:



   “NOTICE OF COSTS OF ABATEMENT AND HEARING”



      2.   The notice shall otherwise be in form and content as set
forth in § 15.212.040.B. and shall be served upon the owner or other person
in charge or control of the property in the manner set forth in §
15.212.040.C.



('61 Code, § 18C.14)



   B.   Hearing before Director.  At the time, date and place set for
the hearing on the costs of abatement, which hearing shall be at least seven
(7) working days after the date of the giving of the notice as set forth in
paragraph A. above, the Director shall conduct a hearing on the report. The
owner of the property, or such other person in charge or control of the
property, shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard with respect to the
costs and expenses set forth in the report. Any objections or protests raised
by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the costs of abating the
nuisance may be submitted orally, or in writing. Upon conclusion of the
hearing, the Director shall make such revisions, corrections or modifications
to the report as may be deemed appropriate, after which the report shall be
confirmed as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified. The hearing on
the costs of abatement may be continued from time to time. The Director shall
give notice in accordance with the provisions of § 15.212.040.C.1.b. to the
owner of the property or to such other person in charge or in control of the
property within five (5) days after the conclusion of the hearing as to the
Director's final determination regarding the costs of abatement. The
Director's decision shall be final unless appealed to the City Council in the
time and manner set forth in paragraph D. below.



('61 Code, § 18C.15)



   C.   Assessment of lien.  Upon expiration of the appeal period set
forth in paragraph D. below, the Director shall prepare and file with the
County Auditor a certified copy of the report and the amounts approved in the
report shall be liens upon the property to be assessed. The assessment shall
be filed in the form and manner required by the County Auditor.



('61 Code, § 18C.16)



   D.   Appeal to City Council.  The owner or other person in control
or in charge of the property may appeal the decision of the Director to the
City Council. Any such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk, in writing,
within ten (10) business days from the date the notice of the Director's
final determination concerning the costs of abatement in accordance with the
provisions of § 15.212.060. The appeal, in writing, shall be accompanied by
the fee required for the taking of any such appeal which fee shall be set by
the City Council, by resolution. Upon the receipt of an appeal in writing,
with the appropriate fee therefor, the City Clerk shall set the appeal for a
hearing before the City Council, and the City Clerk shall notify the
appellant of the time, date and location of the hearing at least ten (10)
business days prior to the date of hearing, pursuant to the provisions of §
15.212.040.C.1.b.



('61 Code, § 18C.17)



   E.   Hearing before Council.  At the time and place set for the
appeal hearing concerning the costs of abatement before the City Council, the
City Council shall review the decision of the Director and shall afford the
appellant a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. Any
objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for
the costs of abating the nuisance may be submitted orally, or in writing.
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may make such revisions,
corrections or modifications to the determination of the Director as the
Council may deem appropriate, after which said report shall be confirmed as
submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified. The City Council may
continue the hearing on the appeal from time to time if such continuance is
deemed warranted in the Council's sole discretion.



('61 Code, § 18C.18)



   F.   Resolution assessing lien.  Upon the conclusion of the City
Council, the City Council shall adopt its resolution making its findings and
determinations with respect to the amounts to be assessed with respect to the
costs of abating the nuisance. The amounts so approved by the City Council
shall be a lien upon the property. The City Council shall adopt a resolution
assessing such amounts as a lien upon the property as that property is shown
upon the last available assessment roll.



('61 Code, § 18C.19)



   G.   Recording of resolution.  The City Clerk shall prepare and
file with the County Auditor a certified copy of the resolution and the
amounts approved in the resolution. The assessment contained therein shall be
filed in the form and manner required by the County Auditor.



('61 Code, § 18C.20)



   H.   Payment of costs.  Any person liable for the costs of
abatement may pay said costs of abatement at a time prior to the hearing
before the City Council.



('61 Code, § 18C.21)



(Ord. 754, passed - - )



§ 15.212.120  ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   The provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 and §§ 39580 to 39585,
inclusive, as they exist as of the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter and as they may be amended from time to time, are
incorporated by reference in and made a part of this chapter. The County
Auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the
parcel of land against which the assessment is levied. The amount of the
assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary
municipal taxes and, if delinquent, the amount thereof shall be subject to
the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale as provided for
ordinary municipal taxes.



('61 Code, § 18C.22)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



§ 15.212.130  ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES.



   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City
Council from ordering the commencement of any civil action to abate a
nuisance as an alternative to or in conjunction with the proceedings set
forth in this chapter. In addition thereto, any nuisance which is defined as
a misdemeanor by any provision of any city code may be abated by criminal
prosecution.



   B.   The procedure for abatement set forth in this chapter is an
alternative procedure to any other procedure permitted by state or local law
and shall not prohibit the use of any other lawful abatement procedure.



   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the costs
of abatement, including incidental expenses, as confirmed either by the
Director of the City Council after appeal, may be assessed against the
owner(s) of the property subject to abatement as a debt personal to the
owner(s) and as a lien on the property. In the event the Director or the City
Council assesses the costs of abatement against the owner(s) personally, the
assessment shall be due and payable within twenty (20) days after service
thereof in accordance with § 15.212.040.C.1.b. In the event such assessment
is not paid within twenty (20) days, the city may commence any legal
proceeding avail-able to it including, but not limited to, suit in small
claims court, municipal court or superior court to recover the costs of
abatement or may permit the lien to be assessed against the property, or
both. Any determination as to the method of collection shall not operate or
be construed as an election of remedies.



('61 Code, § 18C.23)  (Ord. 764, passed - - )



CHAPTER 15.216:  WEED AND REFUSE ABATEMENT



Section



   15.216.010   Short title



   15.216.020   Findings by City Council



   15.216.030   Enforcement officer designated



   15.216.040   Definitions



   15.216.050   Removal of weeds and refuse required; notice provisions



   15.216.060   Notice by City Clerk



   15.216.070   Hearing



   15.216.080   Entry by city on lots



   15.216.090   Payment of costs; lien on property



   15.216.100   Refunds



   15.216.110   Cost of abatement



   15.216.120   Hearing on costs



   15.216.130   Summary abatement



   15.216.140   Costs of abatement when work done by contractor



§ 15.216.010  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Weed and Rubbish
Abatement Ordinance.”



('61 Code, § 12.30)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.020  FINDINGS BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council hereby finds that weeds and refuse, as defined in §
8.32.020, on lots or parcels within the city,  constitute public nuisances.



('61 Code, § 12.43)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.030  ENFORCEMENT OFFICER DESIGNATED.



   The Fire Chief of the city is hereby designated as the enforcement
officer, whose duty it shall be to administer and enforce provisions of this
chapter, except as otherwise provided herein.



('61 Code, § 12.31)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.040  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LOT.  A lot, parcel, tract, or piece of land, improved, or unimproved,
including the sidewalk area abutting or adjoining such lot, parcel, tract or
piece of land, and the parkways or areas lying between any abutting sidewalk
and the curb or street line, or between the abutting property ownership line
and any street line.



   PRIVATE LOT.  Any lot as above defined not owned and in the possession
of a governmental agency or entity.



('61 Code, § 12.32)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.050  REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND REFUSE REQUIRED; NOTICE PROVISIONS.



   A.   Whenever weeds or refuse, as defined in § 8.32.020 of this
code are situated upon any private lot, the enforcement officer shall cause
notice to be posted upon or in front of such property requiring that any such
weeds be destroyed or removed and any such refuse be removed by the owner or
occupant within fourteen (14) days from and after the date of such posting.
In the event such weeds or refuse are not so destroyed or removed within such
period of time, or if a hearing is timely requested as provided for in §
15.216.070, within the time therein provided for, the enforcement officer
shall forthwith cause the same to be destroyed or removed, and he or she and
other employees of the city and any contractors for the city may enter upon
the property for such purpose. Such notice shall be in the following form,
the heading to be in letters not less than one (1") inch in height.



   “NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS AND TO REMOVE REFUSE”



      Pursuant to Chapter 15.216 of the Brea City Code, notice is
hereby given that weeds and/or refuse are situated upon this lot, and are a
public nuisance. Said weeds are required to be destroyed or removed, and any
such rubbish is required to be removed from this lot, and the public nuisance
thus abated, within fourteen (14) days after the date of this posting, unless
within ten (10) days after said posting date a person interested in this lot
files in writing with the City Clerk of the City of Brea a request for
hearing before the city council to consider objections to this abatement
order. Said hearing shall be at the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting, or any adjournment thereof, after the filing of said request. The
date, time and place may be obtained from the city clerk. If a hearing is so
requested, said public nuisance is required to be abated within fourteen (14)
days after the date of said posting, or within five (5) days after the
decision of the council, whichever is later, unless a longer period is
directed by said council.



      If said public nuisance is not abated as required, the City of
Brea will abate or cause it to be abated, and the costs thereof shall be
immediately due and payable and shall be assessed against this lot and become
a lien thereon. A hearing before the city council to consider objections to
said costs will be held on                   , 19    .  Said
costs can be obtained from the city clerk ten (10) days before said hearing
date.



      Said Chapter 15.216 is available in the office of the City Clerk.



      Dated and posted:



      CITY OF BREA



      By                        



      Public Official



   B.   Such notice shall be posted in front of or on the front portion
of each separately owned parcel according to the last equalized assessment
roll then available to the city. In the event that the parcel fronts on two
(2) or more streets, one (1) posting shall be sufficient. In the event that
such weeds or rubbish have not been caused to be removed or destroyed by the
city within sixty (60) days after the date notice is posted on the property,
a new notification shall first be posted.



('61 Code, § 12.33)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.060  NOTICE BY CITY CLERK.



   In addition to the notice above provided for, the City Clerk, within
three (3) business days after the posting of such notices on the property,
shall send a written notification, through the United States mail, first
class, postage prepaid, to the owner of the subject property as shown upon
the last equalized assessment roll then available to the city, which shall
describe the property on which the notice has been posted, by street address,
property description, or by reference to a nearby address of other property,
or by any other description sufficient to identify the property. Such notice
shall thereupon repeat the wording of the notice so posted, including the
date thereof and the name of the public official so posting. Notwithstanding
the requirements of this section, the failure to send the written notice
herein provided for or any defect therein shall not invalidate any
proceedings under this chapter.



('61 Code, § 12.34)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.070  HEARING.



   Any person with an interest in any property on which a “Notice to
Destroy Weeds and to Remove Refuse” sign has been posted may, within ten
(10) days of such posting, request a hearing before the City Council with
respect to the abatement order. Such request shall be in writing, and shall
identify the property and the interest of the person making such request for
a hearing. It shall be automatically scheduled for the next regular City
Council meeting, at which the Council shall hear and consider all objections
to the abatement order. It shall be the responsibility of the party
requesting the hearing to ascertain from the City Clerk the date, time and
place of the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time. By
motion or resolution at the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall
allow or overrule any objections. The decision of the Council shall be final
and conclusive, and the burden shall be upon the objecting party to show that
the abatement order is improper. In holding such hearing, the Council need
not adhere to formal rules of evidence. In the event the objections are
overruled, the owner and/or occupant will cause such abatement within five
(5) days after the date of such hearing or within fourteen (14) days from and
after the date such notice was posted, whichever is later, unless a longer
period is permitted by the City Council in its motion or resolution
overruling such objections.



('61 Code, § 12.35)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.080  ENTRY BY CITY ON LOTS.



   The enforcement officer, and any employees of the city, and any
contractors with the city, are hereby authorized to enter upon any lot in the
city for the purpose of posting notices under § 15.216.050, and for the
purpose of entering to destroy or remove weeds and to remove refuse.



('61 Code, § 12.36)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.090  PAYMENT OF COSTS; LIEN ON PROPERTY.



   Each cost so confirmed by the Council in accordance with § 15.216.120
shall be billed forthwith to the property owner of the lot at his or her
address as shown by the last equalized county assessment roll then available
to city, or at such other address as may have been furnished to city by the
owner in connection with abatement proceedings, excepting those as to which
such Council action occurs after July 1 and before August 10 of any year.
However, the failure to furnish such bill will not invalidate the lien herein
provided. The cost of abatement on each lot shall constitute a special
assessment against that lot, and from the date of the Council action pursuant
to § 15.216.120 is hereby made a lien upon such lot. To the extent such
assessments have not been paid by July 1 of the particular year (whether or
not billed to the property owner), a certified copy of all assessment reports
adopted by the City Council and not theretofore forwarded to the County
Auditor shall be forwarded to him or her on or before August 10. All such
assessments which so constitute a lien shall be collected in the same manner
as general city property taxes are collected and shall be contained on the
tax bill therefor as prepared and mailed by county officials.



('61 Code, § 12.37)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.100  REFUNDS.



   The Council may order refunded all or part of an assessment paid
pursuant to this chapter if it finds that all or part thereof was erroneously
levied. No refund shall be made unless a written claim is filed with the City
Clerk on or before December 10 of the tax year next following that in which
the work resulting in the assessment was purportedly done. The claim shall be
verified by the person who paid the assessment, or his or her guardian,
executor or administrator, and shall set forth the basis for the claim. The
Council shall hold a hearing with respect thereto at its next regular meeting
scheduled at least ten (10) days after the filing of the claim, or at any
adjourned session thereof, and claimant shall not be entitled to special
notice thereof. The hearing may be continued from time to time. No refund
shall be made of penalties or interest.



('61 Code, § 12.38)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.110  COST OF ABATEMENT.



   The enforcement officer shall keep a record of the cost of abatement on
each separate lot wherein the city, or its contractors, abate any nuisance
under this chapter. He or she shall quarterly submit to the City Clerk a
written report showing such cost as to each such lot on which such abatement
has been completed for at least ten (10) days prior to the filing of such
report with the City Clerk, but may include the costs of more recent
abatements. Such written reports shall be filed with the City Clerk no later
than January 2, April 2, July 2, and October 2 of each year.



('61 Code, § 12.39)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.120  HEARING ON COSTS.



   At the Council meeting next regularly scheduled at least eleven (11)
days following the date on which such written report is to be filed with the
City Clerk, or at any adjourned session thereof, the City Council shall
conduct a hearing with respect to such costs contained in the written report
of the enforcement officer. Any property owner or other person interested in
a lot as to which a cost is proposed to be assessed may be heard and present
such evidence in opposition to the proposed assessment as that person
desires. The Council shall make its determination to each objection by
motion, and, except to the extent that it may uphold any objection in whole
or in part, or may decrease or eliminate any assessment on its own motion,
shall adopt and confirm the written report of the enforcement officer by
motion or resolution. The determination of the Council shall be final.



('61 Code, § 12.40)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.130  SUMMARY ABATEMENT.



   The enforcement officer, upon a written determination filed with the
City Clerk that weeds or refuse on any private lot constitute an immediate
threat to the public health, safety and welfare, may enter or authorize other
city employees or its contractors to enter on such private lot and forthwith
destroy or remove such weeds and remove such refuse without notice of any
nature. The resulting cost shall be payable by the same persons, in the same
manner, and shall be a lien upon such lot and collectible as such all as
provided in the preceding and succeeding sections of this chapter. Written
notice of the hearing to be held pursuant to § 15.216.120 shall be mailed to
the owner of record of such lot as appears from the last equalized county
assessment roll then available, by first class mail, at least seven (7) days
before the date of such hearing.



('61 Code, § 12.41)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



§ 15.216.140  COSTS OF ABATEMENT WHEN WORK DONE BY CONTRACTOR.



   Costs of abatement, if done by a contractor, shall be the cost to the
city, plus a reasonable amount on account of city's overhead attributable
thereto. In the event city crews perform the work, cost and reason-able
overhead for city personnel and equipment shall be applied. The Council shall
annually, by resolution, adopt labor and equipment rates to be utilized in
determining costs when city crews perform the abatement work and a percentage
overhead factor to be applied thereto and to contract costs. Notwithstanding
the foregoing requirement of an annual resolution, a resolution in this
regard shall remain effective until the subsequent resolution is adopted.
Notwithstanding the adoption of a successor resolution, the prior resolution
shall apply to all abatements as to which notices were posted prior to the
adoption of the successor resolution, unless the costs under the successor
resolution would be lower.



('61 Code, § 12.42)  (Ord. 822, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 15.220:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   15.220.010   2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted



   15.220.020   2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code -
amendments



§ 15.220.010  2015 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2015 International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code, is hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be and become
the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Brea, regulating the design,
construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair and
maintenance of swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, aquatic facilities and relate
equipment in Brea.



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



§ 15.220.020  2015 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE - AMENDMENTS.



   [Reserved for future amendments.]



(Ord. 1188, passed 12-6-16)



TITLE 16:  FIRE SAFETY



   Chapter



      16.00   FIRE DEPARTMENT



      16.04   BREA FIRE CODE



      16.08   FIREWORKS



CHAPTER 16.00:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



   16.00.010   Fire Department created; composition



§ 16.00.010  FIRE DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created and established a Fire Department for the city
which shall consist of a Fire Chief who shall be appointed by the City
Manager and such other employees as shall be authorized from time to time by
the Council. In addition, the Fire Chief may designate and remove, from time
to time, without cause, such volunteer firefighters as he or she shall
desire, within such number limitation as shall be established by resolution.



('61 Code, § 11.1)  (Ord. 66, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 423, passed  - - )



CHAPTER 16.04:  BREA FIRE CODE



Section



   16.04.010   Fire Code adopted



   16.04.020   Enforcement and inspections



   16.04.030   Chapter 1 Scope and administration amendments



   16.04.040   Chapter 2 Definitions amendments



   16.04.050   Chapter 3 General requirements amendments



   16.04.060   Chapter 5 Fire service features amendments



   16.04.070   Chapter 6 Building services and systems amendments



   16.04.080   Chapter 9 Fire protection systems amendments



   16.04.090   Chapter 11 Construction requirements for existing
buildings amendments



   16.04.100   Chapter 49 Requirements for wildland-urban interface
fire areas amendments



   16.04.110   Chapter 56 Explosives and fireworks amendments



   16.04.120   Chapter 80 Referenced standards amendments



   16.04.130   Fees



§ 16.04.010  FIRE CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code in its entirety, including
Appendices Chapter 4, A, B, BB, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, and N, and
excluding Appendices CC and J, together with the following amendments,
additions, deletions and exceptions, are hereby adopted by reference as the
Fire Code of the City of Brea.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.020  ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS.



   The California Fire Code, with amendments, shall be enforced by the
Brea Fire Department. The Fire Chief of the Brea Fire Department may detail
such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall be necessary from
time to time.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.030  CHAPTER 1 SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION AMENDMENTS.



   Section 101.1 Title is hereby revised as follows:



   Section 101.1 Title. This Code shall be known as the Brea Fire Code,
hereinafter referred to as ‘this Code.’



   Section 102.10 Conflicting provisions is hereby revised as follows:



   Section 102.10 Conflicting provisions. Where there is a conflict
between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the fire code
official shall decide which requirement meets the general intent of this Code.



   Section 105.6.16 Fire hydrants and valves is hereby deleted in its
entirety.



   Section 105.6.49 Additional permits is hereby amended by adding the
following:



   Cut Christmas trees. No person shall sell, display or store for resale,
in the City of Brea, any cut Christmas tree, unless a permit therefore has
been issued by the Chief.



   Oil and natural gas wells. To drill, own, operate, or maintain an oil
or natural gas well.



   Potentially hazardous general use. To conduct an activity or operation
that is not specifically addressed by other permits, but which is likely to
produce conditions hazardous to life or property.



   Residential based care facilities. Including, but not limited to, care
for the elderly, care for the developmentally disabled, and half-way homes
shall be regulated under this section and a permit issued by the Fire
Department to each business engaging in these operations.



   Section 105.7.19 Bi-Directional Radio Amplification is hereby added as
follows:



   Bi-Directional Radio Amplification. Plans must be submitted for
installation or modification of Bi-Directional Radio Amplification in any
structure.



   Section 105.7.20 Miscellaneous Plan Check is hereby added as follows:



   Miscellaneous Plan Check. Request or submittal of any type of plan or
necessary review of documents pertaining to operations that are covered by
the Fire Department or this Code, but are not specifically listed in Chapter
1.



   Section 107.7 Occupant count is hereby added as follows:



   107.7 Occupant count. The supervisor of each place of assembly shall
have an effective system to keep count of the number of occupants present in
the assembly area. If the Chief determines at any time that an accurate count
of occupants is not being maintained, the occupancy shall be cleared until an
accurate count can be made.



   Section 109.4 Violation penalties is hereby amended to read as follows:



   109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate any provision of
this Code or shall fail to comply with any of its requirements, or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents used under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor unless such violation is expressly made punishable as an
infraction, Alternatively or in addition, any violation of this Code may be
punished by administrative penalty and issuance of an administrative citation.



   Section 111.4 Failure to comply is hereby revised as follows:



   111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   Section 113.3 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby revised
as follows:



   113.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences
any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the
necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee that is equal to the
original permit fee, which shall be in addition to the required permit fees.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.040  CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS AMENDMENTS.



   Section 202 General Definitions is hereby amended by adding the
following definitions:



   FLOW-LINE. The lowest continuous elevation on a rolled curb defined by
the path traced by a particle in a moving body of water at the bottom of the
rolled curb.



   HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA. All areas identified within Section 4906.2 and
other areas as determined by the fire code official do to the presence of
combustible vegetation, or the proximity of the property to an area that
contains combustible vegetation.



   JURISDICTIONAL AREA. Any area under the jurisdiction, including the
territorial area, of the City of Brea, including all areas annexed thereto
after adoption of this Code.



   VEHICLE FUELING APPLIANCE. A listed natural gas compressor package not
containing storage, designed for the unattended dispensing of natural gas
into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.050  CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AMENDMENTS.



   Section 304.1.2 (7) (E) is hereby added as follows:



   (E)   Brea Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Requirements -
Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance
Program.



   Section 304.1.2 (7) (F) is hereby added as follows:



   (F)   Brush Clearance on all Existing Properties located with the
Protection Area.



   Section 307.6 Outdoor Fires in the Fuel Modification Areas is hereby
added as follows:



   307.6 Outdoor Fires in the Fuel Modification Areas. Outdoor, open or
recreational fires using wood or other solid fuel shall not be built, ignited
or maintained in the fuel modification area.



      Exception:



      1.   Occupied one and two-family dwellings where such fires
are built in a permanent or portable barbeque, gas outdoor fireplace, or gas
grill and are a minimum of 30 feet (9144mm) from a grass, grain, brush, or
forest-covered area. Permanent barbecues, portable barbecues, outdoor
fireplaces or grills shall not be used for the disposal of rubbish, trash, or
combustible waste material.



      2.   Fires at official organized campsites or parks when
located in permanent or portable barbecue or grill, incinerator, or outdoor
fireplace (all equipped with some type of spark arrester) located at least 30
feet from combustible vegetation.



   Section 307.6.1 Outdoor fires is hereby added as follows:



   307.6.1 Outdoor fires. Outdoor, open burning and recreational fires
shall not be built, ignited or maintained when the following conditions exist:



   1.   Predicted sustained winds exceed 8 MPH at the ground level, or
a red flag condition has been declared.



   2.   A person age 18 or over is not present at all times to watch
and tend such fire.



   3.   A public announcement is made that open burning is prohibited.



   4.   A viable water source or approved means of extinguishment is
not immediately available.



   Exception:



   1.   Occupied one and two-family dwellings where such fires are
built in a permanent or portable barbeque, outdoor fireplace, or grill and
are a minimum of 15 feet (9144mm) from any combustible material or structure.
Permanent barbecues, portable barbecues, outdoor fireplaces or grills shall
not be used for the disposal of rubbish, trash, or combustible waste material.



   2.   Fires at official organized campsites or parks when located in
permanent or portable barbecue or grill, incinerator, or outdoor fireplace
(all equipped with some type of spark arrester) located at least 30 feet from
combustible vegetation.



   Section 308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices is deleted in its entirety.



   Section 320 Christmas Tree Sales is hereby added as follows:



   SECTION 320 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES



   320.1 General.



   No person shall sell, display for sale, or store for sale in the City
of Brea, any cut Christmas tree, unless a permit therefor has been obtained
from the Fire Department. Applicants must comply with all rules and
regulations and obtain all required permits and licenses including a City
business license.



   320.1.1    Permit-When issued.



   Permits to sell, display for sale, or store for sale cut Christmas
trees in the City of Brea may only be issued for the period from November 5
to December 31. The applicant must show that the proposed location and method
of any activity will not constitute a fire hazard or violation of law.



   320.1.2 Cleanup deposit.



   Each applicant, if other than a permanent established year-round
business, shall pay a cleanup guarantee deposit in such amount as established
by Resolution to the City Council. The applicant must agree that not later
than the tenth day of January following the issuance of such permit, all
unsold trees, combustible waste and accumulation of sawdust will be removed
from the permitted location and disposed of properly. Following the tenth day
of January the City may remove and dispose of accumulations and apply the
deposit to costs, including overhead expenses (30%), incurred by such removal.



   320.1.3    Return of deposit.



   The Fire Marshal will inspect permitted sites as soon as possible after
January 10 of each year. Permittees who have completed the site cleanup will
receive a refund of the cleanup guarantee deposit.



   320.1.4    Liability.



   Each permittee shall provide general liability insurance as required by
the City of Brea Risk Manager, protecting against any claim for any damages
caused in any manner from the use of such lot or the keeping or sale of any
Christmas trees therein or otherwise in the exercise of rights granted by
such permit issued pursuant to this Section. A certificate of such insurance
shall be filed with the Fire Marshal showing the City as a named insured
hereunder.



   Section 321 Projectile Firing is hereby added as follows:



   Section 321 Projectile Firing. No person shall, in any brush or
grass-covered area or area covered with flammable material, possess, fire, or
cause to be fired any tracer bullets, tracer charge, flammable propellant
model rockets or any type of projectile that discharged smoldering or
flammable material. Nothing in this section shall apply to any law
enforcement acting in the course of such officer's duties other than target
practice.



   Section 322 Development on or near Land Containing or Emitting Toxic,
Combustible or Flammable Gasses or Vapors is hereby added as follows:



   Section 322 Development on or near Land Containing or Emitting Toxic,
Combustible or Flammable Gasses or Vapors



      Section 322.1 All projects will be required to conform to the
current adopted ‘Brea Fire Department Combustible Soil-Gas Guideline’.



      Section 322.2 Additions or modifications to a lot or existing
building in any identified methane area, that expands the original footprint,
may be required to conduct an updated methane study.



   Section 323 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is
hereby added as follows:



   Section 323 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All
new buildings and additions to be built or installed in areas containing
combustible vegetation shall comply with the following:



   1.   The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth
in the ‘Brea Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Requirements -Technical
Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance
Program’.



   2.   Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and
approved by the fire code official concurrent with the submittal for approval
of any tentative map(s).



   3.   Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and
approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit.



   4.   The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change.
Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval by
the fire code official.



   5.   All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained
in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement
process outlined in the Fire Code.



   Section 324 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways is
hereby added as follows:



   Section 324 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The
fire code official is authorized to require areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) on
each side of portions of highways, roads, and private streets which are
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of
flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from
the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces.



   Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or
cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar
plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of
readily transmitting fire.



   Section 325 Use of equipment is hereby added as follows:



   Section 325 Use of equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated, in, upon or
adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses
hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as
defined in Section 325.1 and maintained in effective working order, or the
engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire.



   Exception:



   1.   Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors,
buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this
section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the
Vehicle Code of the State of California.



   2.   Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all
exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust
bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition



   Section 325.1 Spark arrestors is hereby added as follows:



   325.1 Spark arrestors. Spark arrestors shall comply with the following:



   1.   The device shall be constructed of nonflammable material
specifically for the purpose of removing and retaining carbon and other
flammable particles over 0.0232 of an inch (0.58 mm) in size from the exhaust
flow of an internal combustion engine that uses hydrocarbon fuels or which is
qualified and rated by the United States Forest Service.



   2.   Spark arresters affixed to the exhaust system of engines or
vehicles shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames
or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material.



   Section 326 Restricted entry is hereby added as follows:



   Section 326 Restricted entry. The fire code official shall determine
and publicly announce when hazardous fire areas shall be closed to entry and
when such areas shall again be opened to entry.



   Exception:



   1.   Residents and owners of private property within hazardous fire
areas and their invitees and guests going to or on their own land.



   2.   Entry, in the course of duty, by peace or police officers, and
other duly authorized public officers, members of a fire department and
members of the United States Forest Service.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.060  CHAPTER 5 FIRE SERVICE FEATURES AMENDMENTS.



   Section 503.2.1 Dimensions is hereby revised as follows:



   503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an
unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), exclusive of
shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section
503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6
inches (4115) mm). Fire Apparatus access roads in the Fire Hazard Severity
Zones shall have an unobstructed width of 24 feet (2 unobstructed 12 feet
travel lanes).



   Section 503.2.3 Surface is hereby revised as follows:



   503.2.3   Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed,
and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus (75,000 lbs.
load/25,000 point load) and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather
driving capabilities. Alternative driving surfaces shall be designed by a
registered civil engineer and shall be subject to approval by the Brea Fire
Department.



   Section 503.2.4 Turning radius is hereby revised as follows:



   503.2.4   Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire
apparatus access road shall be determined by the fire code official. Fire
access road turns and corners shall be designed with a minimum inner radius
of 17 feet and an outer radius of 45 feet. Radius must be concentric.



   Section 503.7 Apparatus access to fire hazard severity zones is hereby
added as follows:



   503.7 Apparatus access to fire hazard severity zones. A minimum of two
separate public access and exit roads are required in developments within a
Fire Hazard Severity Zone or as approved by the fire code official.



   Section 505.1 Address identification is hereby revised as follows:



   505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have
approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building
identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from
the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with
their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a minimum stroke
width of 0.5 inch for single-family residences.



   All multi-family, multi-retail and multi-commercial occupancies shall
have a minimum of 6 inch high numbers, with a minimum one-and-one-half inch
(1-1/2) stroke.



   All light and heavy industrial occupancies shall have a minimum of ten
(10) inch high numbers, with a minimum one-and-one-half inch (1-1/2) stroke.
All complexes that are three (3) stories or greater in height and/or have two
(2) or more building units shall have a minimum of ten (10) inch high
numbers, with a one-and-one-half inch (1- 1/2) stroke.



   All multi-family, multi-retail and multi-industrial occupancies shall
identify individual units with numbers a minimum of four (4) inches, affixed
to the units front door entrance or frame. All buildings with a rear door
access shall identify that unit with the proper numbers affixed to the door
or frame.



   All buildings with two (2) or more units shall identify utility meters
according to the unit being serviced.



   Section 506.1 Where required is hereby revised as follows:



   506.1 Where required. Where access to or within a structure or an area
is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is
necessary for emergency or non-emergency purposes, the fire code official is
authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The
key box shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain necessary
access as required by the fire code official



   Section 507.5.7 Private hydrants is hereby added as follows:



   507.5.7 Private hydrants. Private hydrants shall be painted OSHA safety
red.



   Section 510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage is hereby revised as
follows:



   510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. All new
buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within
the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety
communication systems at the exterior of the building. This section shall not
require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The
emergency responder radio coverage system shall comply with the Brea Fire
Department guidance document:



   Information for Digital Antenna System (DAS)/Bi-Directional
Amplification (BDA) Systems.



   Exceptions:



   1.   Where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio
coverage system is not needed.



   2.   In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is
required and such systems, components or equipment could have a negative
impact on normal operations of the facility, the fire code official shall
have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency responder
radio coverage system.



   Sections 510.4 and 510.5 are deleted without replacement.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.070  CHAPTER 6 BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS AMENDMENTS.



   Section 608.10 Indoor charging of electric carts/cars is hereby added
as follows:



   608.10 Indoor charging of electric carts/cars. Indoor charging of
electric carts/cars where the combined volume of all carts/cars battery
electrolyte exceeds 50 gallons shall comply with the following:



   1.   Spill control and neutralization shall be provided and comply
with Section 608.5.



   2.   Room ventilation shall be provided and comply with Section
608.6.1.



   3.   Signage shall be provided and comply with Section 608.7.1.



   4.   Smoke detection shall be provided and comply with Section 907.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.080  CHAPTER 9 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS AMENDMENTS.



   Section 903.2 Where required is hereby revised as follows:



   903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings
and structures shall be provided in the following locations:



   1.   New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system
shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area, as
defined in Section 202, exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2), or more than two
stories in height, regardless of fire areas or allowable area.



   2.   New buildings in the VHFHSZ: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided in all new structures in the VHFHSZ.



   3.   Existing buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions
of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing
building when an addition occurs and when one of the following conditions
exists:



      a.   When the addition is 50% or more of the existing building
area and the resulting building area, as defined in Section 202, exceeds 5000
square feet (465 m2); or



      b.   When the addition exceeds 2000 (185.81m2)square feet and
the resulting building area, as defined in Section 202, exceeds 5000 square
feet (465 m2); or



      c.   An additional story is added above the second floor
regardless of fire areas or allowable area.



   Exception: Group R-3 occupancies. Group R-3 occupancies shall comply
with Section 903.2.8.



   Section 903.2.8 Group R is hereby revised as follows:



   903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R
fire area as follows:



   1.   New buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout all new buildings.



   2.   Existing buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists:



      a.   When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building
area, as defined in Section 202, or greater than 1000 square feet (92.903 m2)
within a two year period; or



      b.   An addition when the existing building is already
provided with automatic sprinklers; or



      c.   When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially
renovated; and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building
Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system
would be similar as in a new building.



   3.   Existing buildings in the Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the
following conditions exists:



      a.   When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building
area, as defined in Section 202, or greater than 1000 square feet (93.902 m2)
within a two year period; or



      b.   An addition when the existing building is already
provided with automatic sprinklers; or



      c.   When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially
renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building
Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system
would be similar as in a new building.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.090  CHAPTER 11 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
AMENDMENTS.



   Adopt only those sections and subsections below:



   1101.1, 1103.1, 1103.2, 1103.3, 1103.7, 1103.7.3.1,
1103.7.8-1103.7.8.2, 1103.7.9-1103.7.9.10, 1103.8-1103.8.5.3, 1107, 1113,
1114, 1115, and 1116



   Section 1103.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings
is hereby revised as follows:



   1103.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings.
Existing buildings that do not have approved radio coverage for emergency
responders within the building, based upon the existing coverage levels of
the public safety communications systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior
of the building, shall be equipped with such coverage according to one of the
following:



   1.   Where an existing wired communication system cannot be repaired
or is being replaced, or where not approved in accordance with Section 510.1,
Exception 1.



   2.   Within a time frame established by the adopting authority.



   3.   The emergency responder radio coverage shall comply with the
following Brea Fire Department guidance document:



      “Information for Digital Antenna Systems (DAS)/Bi-Directional
Amplification (BDA) Systems.”



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.100  CHAPTER 49 REQUIREMENTS FOR WILDLAND- URBAN INTERFACE FIRE
AREAS AMENDMENTS.



   Section 4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is
hereby added as follows:



   Section 4908 Fuel modification requirements for new construction



      Section 4908.1  General. All new buildings or additions to be
built or installed in areas containing combustible vegetation shall comply
with the criteria set forth in the ‘Brea Very High Fire Hazard Severity
Zone Requirements - Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification
Plans and Maintenance Program.’



      Section 4908.2 Homeowners associations is hereby added as follows:



      4908.2  Homeowners associations. Where the Fuel Modification
Zone is to be maintained by a homeowners’ association the following apply:



      1.   The conditions, covenants and restrictions recorded
against all property within the homeowners’ association shall require
specifically budgeted funds sufficient to meet the ongoing maintenance
obligations of the applicable fuel modification requirements.



      2.   The Fuel Modification Zone shall be subject to an annual
inspection conducted by a representative of the Fire Department in order to
assure that the Fuel Modification Zone continues to be maintained in
compliance with the applicable fuel modification requirements.



      3.   Any occupied structure on any lot which adjoins a Fire
Hazard Severity Zone shall be constructed in compliance with all requirements
of the City’s Building or Fire Code (as amended).



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.110  CHAPTER 56 EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS AMENDMENTS.



   Sections 5609.1 Retail fireworks, 5609.2 Seizure of fireworks, and
5609.3 Firing are hereby added as follows:



   5609.1 Retail fireworks. The sale, use and display of fireworks 1.4G
(commonly referred to as Safe & Sane), and the storage, use, sale, possession
and handling of fireworks 1.3G is prohibited.



      Exception - Fireworks 1.4G and fireworks 1.3G may be part of an
electrically fired public display when permitted and conducted by a licensed
pyrotechnic operator as part of a permitted public display.



   5609.2 Seizure of fireworks. The fire code official shall have the
authority to seize, take, and remove all fireworks stored, sold, offered for
sale, used or handled in violation of the provisions of the Code and Title 19
CCR, Chapter 6. Any seizure or removal pursuant to this section shall be in
compliance with all applicable statutory, constitutional, and decisional law.



   5609.3 Firing. All fireworks displays must be electrically fired.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.120  CHAPTER 80 REFERENCED STANDARDS AMENDMENTS.



   Chapter 80 referenced standards amendments is adopted in its entirety
with the following amendments:



   NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby
amended as follows



   6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type.
The FDC shall contain a minimum of two 2 ½ inch inlets. The location shall
be approved and be no more than 45 feet from a public hydrant. The size of
piping and the number of inlets shall be approved by the chief. If acceptable
to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire
department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red. When the fire
sprinkler density design requires 500 gpm (including inside hose stream
demand) or greater, or a standpipe system is included, four 2 ½ inch inlets
shall be provided. Sprinkler density of not less than that required for an
Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction/s in density or  design area.
Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d)
curve “G.” Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant
is not identified at the time the permit is issued. Where a subsequent
occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density
for the new occupancy.



   NFPA 13R 2016 edition installation of sprinkler system in residential
occupancies up to and including four stories in height is hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 6.11.2 is hereby revised as follows:



   6.11.2 Fire department connections shall consist of at least two 2 1/2
inch female couplings.



   NFPA 13D 2016 edition installation of sprinkler systems in one and
two-family dwellings  and  manufactured  homes  is  hereby  amended 
as follows:



   Section 8.3.5.1.1 is hereby revised as follows:



   8.3.5.1.1 All attics shall be protected with an intermediate
temperature quick response sprinkler which shall be located to protect attic
penetrations created by the access scuttles or mechanical equipment.



   NFPA 14, 2016 edition, installation of standpipe and hose systems is
hereby amended as follows:



   Section 6.4.5.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:



   6.4.5.4 The location of the FDC shall be approved and be no more than
45 feet from a public hydrant. If acceptable to the weter authority, it may
be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections
shall be painted OSHA safety red.



   NFPA 24, 2016 edition, installation of private fire service mains and
their appurtenances is hereby amended as follows:



   Section 5.9.1.3 is hereby revised as follows:



   5.9.1.3 The fire department connection shall be of an approved type and
contain a minimum of two 2 1/2 inch inlets. The location shall be approved
and be no more than 45 feet from a public fire hydrant. If acceptable to the
water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. The supply
pipe shall be painted OSHA safety red.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



§ 16.04.130  FEES.



   A.   Fee schedules for any permits, licenses, inspections, plan
check or other related work or services provided by the Fire Department in
connection with the application of this chapter or the Code adopted hereby
(‘fire service fees’) shall be as established by resolution of the City
Council as the same may be amended from time to time.



   B.   Unless otherwise provided by this Code, fire service fees
established pursuant to paragraph A. of this Section are due and payable upon
receipt of an invoice therefor from the City. It is a violation of this
Section to fail to pay any fire service fee when due. Any fire service fee is
delinquent if it remains unpaid thirty (30) days after the date of the
invoice. Any fire service fee that becomes delinquent shall be subject to the
following monetary penalty. Thirty-one (31) days after the date of invoice, a
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the fire service fee shall be added, and each
month thereafter, an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the original
fire service fee shall be added, up to a  maximum penalty amount not to
exceed the original invoiced amount.



(Ord. 1187, passed 12-6-16)



CHAPTER 16.08:  FIREWORKS



Section



   16.08.010   Fireworks prohibited; exception



§ 16.08.010  FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   Subject to the exception set forth below in this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to sell, use or
discharge any fireworks within the city including, but not limited to,
“safe and sane” fireworks as that term is defined in Cal. Health & Safety
Code, Part 2 of Division 11, as the same may be amended from time to time
hereafter.



   EXCEPTION:  Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the presentation of
a public display of fireworks including, but not limited to, “safe and
sane” fireworks, by the city. The City Council may contract with a person,
firm, partnership or corporation to provide such public display upon terms
and conditions deemed advisable by the City Council.




(‘61 Code, § 11B.1)  (Ord. 794, passed  --; Am. Ord. 795, passed  - - )




TITLE 17:  RESERVED



TITLE 18:  SUBDIVISIONS AND FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



   Chapter



   DIVISION I — SUBDIVISIONS



      18.04   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      18.08   DEFINITIONS



      18.12   MAPS — GENERAL PROVISIONS



      18.16   FINAL TRACT MAPS



      18.20   FINAL PARCEL MAPS



      18.24   IMPROVEMENTS



      18.28   PROCEDURE — GENERAL PROVISIONS



      18.32   TENTATIVE PARCEL AND TENTATIVE TRACT MAPS



      18.36   VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS



      18.40   REVIEW OF MAPS BY OTHER AGENCIES



      18.44   FINAL MAPS



      18.48   PARCEL MAPS



      18.52   TRACT MAPS



      18.56   FILING MAPS WITH COUNTY RECORDER



      18.60   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



      18.64   DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS



      18.68   FEES



      18.72   SOILS REPORTS



      18.76   MONUMENTS



      18.80   DESIGN — GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



      18.84   DESIGN — LOTS



      18.88   DESIGN — STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      18.92   DESIGN — STREETS AND HIGHWAYS



      18.96   IMPROVEMENT SECURITY



      18.100   REVERSION TO ACREAGE



      18.104   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS



      18.106   VOLUNTARY LOT MERGERS



   DIVISION II — FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



      18.204   PURPOSE AND METHODS



      18.208   DEFINITIONS



      18.212   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      18.216   ADMINISTRATION



      18.220   DEVELOPMENT



      18.224   VARIANCE PROCEDURE



DIVISION I — SUBDIVISIONS



CHAPTER 18.04:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   18.04.010   Statutory authority — applicability of Title 18
provisions



   18.04.020   Purpose of Division I provisions



   18.04.030   Exclusions to Division I applicability



   18.04.040   Official date of established subdivisions



   18.04.050   Reference to other laws



   18.04.060   Division of land for lease only



§ 18.04.010  STATUTORY AUTHORITY —  APPLICABILITY OF TITLE 18 PROVISIONS.



   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code Division 2 of Title 7,
refereed to herein as the “Map Act,” and pursuant to any other
regulations provided by law, the regulations hereinafter set forth in
Division I of this title shall be known as the “subdivision ordinance,”
and shall apply to all divisions of land hereafter made of property wholly or
partially within the city. A map shall be prepared and presented for
approval, as hereinafter provided for and required, for each such division of
land and each part thereof lying within or partially within the city.



§ 18.04.020  PURPOSE OF DIVISION I  PROVISIONS.



   This Division I shall have as its purposes the establishment and
enforcement of the following principles in the interest of protecting the
health, safety and public welfare of the people of the city:



   A.   Effectuating the objectives established for the development of
the city in the General Plan and the precise plans based thereon;



   B.   To provide for proper grading and erosion control including the
prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site properties;



   C.   Providing standards for the construction and installation of
streets. roads, alleys, highways, public utilities and other public
facilities;



   D.   Providing uniformity in street width, proper street alignment
and adequate means of ingress and egress to property;



   E.   Preventing the subdivision of land which is subject to
inundation or flash flooding or is otherwise  unsuitable for subdivision.



§ 18.04.030  EXCLUSIONS TO DIVISION I  APPLICABILITY.



   This division shall be inapplicable to those matters stated in Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 66412, 66412.1, and 66412.2.



§ 18.04.040  OFFICIAL DATE OF  ESTABLISHED SUBDIVISIONS.



   A subdivision shall be deemed established on the date of recordation of
the final parcel or tract map at the county recorder's office.



§ 18.04.050  REFERENCE TO OTHER LAWS.



   Whenever reference is made to an ordinance of this city or to a statute
of the state of California, such reference applies to requirements of the
ordinance or statute applicable on the date of final action on a tentative
map and to the provisions of variances and permits granted pursuant to such
ordinances or statutes, except in the case of vesting tentative maps.
Moreover, any such reference shall mean and include any amendment or
modification thereto hereinafter made, except as otherwise required by law.



Cross-reference:



   Vesting tentative maps, see Chapter 18.36



§ 18.04.060  DIVISION OF LAND FOR LEASE  ONLY.



   The filing of a tract map or parcel map on which appears the words
“DIVISION OF LAND FOR LEASE ONLY” authorizes the leasing of any lot shown
on such map. A person shall not sell, finance, or transfer title to any lot
shown on such maps, or offer to do so, or contract to do so, unless the
transaction would be in full compliance with the provisions of this Division
and the Map Act had such tract map or parcel map not been filed.



CHAPTER 18.08:  DEFINITIONS



Section



   18.08.010   Advisory agency



   18.08.020   Alley



   18.08.030   City Council



   18.08.040   City Engineer



   18.08.050   Community apartment project



   18.08.060   Condominium



   18.08.070   County surveyor



   18.08.080   Dedication



   18.08.090   Design



   18.08.100   Director



   18.08.110   Drainage facility



   18.08.120   Easement



   18.08.130   Final map



   18.08.140   Flood hazard



   18.08.150   Frontage



   18.08.160   Future street



   18.08.170   General Plan



   18.08.180   Geological hazard



   18.08.190   Improvements



   18.08.200   Legislative body



   18.08.210   Limited-equity housing cooperative



   18.08.220   Local agency or city



   18.08.230   Local city street



   18.08.240   Lot consolidation



   18.08.250   Lot line adjustments



   18.08.260   Major highway



   18.08.270   Merger



   18.08.280   Owner



   18.08.290   Parcel map



   18.08.300   Primary highway



   18.08.310   Secondary highway



   18.08.320   Shall and may



   18.08.330   Stock cooperative



   18.08.340   Streets



   18.08.350   Subdivider



   18.08.360   Subdivision



   18.08.370   Subdivision Map Act (S.M.A.)



   18.08.380   Tentative map



   18.08.390   Tract map



   18.08.400   Vesting tentative map



   18.08.410   Zoning ordinance



§ 18.08.010  ADVISORY AGENCY.



   ADVISORY AGENCY.  The Planning Commission which is herein designated
as the advisory agency to the City Council on all matters related to the
zoning and use of land and structures.



§ 18.08.020  ALLEY.



   ALLEY.  An unnamed public or private right-of-way which affords a
means of vehicular access to the side or rear of properties abutting a street
or highway.



§ 18.08.030  CITY COUNCIL.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the city, sometimes referred to as
the “legislative body.”



§ 18.08.040  CITY ENGINEER.



   CITY ENGINEER.  The City Engineer of the city.



§ 18.08.050  COMMUNITY APARTMENT  PROJECT.



   COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECT.  As defined in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §
11004.



§ 18.08.060  CONDOMINIUM.



   CONDOMINIUM.  As defined in Cal. Civ. Code § 1351.



§ 18.08.070  COUNTY SURVEYOR.



   COUNTY SURVEYOR.  Includes the county engineer, if there is no county
surveyor.



§ 18.08.080  DEDICATION.



   DEDICATION.  The grant of real property for public use.



§ 18.08.090  DESIGN.



   DESIGN.  As defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 66418.



§ 18.08.100  DIRECTOR.



   DIRECTOR.  The Public Works Director. Where the staff title is no
longer used by the city, the staff position most closely associated with this
position, as determined by the City Manager, shall be designated the
authority.  (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 3-21-17)



§ 18.08.110  DRAINAGE FACILITY.



   DRAINAGE FACILITY.  Any drainage device or structure which may be used
to control or direct the flow of water and/or alleviate flood hazard,
including, but not limited to, berms, channels, culverts, curbs, ditches,
gutters, pavement and pipes.



§ 18.08.120  EASEMENT.



   EASEMENT.  A limited right or interest in the land of another,
entitling the holder to some use, privilege or benefit.



§ 18.08.130  FINAL MAP.



   FINAL MAP.  A map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and
final map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this Division I, prepared
in accordance with the provisions of this division and the Subdivision Map
Act, designed to be recorded in the office of the county recorder.



§ 18.08.140  FLOOD HAZARD.



   FLOOD HAZARD.  A potential danger to life, land or improvements due to
inundation or storm-water runoff having sufficient velocity to transport or
deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or
erode the banks of water-courses.



§ 18.08.150  FRONTAGE.



   FRONTAGE.  A line, and length thereof, along which a lot abuts a
public or private street. Where a lot abuts more than one (1) street, or
abuts the same street along more than one (1) continuous line; each such line
shall be considered a separate frontage.



§ 18.08.160  FUTURE STREET.



   FUTURE STREETS.  Any real property which the owner thereof has offered
for dedication for street purposes and the offer has been rejected by the
City Council, subject to the right of the Council to rescind its act and
accept by resolution at any later date and without future action by the
owner, all or any part of said property as a public street.



§ 18.08.170  GENERAL PLAN.



   GENERAL PLAN.  A general plan or any element thereof, adopted by the
city pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65300 et seq.



§ 18.08.180  GEOLOGICAL HAZARD.



   GEOLOGICAL HAZARD.  A hazard inherent in the earth, or artificially
created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property or
improvements due to the movement, failure or shifting of earth.



§ 18.08.190  IMPROVEMENTS.



   IMPROVEMENTS.  As defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 66419.



§ 18.08.200  LEGISLATIVE BODY.



   LEGISLATIVE BODY.  The City Council of the city of Brea.



§ 18.08.210  LIMITED-EQUITY HOUSING  COOPERATIVE.



   LIMITED-EQUITY HOUSING COOPERATIVE.  As defined in Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code  § 11003.



§ 18.08.220  LOCAL AGENCY OR CITY.



   LOCAL AGENCY or CITY.  The city of Brea.



§ 18.08.230  LOCAL CITY STREET.



   LOCAL CITY STREET.  A dedicated street serving as the principal means
of access to property, which street is not shown on the circulation element
of the General Plan as a secondary, primary or major highway.



§ 18.08.240  LOT CONSOLIDATION.



   LOT CONSOLIDATION.  The combining of two (2) or more contiguous lots
or parcels for the purpose of constructing buildings or structures which
cross existing lot lines, or where such combination is required to provide
the required off-street parking, open space, landscape area, or other purpose
required as a condition of the development of a project or land.



§ 18.08.250  LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.



   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.  A transfer of land between two (2) or more
adjacent lots or parcels where the land taken from one is attached to an
adjacent lot, and where the number of lots stays the same.



§ 18.08.260  MAJOR HIGHWAY.



   MAJOR HIGHWAY.  A highway designated as a major highway on the
circulation element of the General Plan.



§ 18.08.270  MERGER.



   MERGER.  The joining of two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land
which are held by the same owner into one (1) parcel.



§ 18.08.280  OWNER.



   OWNER.  An individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, the federal, state, city, or city government, or special
district, or any other group or combination acting as an entity.



§ 18.08.290  PARCEL MAP.



   PARCEL MAP.  A map consisting of four (4) or less parcels and prepared
in accordance with the provisions of this division and of the Subdivision Map
Act.



§ 18.08.300  PRIMARY HIGHWAY.



   PRIMARY HIGHWAY.  A highway designated a primary highway on the
circulation element of the General Plan.



§ 18.08.310  SECONDARY HIGHWAY.



   SECONDARY HIGHWAY.  A highway designated as a secondary highway on
circulation element of the General Plan.



§ 18.08.320  SHALL AND MAY.



   SHALL is mandatory; MAYis permissive.



§ 18.08.330  STOCK COOPERATIVE.



   STOCK COOPERATIVE.  A corporation formed or availed of primarily for
the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years,
improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of
such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the
real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of
occupancy is transferable only con-currently with the transfer of the share
or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of
occupancy.



§ 18.08.340  STREETS.



   STREETS.  Public roads and highways.



§ 18.08.350  SUBDIVIDER.



   SUBDIVIDER.  As defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 66423.



§ 18.08.360  SUBDIVISION.



   SUBDIVISION.  As defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 66424.



§ 18.08.370  SUBDIVISION MAP ACT (S.M.A.).



   SUBDIVISION MAP ACT (S.M.A.).  Cal. Gov't Code Division 2 of Title 7,
as may be amended from time to time.



§ 18.08.380  TENTATIVE MAP.



   TENTATIVE MAP.  A tentative map in accordance with the provisions of
this Division I and the Subdivision Map Act. A map, made for the purpose of
showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and existing
conditions in and around it, need not be based upon an accurate or detailed
final survey of the property.



§ 18.08.390  TRACT MAP.



   TRACT MAP.  A final map prepared in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. A tract
map is required for five (5) or more parcels of land.



§ 18.08.400  VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.



   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.  A tentative map for a residential subdivision,
that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting
Tentative Map” at the time it is filed and thereafter processed in
accordance with provisions of Chapter 18.36.



§ 18.08.410  ZONING ORDINANCE.



   ZONING ORDINANCE.  The comprehensive zoning plan of the city of Brea,
as the same may be amended from time to time.



CHAPTER 18.12:  MAPS — GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   18.12.010   Parcel map waiver authorized when



   18.12.020   Numbers for tentative tract and parcel maps



   18.12.030   Tentative map — identification of subdivider



   18.12.040   Final maps and certificates of compliance — submittal
procedure



   18.12.050   Hazard areas — use restriction authority



   18.12.060   Sewers, drains and water facilities



   18.12.070   Natural watercourses



   18.12.080   Title sheets for maps



   18.12.090   Private streets and alleys shown on maps



   18.12.100   Street and highway names



   18.12.110   Rights-of-way for railroads, transmission lines and
flood control



   18.12.120   Easements — tract and parcel map requirements



   18.12.130   Easements — certification statement



   18.12.140   Evidence of title for tract and parcel maps



   18.12.150   Separate instruments — preparation and checking



   18.12.160   Widths and centerlines of public ways



   18.12.170   Survey procedure and practice



   18.12.180   Waiver of signatures for tract and parcel maps —
conditions



   18.12.190   Access rights



§ 18.12.010  PARCEL MAP WAIVER  AUTHORIZED WHEN.



   A.   The City Engineer shall waive the parcel map for the following:



      1.   A division of property resulting from the conveyance of
land to or from a governmental agency, public utility, public entity, or for
land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such
public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in an individual
cue, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a parcel
map; or



      2.   A subdivision of a portion of the operating right-of-way
of a railroad corporation defined by the Public Utilities Code, which are
created by short-term leases.



   B.   The advisory agency may, upon making a finding that the
proposed subdivision of land complies with requirements of this division and
the Subdivision Map Act, waive a parcel map for the following:



      1.   A division of land which is a property line adjustment
between two (2) adjacent lots or parcels as shown on a recorded or filed
tract map, parcel map, or approved record of survey, except where the
tentative conditions of approval thereof require any dedications or
improvements;



      2.   A division of land for the construction of a condominium
project on a single parcel; or



      3.   If the division of real property or interest is created
by an action in probate, eminent domain, or other civil judgments or decrees.



   C.   Upon waiving the parcel map requirement, the City Engineer
shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a certificate of compliance
for the land to be divided and plat map showing the division.



   D.   A parcel map waived by the advisory agency may be conditioned
to provide for the payment of park land dedication, drainage, and other fees
approved pursuant to this division and the Subdivision Map Act.



§ 18.12.020  NUMBERS FOR TENTATIVE  TRACT AND PARCEL MAPS.



   The subdivider or his or her agent shall apply for a map number prior
to submission of a tentative map. Tentative tract and tentative parcel maps
numbers shall be assigned by the county surveyor.



§ 18.12.030  TENTATIVE MAP —  IDENTIFICATION OF SUBDIVIDER.



   When a tentative map is submitted, the advisory agency may require the
subdivider to show that he or she is the owner of the property shown on the
map as proposed for subdivision, or that he or she has an option or contract
to purchase the property or that portion of which he or she is not the owner,
or that he or she is the authorized agent of one who can comply with these
requirements.



§ 18.12.040  FINAL MAPS AND CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE — SUBMITTAL
PROCEDURE.



   Final maps, or certificates of compliance shall be submitted to the
City Engineer. A subdivider shall submit sufficient copies of the tract map,
parcel map, or certificate of compliance to permit the City Engineer to
furnish copies to city officers and departments and to other public agencies
which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, may have an interest in the map.



§ 18.12.050  HAZARD AREAS — USE  RESTRICTION AUTHORITY.



   The city reserves the right to restrict the erection of buildings or
other structures within those portions of lots which are shown as being
subject to flood hazard, inundation, or geological hazard. If the hazard is
not to be mitigated precedent to filing, the hazard area and a note
identifying the hazard area shall be shown on the map.



§ 18.12.060  SEWERS, DRAINS AND WATER  FACILITIES.



   If sewers, storm drains or water facilities, or any combination
thereof, are required for the general use of lot owners in a division of land
and such facilities are not to be installed in public highways, streets or
alleys, then the necessary easements shall be granted on site.



§ 18.12.070  NATURAL WATERCOURSES.



   A.   In the event that a division of land is traversed by a major
watercourse, channel, stream, swale or creek, the advisory agency may require
that an adequate right-of-way be dedicated for storm drainage purposes.



   B.   In the event that dedication of right-of-way for storm drainage
purposes is not required, the advisory agency may require that a tract map or
parcel map show the location of any natural water-course, stream, channel,
swale, or creek which traverses the map.



§ 18.12.080  TITLE SHEETS FOR MAPS.



   A.   The title sheet of each map shall contain a title, consisting
of the words “Tract No.” and the map number on a tract map, or the words
“Parcel Map No.” and the map number on a parcel map. The title shall also
contain the words “in the city of Brea” or “partly in the city of Brea
and partly in...” (here insert the name of the political division involved).



   B.   The title sheet shall also contain a subtitle consisting of a
description of all of the property being divided by reference to maps
previously filed or recorded in the office of the county recorder, or
previously filed with the county clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any
action in partition, or by reference to the plat of a United States survey.
Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting
subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words “Being
a Reversion to Acreage of...” (insert a legal description of the land being
reverted). Each reference in these subtitles must be spelled out and worded
identically to the original record thereof. A complete reference to the book
and page of the cited record must be included.



   C.   The title sheet for a parcel map shall contain the certificate
of the surveyor or engineer referred to in Cal. Gov't Code § 66449. A title
sheet for a tract map shall contain the certificate of the surveyor or
engineer referred to in Cal. Gov't Code § 66441. The title sheet or at least
one (1) map sheet shall contain a basis of bearings, making reference to a
filed tract map, county surveyor's map, or other record acceptable to the
City Engineer, when the map is based upon a field survey.



   D.   Required certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements may be
legibly stamped or printed on the title sheet of a tract map or parcel map
with opaque ink. All required signatures shall be written in black opaque
ink. All such entries shall be readily reproducible by any normal method of
reproduction.



§ 18.12.090  PRIVATE STREETS AND ALLEYS SHOWN ON MAPS.



   Tract maps and parcel maps shall show sufficient mathematical data to
clearly indicate the portion of each lot which is within private streets or
alleys, in addition to the width and centerline detail. Right-of-way lines
for private streets or alleys shall be dashed. Each private street or alley
shall be clearly identified as such.



§ 18.12.100  STREET AND HIGHWAY NAMES.



   A.   Tract maps and parcel maps shall show the name of each highway
or street, other than a future street, appearing on the map. Street and
highway names shall be shown in or arrowed to the right-of-way.



   B.   If only a portion of a street or highway is to be dedicated on
a map, the street or highway name shall be shown or arrowed into both the
portion to be dedicated and the existing portion of the street or highway.



   C.   The word “avenue,” “street,” “place,” or other
street or highway designation shall be spelled out in full.



   D.   The City Council shall review the recommended street names
during the approval process of the tentative and final map. The approval of
the final map by the City Council shall also constitute approval of the
street names shown on the final map.



§ 18.12.110  RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR RAILROADS, TRANSMISSION LINES AND  FLOOD
CONTROL.



   Tract maps and parcel maps shall show the width and location of each
railroad or transmission line right-of-way, flood control channel or other
similar rights-of-way appearing on the map. Rights-of-way which appear on a
map as a lot or a series of lots shall be shown.



§ 18.12.120  EASEMENTS — TRACT AND PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS.



   Tract maps and parcel maps shall show all easements or restrictions
which are a burden upon lots in the division or reversion of which are
required as a condition precedent to filing the map.



§ 18.12.130  EASEMENTS — CERTIFICATION  STATEMENT.



   Tract maps or parcel maps on which easements are offered for public use
shall have written thereon, in addition to or as a part of any other
certificate required, a certificate signed by any persons claiming an
interest in the lands included within the division or reversion shown on the
map, other than an interest which cannot ripen into a fee, in substantially
the following form:



   We hereby certify that, except as shown on a copy of this map on file
in the office of the City Engineer, we know of no easement or structure
existing within the easements hereby offered for dedication to the public,
other than publicly owned water lines, sewers or storm drains; that we will
grant no right or interest within the boundaries of said easements offered to
the public except where such right or interest is expressly made subject to
the said easements.



§ 18.12.140  EVIDENCE OF TITLE FOR TRACT AND PARCEL MAPS.



   A.   The evidence of title required for tract maps and parcel maps
where signatures appear on the final map by the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code
§ 66465 shall be a certificate of title or a guarantee of title issued by a
title insurance company authorized by the laws of the state of California to
write the same, showing the names of all persons having any record title
interest in the land to be subdivided, together with the nature of their
respective interests therein.



   B.   In the event that the land in the city is to be dedicated, the
certificate of title or guarantee of title shall be issued for the benefit
and protection of the city. The certificate or guarantee shall be dated and
delivered upon request of the City Engineer when the map is ready for filing.



§ 18.12.150  SEPARATE INSTRUMENTS —  PREPARATION AND CHECKING.



   Separate instruments shall be prepared by the subdivider and checked by
the City Engineer. When dedicating by separate instrument, the subdivider
shall submit a title report, dated not less than fifteen (15) days prior to
submittal, prepared in favor of the city, which indicates who is required to
sign the separate instrument to pass clear title to the city. This title
report shall be kept up to date and the city shall be notified of any change
until such time as the separate instrument is recorded.



§ 18.12.160  WIDTHS AND CENTERLINES OF PUBLIC WAYS.



   Each tract map or parcel map shall show the center-line, the total
width, and the width on each side of the centerline of each street, highway,
alley or other way appearing on the map. The bearing and length of each
tangent and the radius, central angle and length of each curve shall be shown
on each centerline. The map shall also show the width of right-of-way to be
dedicated on the map when only a portion of a street, highway, alley or way
is within the map boundary.



§ 18.12.170  SURVEY PROCEDURE AND PRACTICE.



   A.   The procedure and practice for all survey work done for
preparation of a tract map or parcel map shall conform to the standards and
details set forth in  of the Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code Chapter 15, Division 3,
the Land Surveyor's Act. The allowable error of closure on any portion of a
tract map or parcel map shall be one to ten thousand (1/10,000).



   B.   In the event that the county engineer, the state or City
Engineer shall have established the centerline of any highway, street or
alley shown on a tract map or parcel map, the map shall show such centerline,
together with a reference to a field book or map showing such centerline and
the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact
shall be stated upon the tract map or parcel map.



§ 18.12.180  WAIVER OF SIGNATURES FOR TRACT AND PARCEL MAPS — CONDITIONS.



   If the owner of an easement in a right-of-way offered for public use on
a tract map or parcel map where dedications are made by certificate on the
parcel map, who has no other interest whatever in any part of the lands
included within the division or reversion, refuses to make his or her
easement subject to the right-of-way offered to the public, but the map in
all other respects complies with this division, with the Subdivision Map Act
and with other applicable statutes and ordinances, and the City Council finds
that the subdivider has, in good faith, attempted to obtain the necessary
signature from the owner and has been unable to do so and that a refusal to
accept the map for filing would work an undue hardship on the subdivider,
then by a majority vote of all its members, the City Council may accept the
tract map or parcel map for filing.



§ 18.12.190  ACCESS RIGHTS.



   Access to major, primary and secondary highways and to local city
streets shall be regulated by the City Engineer. Dedication of access rights,
if required, shall be shown on the final tract map or parcel map.



CHAPTER 18.16:  FINAL TRACT MAPS



Section



   18.16.010   Preparation standards and specifications



   18.16.020   Required certificates and acknowledgements



§ 18.16.010  PREPARATION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   The final tract map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall be based upon a
survey, and shall conform to all information required by Cal. Gov't Code §
66434.



§ 18.16.020  REQUIRED CERTIFICATES AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.



   Certificates or acknowledgements are required for all final tract maps,
as per Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66436 and 66442 inclusive.



CHAPTER 18.20:  FINAL PARCEL MAPS



Section



   18.20.010   Preparation standards and specifications



   18.20.020   Required certificates and acknowledgements



   18.20.030   Certificate formats



   18.20.040   Field survey or filed data for boundaries



§ 18.20.010  PREPARATION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall show the location
of streets and property lines bounding the property, and shall conform to all
of the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 66445.



§ 18.20.020  REQUIRED CERTIFICATES AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.



   Certificates and acknowledgements required for final parcel maps shall
be the same as for final tract maps.



§ 18.20.030  CERTIFICATE FORMATS.



   The final parcel map certificate format for engineers and recorders
shall be the same as for final tract maps.



§ 18.20.040  FIELD SURVEY OR FILED DATA FOR BOUNDARIES.



   Parcel maps shall be based upon a field survey or compiled from
recorded or filed data when sufficient survey information exists on filed
maps to locate and retrace the exterior boundary lines of the parcel map if
the location of at least one (1) of the boundary lines can be established
from an existing monumented line.



(S.M.A. § 66448)



CHAPTER 18.24:  IMPROVEMENTS



Section



   18.24.010   Installation requirements and conditions



   18.24.020   Required improvements



   18.24.030   Plans, profiles and specifications — preliminary plans



   18.24.040   Improvement agreements required when



   18.24.050   Streets and highways — plans and specifications



   18.24.060   Streets and highways — map requirements



   18.24.070   Streets and highways — specific improvements required



   18.24.080   Existing streets or highways



   18.24.090   Temporary improvements



   18.24.100   Hazard protection improvements



   18.24.110   Drainage improvements



   18.24.120   Fences or walls adjacent to highways



   18.24.130   Fencing of watercourses or drainage facilities



   18.24.140   Underground utilities



   18.24.150   Sanitary sewers



   18.24.160   Sidewalks and wheelchair ramps



   18.24.170   Sidewalk construction waiver conditions



   18.24.180   Street lighting system and street name signs



   18.24.190   Street trees and landscaping



   18.24.200   Water mains and fire hydrants



   18.24.210   Cost of improvements — subdivider responsibility



§ 18.24.010  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.



   Improvements required to be installed or agreed to be installed by a
subdivider as a condition precedent to the filing of a tract map or parcel
map shall comply with the requirements of this division. Such improvements
shall be provided and developed in accordance with the conditions imposed as
a condition of approval of the tentative map, in accordance with any
agreement or bond made or entered into by the subdivider for that purpose,
and in accordance with the standards and specifications set by administrative
regulations and ordinances of the city applicable at the time of approval of
the tentative map and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.



§ 18.24.020  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



   A.   Required improvements on maps shall be limited to the
dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the construction of reasonable
off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created. Requirements
for the construction of such off-site and on-site improvements shall be
noticed by certificate on the map, on the instrument evidencing the waiver of
such map or by separate instrument, and shall be recorded on, concurrently
with, or prior to the map or instrument or waiver of a map being filed for
record.



   B.   Fulfillment of such construction requirements shall not be
required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for
development of the parcel is issued by the city or, otherwise pursuant to any
agreement between the city and the subdivider.



§ 18.24.030  PLANS, PROFILES AND SPECIFICATIONS — PRELIMINARY PLANS.



   A.   Plans, profiles and specifications for improvements other than
street and highway improvements shall be submitted to the City Engineer not
later than the time a tract map or parcel map is submitted for checking and
certification. Such plans shall show all details of the proposed improvements
needed for approval of the plans by the City Engineer. Such details may
include requirements of other governmental bodies whose jurisdiction some
portion of the plan may encompass.



   B.   Preliminary plans may be approved by the City Engineer when
sufficient engineering data are furnished by the subdivider to demonstrate
that the preliminary design meets the city's standards and specifications, is
practicable from a maintenance standpoint, is consistent with sound
engineering practices, and that the final plans will conform to the
preliminary plans with only minor changes.



§ 18.24.040  IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS REQUIRED WHEN.



   If the subdivider has not completed any public improvements pursuant to
the previous tentative map, the subdivider and the city, shall enter into one
(1) of the agreements specified in Cal. Gov't Code § 66462.



§ 18.24.050  STREETS AND HIGHWAYS —  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   A.   Plans, profiles and specifications for all street and highway
improvements shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Such
plans shall be furnished to the City Engineer not later than the time of
submitting the tract map or parcel map for checking, and shall be subject to
the approval of the City Engineer before any such map shall be certified by
the City Engineer.



   B.   Such plans, profiles and specifications shall show full details
of the proposed improvements and shall be in accordance with the standards
and specifications of the city as approved by the City Engineer. Such plans
shall also include the design grade for an existing highway or for future
streets, provided the City Engineer determines that such grade is necessary
to properly locate slope and drainage easements, if any.



§ 18.24.060  STREETS AND HIGHWAYS —  MAP REQUIREMENTS.



   If streets, highways or other public ways are to be dedicated on a
tract map or parcel map or by separate instrument prior to filing a parcel
map and the subdivider is required to grade, pave or install curbs, gutters
or sidewalks within such easements, the subdivider shall provide a copy of
the tract map or parcel map,as the may be, which delineates all structures
within such easements, except publicly owned storm drains, water lines,
sewers, and other drainage or sanitary facilities. Such maps shall be
submitted to the City Engineer when highway improvement plans are submitted
for approval.



§ 18.24.070  STREETS AND HIGHWAYS —  SPECIFIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.



   Each street or highway, whether public or private, shall be improved by
the subdivider with full-width grading, portland cement concrete curb and
gutter, portland cement concrete sidewalk and/or parkway landscaping,
full-width roadway paving, streetlights, installation of drainage facilities
incidental thereto, street name signs, and such other improvements for
traffic control and drainage needs as required for the appropriate
development of the division of land.



   A.   Traffic-control improvements shall include but not be limited
to traffic signals, street warning and safety signs, and street striping and
markings.



   B.   Drainage improvements shall include but not be limited to
parkway drains, catchbasins, drainage pipes and other appurtenances.



§ 18.24.080  EXISTING STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.



   If a portion of an existing street or highway constitutes any portion
of the boundary of the division of land and such street or highway is
unimproved, and the Planning Commission determines that the improvements are
for the general use of the lot owners in the division of land and for local
neighbor-hood traffic and drainage needs, the Planning Commission may require
the subdivider to improve or agree to improve said street or highway as
specified by the City Engineer.



§ 18.24.090  TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENTS.



   Temporary improvements may be required prior to or concurrent with
permanent improvements. In such instances, the temporary improvements shall
be installed in a manner approved by the City Engineer.



§ 18.24.100  HAZARD PROTECTION IMPROVEMENTS.



   The advisory agency may require the installation of protective
improvements. These improvements shall be installed as are necessary for the
proper functioning and maintenance of the improvements required to remove a
flood or geological hazard and as are necessary for the protection of
property adjacent to the division of land.



§ 18.24.110  DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS.



   The subdivider shall provide such drainage facilities as are considered
necessary by the advisory agency for the drainage requirements of the
division of land and for local neighborhood needs. Such facilities shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with standards and specifications
approved by the City Engineer.



§ 18.24.120  FENCES OR WALLS ADJACENT TO HIGHWAYS.



   If lots in a division of land abut a highway and the subdivider is
required to relinquish complete access rights to such highway, a masonry wall
not less than six (6) feet high may be required along the property line of
the lots contiguous to the highway. Style and colors shall be as approved by
the director.



§ 18.24.130  FENCING OF WATERCOURSES OR DRAINAGE FACILITIES.



   The subdivider shall provide a chainlink fence or equivalent, not less
than six (6) feet high, along each side of any portion of a dedicated
right-of-way for any watercourse or drainage facility within a proposed
division of land if the advisory agency finds that the location, shape,
slope, width, velocity of water therein, or other characteristics of the
watercourse or drainage facility makes the fencing of the right-of-way
necessary for the protection of the general public. Such fencing shall be of
a design as approved by the City Engineer and shall have an adequate number
of gates to facilitate cleaning and maintenance, and shall not contain
apertures below the fence in excess of four (4) inches vertical.



§ 18.24.140  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.



   A.   Utility lines, including but not limited to electrical power,
communications, street lighting, cable television, sanitary sewers and storm
drains, shall be placed underground. All underground utilities, sanitary
sewers and storm drains installed in streets, service roads, alleys or
highways shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets, service
roads, alleys or highways. Connection for all underground utilities and
sanitary sewers shall be laid to such lengths as will obviate the necessity
for disturbing the street or alley improvements when service connections are
made. The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements
of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with utility
companies for the installation of such facilities. For the purpose of this
chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to
surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed
aboveground.



   B.   In the event it is necessary to trench any street, alley,
service road or highway after placement of surfacing, the entire street,
alley, service road or highway shall be entirely reconstructed or resurfaced
at the subdivider's expense as specified by and to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer.



§ 18.24.150  SANITARY SEWERS.



   The advisory agency shall require the subdivider to install a sanitary
sewers to serve each lot in a division of land. Such sewers shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer.



§ 18.24.160  SIDEWALKS AND WHEELCHAIR RAMPS.



   A.   Concrete sidewalks shall not be less than four (4) feet in
width for residential developments nor less than five (5) feet in commercial
or industrial areas.



      1.   Concrete sidewalks shall be full-width walk for major,
primary and secondary highways and all industrial and commercial property
adjacent to public right-of-way, unless otherwise specified by the advisory
agency.



      2.   Tree well locations shall be as specified by the City
Engineer and shall be required when street trees are to be installed in
sidewalks adjacent to the curb.



   B.   Wheelchair ramps shall be provided at every corner where curb
and gutter is to be constructed where the existing improvements are
reconstructed or where wheelchair ramps are required as a condition of the
subdivision. Type and location will be as required by the City Engineer.



§ 18.24.170  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION WAIVER CONDITIONS.



   A.   The construction of sidewalks may be waived where any one (1)
or more of the following conditions exist and the advisory agency so finds:



      1.   The construction of sidewalks would be impractical
because of topographic conditions or other physical obstacles;



      2.   Sidewalks will not be in keeping with the nature, extent
or pattern of existing improvements in the neighborhood;



      3.   The sidewalks will not be used by children in the general
neighborhood as a route to or from schools or school bus stops;



      4.   Sidewalks are not needed in and will not benefit the area;



   B.   In the event that sidewalks are waived by the advisory agency,
the property owner shall be required to landscape, install an irrigation
system and maintain said parkway to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.



§ 18.24.180  STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM AND STREET NAME SIGNS.



   The subdivider shall provide and install a street lighting system and
street name signs in each division of land to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer. Marbelite street light standards with underground service shall be
required for the street lighting system. The requirements of this section may
be waived if the advisory agency finds that the required system would not be
in keeping with the neighbor-hood system or if it would be impractical to
under-ground existing overhead utilities and remove existing wood poles.



§ 18.24.190  STREET TREES AND LANDSCAPING.



   A.   The subdivider of improved or unimproved land shall plant and
install trees and/or landscaping and irrigation system along all streets and
highways in each division of lands as per the City Engineer's requirements.
The type of species of such trees or landscaping shall be approved by the
City Engineer. A soils test may be required and recommendations from the
soils testing laboratory may be incorporated into the requirements for the
subdivision. The locations of such trees and/or landscaping shall be approved
by the City Engineer.



   B.   The requirements of this section may be waived if the advisory
agency finds that topographical, soil or other conditions make the planting
of trees or landscaping unreasonable or impractical.



§ 18.24.200  WATER MAINS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.



   A.   The subdivider shall install or agree to install mains, meters,
valves, services, appurtenances and fire hydrants in the division of land for
the general use of the lot owners and for fire protection. The installation
of such water mains and fire hydrants shall comply in all respects with all
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to water mains and
fire hydrants.



   B.   In the absence of such statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations, required domestic water flows shall be determined by the
subdivider's engineer, subject to the approval of the City Engineer and
required fire flows, duration of required fire flows, and fire hydrant type
and location shall be approved by the City Engineer and the Fire Chief.



   C.   Water mains and fire hydrants may be required on existing
streets or highways adjacent to or within the division of land, provided the
existing improvements are insufficient for the general use and/or fire
protection of the lot owners.



§ 18.24.210  COST OF IMPROVEMENTS — SUBDIVIDER RESPONSIBILITY.



   Improvements required by this division shall be installed and
constructed by the subdivider at his or her expense, and shall not be paid
for by any special assessment lien, tax, bonded indebtedness, or other charge
against the land or real property within the division, unless pursuant to §
18.24.040 of this chapter or Cal. Gov't Code § 66462.



CHAPTER 18.28:  PROCEDURE -
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   18.28.010   Applicability of provisions



   18.28.020   Time limits for review and approval — extensions



   18.28.030   Processing fees



   18.28.040   Public hearing notice requirements



   18.28.050   Unmerging of previously merged parcels



§ 18.28.010  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   The procedures set forth in Chapters 18.28 through 18.56, inclusive,
shall govern the processing, approval, conditional approval or disapproval
and filing of tentative parcel, tentative tract, final parcel and final tract
maps.



§ 18.28.020  TIME LIMITS FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL — EXTENSIONS.



   A.   The time limits specified in this division for reporting and
acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent. However, the city may not
require a routine waiver of time limits as a condition of accepting the
application for any map, unless the routine waiver is obtained for the
purpose of permitting concurrent processing or related approvals or an
environmental review on the same development project.



   B.   No application for a map pursuant to the terms of this division
shall be approved unless and until all review and related documents for
compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act have been completed.
The time limits specified in this division for acting on an application for a
map shall not commence, and an application for a map shall not be deemed
complete to commence such time limits, until such time as there has been
sufficient progress towards completing the environmental documentation
required by the California Environmental Quality Act to enable the city to
finish the related environmental review within the time limits specified in
this division.



   C.   If the city is unable to meet the specified time limits for
acting on maps, the city, by request of the subdivider, can contract to
employ private entities to perform such services to meet such time limits.
The city may charge the subdivider fees to defray costs attributable to
employing such private entities.



§ 18.28.030  PROCESSING FEES.



   The city shall establish reasonable fees for the processing of any map,
but such fees shall not exceed a reasonable amount to administer the
provisions of this division.



§ 18.28.040  PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Unless otherwise provided for in this division, notice shall be given
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 5090 and 65091. If the application is a
conversion to a condominium project, etc., notice shall be mailed by
certified letter to each tenant.



§ 18.28.050  UNMERGING OF PREVIOUSLY MERGED PARCELS.



   The merger of two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of land which
may have been created under the provisions of the Map Act, or any prior law
regulating the division of land, or which were not subject to such provisions
at the time of their creation, shall be governed by the provisions of Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 66451.10 et seq.



CHAPTER 18.32:  TENTATIVE PARCEL AND TENTATIVE TRACT MAPS



Section



   18.32.010   Filing of maps



   18.32.020   Contents



   18.32.030   Preliminary processing of tentative maps



   18.32.040   Public hearing requirements



   18.32.050   Action to be taken within time required by law



   18.32.060   Appeals procedure



   18.32.070   Expiration of tentative maps



   18.32.080   Written statements for submittal



   18.32.090   Departmental approval



§ 18.32.010  FILING OF MAPS.



   A tentative parcel and/or tentative tract map shall be filed with the
director of development services.



§ 18.32.020  CONTENTS.



   A.   Such maps shall contain:



      1.   The county-assigned map number;



      2.   The date of preparation, North point, and scale;



      3.   The boundary of the division of land, shown to scale and
tied to a known point;



      4.   A key map, indicating the location of the proposed
division of land in relation to the surrounding area;



      5.   Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the
general slope of the land and the high and low point thereof;



      6.   The approximate location of all areas subject to
inundation or stormwater overflow, and the location, width and direction of
flow of each water-course;



      7.   The appropriate location of all trees standing within the
boundaries of proposed rights-of-way;



      8.   The location, width, approximate grade and centerline
radius of existing and proposed streets, alleys, highways, ways and easements
which are within or adjacent to the proposed division of land;



      9.   The existing street improvements, including drainage
structures;



      10.   Actual names for existing streets or highways and a
proposed name for each new street or highway;



      11.   A label or identifying note for existing or proposed
easements other than streets or highways;



      12.   The approximate layout of lots, including approximate
dimensions and lot numbers and, where pads are proposed for building sites,
the approximate finish grade;



      13.   The approximate location of existing structures, shown
to scale, within or immediately adjacent to the division of land; show house
numbers and label each structure with the proposed division;



      14.   The general location of all proposed buildings and
structures which are to be divided into units of air space, and the means of
access thereto, where the division of land consists of a condominium or
community apartment project;



      15.   If necessary, a generalized plan of proposed development
adjacent to the division of land, showing the compatibility of the
development with existing and future development in the neighborhood;



      16.   The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is
required pursuant to § 66426 (S.M.A.) shall provide, to the extent feasible,
for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the
subdivision;



      17.   Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in
subdivision design; include design of lot size and configuration to permit
orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes;



      18.   Existing sewers, culverts or other underground
structures within the division and immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe
sizes,grades and locations indicated;



      19.   The cross-sections of proposed streets showing the size
of roadways, location and width of sidewalks;



      20.   The location of existing and proposed sanitary sewers,
with manholes, water mains, fire hydrants, stormwater drains and other public
utilities, with grades and sizes indicated;



      21.   The type and location of street lighting required.



   B.   In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling
opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to
local climate, to contour, to configuration of the parcel to be divided, and
to other design and improvement requirements, and such provision shall not
result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may
be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning
in force at the time the tentative map is filed.



   C.   The requirements of this section do not apply to condominium
projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building
when no new structures are added.



   D.   For the purposes of this section, “feasible” means capable
of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of
time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological
factors.



§ 18.32.030  PRELIMINARY PROCESSING OF TENTATIVE MAPS.



   Tentative maps and required written statements shall be submitted to
the director. The director shall distribute copies of tentative maps and,
where appropriate, required written statements to the interested agencies and
departments for their review and reports thereon, a city requesting
extraterritorial review of tentative maps pursuant to the Subdivision Map
Act, and to other agencies pursuant to the Map Act and Chapter 18.40 of this
division.



§ 18.32.040  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS.



   All tentative maps shall be considered at a noticed public hearing
before the Planning Commission, as provided in § 18.28.040.



§ 18.32.050  ACTION TO BE TAKEN WITHIN TIME REQUIRED BY LAW.



   The Planning Commission shall take action on tentative parcel or
tentative tract maps within the time required by law after filing a complete
application with the development services department. However, if an EIR is
prepared, the Planning Commission shall take action on such project within
the time required by law after certification of the EIR. Action by the
Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed.



§ 18.32.060  APPEALS PROCEDURES.



   The subdivider, or any person adversely affected by the decision of the
Planning Commission may appeal the Commission's decision within ten (10) days
after such decision. Upon filing such appeal, the City Council shall hold a
public hearing within thirty (30) days after the filing of such appeal. The
City Council shall render its decision on the project within ten (10) days
following the hearing.



§ 18.32.070  EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAPS.



   Expiration of tentative maps shall be governed by Cal. Gov't Code §§
66452.6 and 66463.



§ 18.32.080  WRITTEN STATEMENTS FOR SUBMITTAL.



   A.   Each tentative map shall be submitted with written statements
containing the following information and acknowledgements:



      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the subdivider;



      2.   The name, address and telephone number, and license
number, of the registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor who prepared
the tentative map or who directed the preparation of the map;



      3.   A statement by a person holding a proprietary interest in
the parcel or parcels comprising the division of land, consenting to the
submission of the tentative map;



      4.   The proposed use of parcels shown on the tentative map,
together with the present and proposed zoning;



      5.   The legal description of the land in the proposed
division of land;



      6.   A statement detailing the arrangements which the
subdivider proposes to make for the operation and maintenance of common
parcels and easements, if any;



      7.   The source of water supply and the proposed method of
sewage disposal;



      8.   The results of percolation tests, if required, performed
in accordance with the standards of the health officer, where a private
system of sewage disposal is proposed;



      9.   A geological and/or soils report, if required by the City
Engineer, prepared by a licensed geologist and/or registered soils engineer,
stating the effect of geological or soil conditions on the proposed
development;



      10.   An environmental assessment statement and/or input for a
draft environmental impact report, as determined by the director;



      11.   A statement of the improvements and public utilities
proposed to be made or installed, and of the time at which such improvements
are proposed to be completed;



      12.   Public areas required, if any;



      13.   Tree planting required;



      14.   In the case of a conversion to a condominium, stock
cooperative or community apartment, the names and addresses of the current
tenants shall be provided on a list, as well as two (2) sets of gummed
labels. Such lists shall be certified to be true and correct.



   B.   The written statements required by this section shall become a
part of the tentative map upon submission to the director.



§ 18.32.090  DEPARTMENTAL APPROVAL.



   Upon receipt of a copy of a tentative map, each department to which the
same has been transmitted shall examine such map to ascertain if the
subdivision proposed thereon conforms to the requirements coming within the
authoritative scope of such department, and within ten (10) days after the
receipt thereof make a written report to the director. If the department to
which the map is referred does not report on such tentative map within the
allotted time, the Commission shall deem this to imply approval of the map
without recommendations or conditions.



CHAPTER 18.36:  VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS



Section



   18.36.010   Statutory authority — title for citation



   18.36.020   Purpose of provisions



   18.36.030   Consistency with city regulations



   18.36.040   Filing and processing



   18.36.050   Fees



   18.36.060   Expiration date — extensions of time



   18.36.070   Rights granted following map approval



§ 18.36.010  STATUTORY AUTHORITY —  TITLE FOR CITATION.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Cal. Gov't
Code Chapter 4.5 (commencing with § 66498.1), herein referred to as the
Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and may be cited as the “vesting tentative
map ordinance.”



§ 18.36.020  PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish procedures
necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute. Except
as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
this division shall apply to the vesting tentative map ordinance.



§ 18.36.030  CONSISTENCY WITH CITY REGULATIONS.



   No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting
tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan, or
any applicable specific plan or community plan, and which is not permitted by
the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of the Brea city code.



§ 18.36.040  FILING AND PROCESSING.



   A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the
same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the
same manner as set forth in the subdivision ordinance for a tentative map
except as herein provided:



   A.   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have
printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map.”



   B.   Simultaneous with or prior to the time a vesting tentative map
is filed, a subdivider shall supply completed applications for all
discretionary use entitlements necessary for the project, including but not
limited to use permits, amendments to the general plan or any applicable
specific plan, zone changes, amendments to the zoning ordinance, etc.,
together with all complete information necessary to process, as applicable, a
negative declaration or draft environmental impact report pursuant to the
terms of the California Environmental Quality Act.



   C.   A subdivider may submit a complete application for a building
permit at the time of filing as provided in this section; however, under no
circum-stances shall such permit, if issued, grant vesting rights as
specified in this chapter.



§ 18.36.050  FEES.



   Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees
required by resolution of the City Council for the filing and processing of a
tentative map.



§ 18.36.060  EXPIRATION DATE — EXTENSIONS OF TIME.



   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall
expire two (2) years from the date of its adoption by resolution. Extensions
of a vesting tentative map shall be subject to those procedures in the
subdivision ordinance applicable to the extension of tentative maps.



§ 18.36.070  RIGHTS GRANTED FOLLOWING MAP APPROVAL.



   A.   1.   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting
tentative map shall confer a vested right to process a final map and proceed
with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and
standards described in Cal. Gov't Code § 66474.2.



      2.   However, if Cal. Gov't Code § 66474.2 is repealed, the
approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a
vested right to process a final map and proceed with development in
substantial compliance with the land use ordinances, policies and standards
in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally
approved.



   B.   Notwithstanding division A. of this section, a permit,
approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any
of the following are determined:



      1.   A failure to do so would place the residents of a
subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to
their health or safety, or both;



      2.   The condition or denial is required, in order to comply
with state or federal law.



   C.   The rights referred to in this section shall accrue only if,
and at the time, a final map is approved for the project. Such rights
referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the
expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided § 18.36.060.



   D.   If the final map is approved, these rights shall remain vested
for the following periods of time:



      1.   An initial time period of twelve (12) months; where
several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a
single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each
phase when the final map for that phase is recorded;



      2.   The initial time period set forth in paragraph D.1. of
this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing
a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural
review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete
application is filed;



      3.   A subdivider may apply to the City Council for a one (1)
year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in
paragraph D.1. of this section or the permit expires.



      4.   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a
building permit during the periods of time specified in paragraphs D.1.
through D.3. of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue
until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.



CHAPTER 18.40:  REVIEW OF MAPS BY
OTHER AGENCIES



Section



   18.40.010   Preannexation filing conditions



   18.40.020   Review of tentative tract maps by school districts



§ 18.40.010  PREANNEXATION FILING CONDITIONS.



   Any subdivider may file with the city a tentative map of a proposed
subdivision of unincorporated territory adjacent to the city. No subdivision
of unincorporated territory may be affected by approval of a map by the city
unless annexation thereof to the city is completed within such period of time
specified by the city.



§ 18.40.020  REVIEW OF TENTATIVE TRACT MAPS BY SCHOOL DISTRICTS.



   Within ten (10) days of filing a tentative tract map, the secretary of
the Planning Commission shall send a notice of filing to all school districts
within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed. The notice shall
include information relevant to the school district. The school district may
submit a written report in response to the notice within twenty (20) days,
stating the impacts the subdivision may or shall have on the district.



CHAPTER 18.44:  FINAL MAPS



Section



   18.44.010   Preparation by subdivider



   18.44.020   Multiple final maps on one tentative map



   18.44.030   Filing time



   18.44.040   Improvement agreements



§ 18.44.010  PREPARATION BY SUBDIVIDER.



   In all cases, after the approval or conditional approval of a tentative
map and prior to its expiration, the subdivider shall prepare a final parcel
or final tract map, whichever the case may be, in conformance with the
approved tentative map.



§ 18.44.020  MULTIPLE FINAL MAPS ON ONE TENTATIVE MAP.



   Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved
tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if:



   A.   The subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs
the Planning Commission of the subdivider's intention to file multiple final
maps on such tentative map; or



   B.   After filing of the tentative map, the Planning Commission and
the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple maps and subject to any
conditions imposed.



§ 18.44.030  FILING TIME.



   A final map shall be filed with the City Council. The date of filing
shall be the day the City Clerk receives the map.



§ 18.44.040  IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS.



   A.   If, at the time of approval of the final map by the legislative
body, any public improvements required by the city have not been completed
and accepted in accordance with standards established by the city, the
legislative body, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map,
shall require the subdivider to enter into one of the following agreements
specified by the city:



      1.   An agreement with the city upon mutually agreeable terms
to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider's expense;



      2.   An agreement with the city to there-after:



         a.   Initiate and consummate proceedings under an
appropriate special assessment act, or



         b.   If not completed under such act, to complete such
improvements at the subdivider's expense.



   B.   The city shall require the performance of such agreement be
guaranteed by security specified in Chapter 18.96 of this Division.



CHAPTER 18.48:  PARCEL MAPS



Section



   18.48.010   Subdivisions requiring parcel maps



   18.48.020   Tentative and final maps required



§ 18.48.010  SUBDIVISIONS REQUIRING PARCEL MAPS.



   A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for those
subdivisions described below:



   A.   A subdivision of land creating four (4) or less parcels;



   B.   The land before division contains less than five (5) acres,
each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or
highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative
body;



   C.   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty
(20) acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street
or highway;



   D.   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having
approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract
of land zoned for industrial or commercial development and which has the
approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths;



   E.   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not
less than forty (40) acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.



§ 18.48.020  TENTATIVE AND FINAL MAPS REQUIRED.



   All parcel maps are required to have a tentative parcel and a final
parcel map.



CHAPTER 18.52:  TRACT MAPS



Section



   18.52.010   Tract maps required when



   18.52.020   Tentative and final map required



§ 18.52.010  TRACT MAPS REQUIRED WHEN.



   A tract map shall be required for all subdivisions creating five (5) or
more parcels, five (5) or more condominiums, a community apartment containing
five (5) or more parcels, or a conversion of a dwelling to a stock
cooperative containing five (5) or more dwelling units.



§ 18.52.020  TENTATIVE AND FINAL MAP REQUIRED.



   All tract maps are required to have a tentative map and a final map.



CHAPTER 18.56:  FILING MAPS WITH
COUNTY RECORDER



Section



   18.56.010   Maps transmitted to county after approval



   18.56.020   Subdivider's evidence of title interest



§ 18.56.010  MAPS TRANSMITTED TO COUNTY AFTER APPROVAL.



   After approval by the city of a final tract or parcel map, the City
Clerk or the City Engineer shall transmit the map to the county surveyor for
ultimate transmittal to the county recorder.



§ 18.56.020  SUBDIVIDER'S EVIDENCE OF TITLE INTEREST.



   The subdivider shall present to the county recorder evidence, at the
time of the filing of the final map in the office of the county recorder,
that the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a
record title interest in real property being subdivided whose signatures are
required by this division, as shown on the records in the office of the
county recorder otherwise the map shall not be filed.



CHAPTER 18.60:  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



Section



   18.60.010   Grounds for final map disapproval



   18.60.020   Cable television service



   18.60.030   Tentative map — disapproval conditions



   18.60.040   Tentative map — compliance with current standards



   18.60.050   Land project maps — conformity with specific plan
required



   18.60.060   Map preparation requirements



§ 18.60.010  GROUNDS FOR FINAL MAP DISAPPROVAL.



   A.   The city shall disapprove a final map for failure to meet or
perform any of the requirements or conditions imposed at the time of approval
of the tentative map.



(Cal. Gov't Code § 66473)



   B.   The city may waive certain conditions when the failure of the
map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not
materially affect the validity of the map.



§ 18.60.020  CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE.



   The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required,
except for conversions, shall include the opportunity for the licensed cable
system to construct, install and maintain, on land identified on the map as
dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable
television services residential parcel in the subdivision.



§ 18.60.030  TENTATIVE MAP — DISAPPROVAL CONDITIONS.



   The city shall deny approval of a tentative map if it makes any of the
following findings:



   A.   That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general
and specific plans;



   B.   That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is
not consistent with applicable general aid specific plans;



   C.   That the site is not physically suitable for the type of
development;



   D.   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed
density of development;



   E.   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements
are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially
unavoidably injure fish or wildlife, or their habitat;



   F.   That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements is
likely to cause serious public health problems;



   G.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements
will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access
through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.



(Cal. Gov't Code § 66474)



§ 18.60.040  TENTATIVE MAP — COMPLIANCE WITH CURRENT STANDARDS.



   In determining whether to approve or disapprove an application for a
tentative map, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies and
standards in effect at the date the city has determined that the application
is complete.



(Cal. Gov't Code § 66474.2)



§ 18.60.050  LAND PROJECT MAPS — CONFORMITY WITH SPECIFIC PLAN REQUIRED.



   The city shall not approve a final subdivision map for any land project
(as defined in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 11000.5) unless:



   A.   The city has adopted a specific plan covering the area proposed
to be included within the land project;



   B.   The city finds that the proposed land project is consistent
with the specific plan for the area.



§ 18.60.060  MAP PREPARATION REQUIREMENT.



   A.   Tract maps and parcel maps shall be prepared in accordance with
the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and of this division, and shall
be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor.



   B.   The division of parcels which are not abutting shall be shown
on separate maps, unless such parcels are separated because of the
interposition of a highway, street, alley or railroad, or public utility, or
flood control right-of-way.



   C.   Driveways delineated on the final map shall be labeled as
“Fire Lane” if they are also for emergency vehicle use.



CHAPTER 18.64:  DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS



Section



   18.64.010   Dedication or offer to dedicate may be required



   18.64.020   Bicycle path dedication required when



   18.64.030   Procedure for making dedications or easements



   18.64.040   Transit facility dedications required when



   18.64.050   Waiver of access rights permitted when



   18.64.060   Reservation of property for public facilities



   18.64.070   Park and recreational facilities dedications —
required when



   18.64.080   Park and recreational facilities dedications — use of
land and fees



   18.64.090   Credit for private open space



   18.64.100   Choice of land or fee



   18.64.110   Not applicable to certain subdivisions



§ 18.64.010  DEDICATION OR OFFER TO DEDICATE MAY BE REQUIRED.



   A dedication or irrevocable offer of dedication may be imposed within
the subdivision for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutter's
rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements.



§ 18.64.020  BICYCLE PATH DEDICATION REQUIRED WHEN.



   A subdivider may be required to dedicate additional land to provide
bicycle paths for the residents of the subdivision if the subdivision
contains two hundred (200) or more parcels.



§ 18.64.030  PROCEDURE FOR MAKING DEDICATIONS OR EASEMENTS.



   Dedications or grants of easements required as a condition precedent to
filing a parcel map may be made either by certificate on the final parcel map
or by separate instrument, as determined by the City Engineer, signed and
acknowledged by those parties having a record title interest in the real
property being subdivided, accepted, and recorded prior to or con-currently
with the filing of the parcel map.



§ 18.64.040 TRANSIT FACILITY DEDICATIONS REQUIRED WHEN.



   The city may require dedication or irrevocable offer of dedication of
land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as bus
turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items which directly
benefit the residents of a subdivision if:



   A.   The subdivision has the potential for two hundred (200) or more
dwelling units or contains one hundred (100) acres or more; and



   B.   Transit facilities are or will be available to such subdivision.



§ 18.64.050  WAIVER OF ACCESS RIGHTS PERMITTED WHEN.



   Dedications or offers of dedication of streets may include a waiver of
direct access rights to any such street from any property shown on a final
map as abutting thereon and, if the dedication is accepted, any such waiver
shall become effective in accordance with its provisions.



§ 18.64.060  RESERVATION OF PROPERTY FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES.



   A.   The City Council may require that areas of real property within
the subdivision be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire
stations, libraries or other public uses, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The requirement is based upon an adopted specific plan or
an adopted general plan containing policies and standards for those uses, and
the required reservations are in accordance with those policies and standards
contained therein;



      2.   The ordinance has been in effect for a period of at least
thirty (30) days prior to the filing of the tentative map;



      3.   The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit
the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to
develop in an orderly and efficient manner;



      4.   The amount of land reserved will not make development of
the remaining land held by the subdivider economically feasible.



   B.   The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific or
general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to
permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not
acquired within the prescribed period; in such event, the subdivider shall
make those changes as are necessary to permit the reserved area to be
developed for the intended purpose consistent with good subdividing practices.



§ 18.64.070  PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — REQUIRED WHEN.



   A.   The intent of §§ 18.64.070 through 18.64.100, inclusive, is
to provide for the development of park and recreational facilities through
subdivision regulations, in an area where the need for residential use,
shall, as a condition to the approval of a tentative map, parcel map, planned
community, land development or real estate development, dedicate lands or pay
fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for neighborhood and
community park or recreational purposes.



   B.   Land to satisfy dedication requirements shall be conveyed to
the city at the time of recordation of the final map or parcel map. In lieu
fees shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of building permits.



§ 18.64.080  PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — REQUIRED WHEN.



   Land or fees required under this section shall be conveyed or paid
directly to the city. The city, in accepting such land or funds, shall
develop the land or use the funds as provided in this section:



   A.   Use of land and fees. The land, fees or combination thereof are
to be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities
which will reasonably serve or benefit future residents of such subdivision.



   B.   Establishment and development time. Any fees collected
hereunder shall be committed within five (5) years after the payment of such
fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half (½) of the lots created
by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If such fees are not committed,
they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the
subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the
total area of all lots within the subdivision.



   C.   Exceptions for small subdivisions. Only the payment of fees
shall be required in subdivisions of fifty (50) parcels or less, except as
provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 66477(g).



   D.   Standards for dedication. The amount of land to be dedicated or
the fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of
benefits of the park and recreational facilities by the future residents of
the subdivision. The City Council establishes a ratio of five (5) park acres
to one thousand (1,000) population, in accordance with the Subdivision Map
Act.



   E.   Population density. Population density for the purpose of this
chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest Census of
Population on Housing. Mean population per dwelling unit is as follows:



   1988 Figures



      1.   Single Family Dwelling Units = 3.5 persons per dwelling
unit; and



      2.   Two-Family Dwelling Units = 3.5 persons per dwelling
unit; and



      3.   Multiple Family Dwelling Units = 2.0 persons per dwelling
unit; and



      4.   Mobile Home Dwelling Units = 1.7 persons per dwelling
unit.



The basis for determination of the total number of dwelling units shall be
the number of such units permitted by, or pursuant to the zoning ordinance,
or as otherwise specified by the Planning Division on property included in
the subdivision at the time the final subdivision map is filed for approval.



   F.   In-lieu fee. When a fee is to be paid in lieu of the dedication
of land, the amount of that fee shall be based upon the current fair market
value of vacant land in the immediate vicinity. “Fair Market Value” (FMV)
shall be determined upon approval of the tentative map in accordance with the
following:



      1.   The fair market value as determined by staff and approved
by the Planning Commission; or



      2.   If the subdivider objects to such evaluation, he or she
may, at his or her expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a
qualified real estate appraiser approved by the city, whose appraisal may be
accepted by the Planning Commission if found reasonable.



If a proposed subdivision contains fifty (50) parcels or less, only the
payment of fees, as provided herein, shall be required. However, when a
condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project exceeds
fifty (50) dwelling units, dedication or payment of fees shall be required
notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than fifty (50).



   G.   Amount of fee. The basis of said in-lieu fee shall be the
current fair market value of prime park land in accordance with the General
Plan.



Fee Per Acre 



(Based on appraisal of FMV per square foot)



43,560 sq. ft. per acre x 100% of $FMV - $ per acre



5 Acres (Req.) x Population of Subdivision x FMV ($ per acre)



         1000



Combination of Dedication and Fees



5 Acres - Dedication x Population of Subdivision x FMV ($ per acre)



            1000



§ 18.64.090  CREDIT FOR PRIVATE OPEN  SPACE.



   Where private space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a
proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained
by the future residents of the subdivision, such areas shall be credited at a
rate of fifty percent (50%) against the requirements of dedication for park
and recreation purposes, as set forth in § 18.65.080.E., or the payment of
fees in lieu thereof, as set forth in § 18.64.080.G., provided the Planning
Commission finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that the
following standards are met:



   A.   That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required
to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included
in the computation of such private open space; and



   B.   That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space
and associated facilities is adequately provided for by written agreement; and



   C.   That the use of the private open space is restricted for park
and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in
favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be
defeated or eliminated without the consent of the counsel; and



   D.   That the proposed private open space is adaptable for use for
park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as
size, shape, topography, geology, access and location of the private open
space land; and



   E.   That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial
accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the General
Plan, and are approved by the Planning Commission.



§ 18.64.100  CHOICE OF LAND OR FEE.



   A.   Procedure.  The procedure for determining whether the
subdivider is to dedicate land, pay a fee, or both, shall be as follows:



      1.   Subdivider.  At the time of filing a tentative map
application, the owner of the property shall, as part of such filing,
indicate whether he or she desires to dedicate property for park and
recreational purposes, or whether he or she desires to pay a fee in lieu
thereof. If he or she desires to dedicate land for this purpose, he or she
shall designate the area thereof on the tentative map as submitted.



      2.   Action of city.  Prior to approval of the tentative map,
the Parks, Recreation and Human Services Commission shall review and
recommend to the Finance Committee, based upon the Commission's
recommendation, which will then recommend to the Planning Commission, which
shall determine whether to require a dedication of land within the
subdivision, payment of a fee in-lieu thereof, or a combination of both.



      3.   Prerequisites for approval of final map.  Where
dedication is required, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. Where fees are required, the same
shall be deposited with the city prior to the approval of the final map. Open
space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be
submitted to the city at least thirty (30) days prior to approval of the
final map and shall be recorded with the final map.



   B.   Determination.  Whether the Planning Commission accepts land
dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a
combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:



      1.   Parks and Recreation element of the city's General Plan;
and



      2.   Topography, geology, access and location of land in the
subdivision available for dedication; and



      3.   Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for
dedication.



§ 18.64.110  NOT APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN SUBDIVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:



   A.   Subdivisions containing five (5) or less parcels and not used
for residential purposes. However, a condition may be placed on the approval
of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of
a residential structure or structures on one (1) or more of the parcels
within four (4) years, the fee pursuant to this section may be required to be
paid by the owner of such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such
permit.



   B.   Commercial or industrial subdivisions.



   C.   Condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the
subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than
five (5) years old when no new dwelling units are added.



CHAPTER 18.68:  FEES



Section



   18.68.010   Fees set by Council resolution



   18.68.020   Bond or deposit for monumentation work



   18.68.030   Reimbursement agreement for supplemental improvements



§ 18.68.010  FEES SET BY COUNCIL RESOLUTION.



   All fees required by this Division I shall be established by resolution
of the City Council.



§ 18.68.020  BOND OR DEPOSIT FOR MONUMENTATION WORK.



   The agreement referred to in Chapter 18.76 of this Division shall be
accompanied by a bond or cash deposit guaranteeing the faithful performance
of the agreement in an amount estimated by the City Engineer to be equal to
the cost of setting monuments and furnishing notes.



§ 18.68.030  REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT FOR SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   A subdivider and the city may enter into a reimbursement agreement for
supplemental improvements which benefit the areas outside of the subdivision,
pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 66435 et seq.



CHAPTER 18.72:  SOILS REPORTS



Section



   18.72.010   Preliminary soils report required



   18.72.020   Waiver of soils report permitted when



   18.72.030   Additional reports required when



§ 18.72.010  PRELIMINARY SOILS REPORT REQUIRED.



   A preliminary soils report, prepared by a soils engineer registered in
this state, and based upon adequate test borings, shall be required for eve
subdivision, unless waived by the City Engineer.



§ 18.72.020  WAIVER OF SOILS REPORT PERMITTED WHEN.



   The preliminary soils report may be waived if the City Engineer
determines that due to the knowledge he or she has as to the soils qualities
of the subdivision no preliminary analysis is necessary.



§ 18.72.030  ADDITIONAL REPORTS REQUIRED WHEN.



   A.   If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of
critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected,
would lead to structural defect, a soils investigation of each lot in the
subdivision may be required.



   B.   Such soils investigation shall be done by a soils engineer
registered in this state, who shall recommend the corrective action which is
likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be
constructed in the area where such soils problem exists. Each report shall be
kept on file for public inspection by the city.



CHAPTER 18.76:  MONUMENTS



Section



   18.76.010   Monumentation requirements



   18.76.020   Interior monuments — delayed setting permitted when



   18.76.030   Boundary determination evidence



§ 18.76.010  MONUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Each tract map and each parcel map for which a survey is
required shall show durable monuments found or set at or near each boundary
corner, and at intermediate points (approximately one thousand (1,000) feet
apart) or at such lesser distances as may be made necessary by topography to
insure accuracy in the reestablishment of any point or line without
unreasonable difficulty. The precise position and character of each such
monument shall be shown on the map. Such durable monument shall not be less
substantial than an iron pipe of two (2) inch outside diameter, nor less than
two and one-half (2½) feet in length, with plug and tack, and set at least
two (2) feet into the ground, or of such other character and stability as may
be approved by the City Engineer. For the purposes of this chapter, a lead
and tack set in permanent concrete or masonry shall be considered as a
durable monument. The approximate elevation of the top of each such monument
with respect to the surface of the ground shall be shown on said map.



   B.   Whenever necessary, in the opinion of the City Engineer,
centerline monuments shall be set to mark intersection of streets or
intersections of streets with the map boundary, or to mark either the
beginning and end of curves or the points of inter-sections of tangents
thereof or other intermediate points.



      1.   Each such monument shall not be less durable and
substantial than a lead and tack in asphaltic concrete or cement pavements, a
two (2) inch pipe set not less than twelve (12) inches below the surface or
at such depth u may be approved by the City Engineer, or a spike not less
than six (6) inches long in bituminum macadam pavements.



      2.   For each centerline monument set, the engineer or
surveyor under whose supervision the survey has been made shall furnish to
the City Engineer a set of notes clearly showing the ties between the
monument, and a sufficient number (normally four (4)) of durable, distinctive
reference points or monuments.



      3.   Such reference points or monuments may be leads and tacks
in sidewalks, or two (2) inch by two (2) inch stakes set back of the curbline
and below the surface of the ground, or a substitute thereof which appears
not likely to be disturbed.



      4.   Each set of notes submitted shall conform in all respects
to the standardized office records of the City Engineer. All such notes shall
be indexed and filed by the City Engineer as a part of the permanent public
records of his or her office.



   C.   All monuments found or set as required herein shall be
permanently and visibly marked or tagged within the registration or license
number of the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey was
made.



   D.   All boundary monuments shall be set prior to filing the tract
map or parcel map. Interior street centerline monuments may be set subsequent
to filing of the tract map or parcel map. The tract map or parcel map shall
show which monuments are in place and which are to be set. Prior to
certification of the tract map or parcel map by the City Engineer, the
subdivider shall submit a written agreement in which he or she agrees that
monuments deferred will be set within a specified time and that all notes
required will be furnished with a specified time.



   E.   All monuments shall be subject to inspection and approval of
the City Engineer.



§ 18.76.020  INTERIOR MONUMENTS —  DELAYED SETTING PERMITTED WHEN.



   Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded, if
the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set
at a specified date and security is given to the legislative body
guaranteeing the payment of the cost of setting such monuments.



§ 18.76.030  BOUNDARY DETERMINATION EVIDENCE.



   Each tract map and each parcel map for which a survey is required shall
show evidence found on the ground of sufficient corners or prior surveys or
such other evidence as may be suitable to precisely locate the boundaries of
the division or reversion shown on the map. Each stake, monument or other
object found shall be fully described and referenced. The method used to
establish each point or line shall be clearly shown and explained on the map.



CHAPTER 18.80:  DESIGN — GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



Section



   18.80.010   New improvements required



   18.80.020   Street grading — drainage easements



   18.80.030   Property unacceptable for subdivisions



   18.80.040   Blocks backing on highways — walls required when



   18.80.050   Super blocks



   18.80.060   Highways and railroads in industrial areas



   18.80.070   Watercourses for storm drainage



   18.80.080   City boundary shall not divide lots



§ 18.80.010  NEW IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.



   In all subdivisions, the streets, alleys, lots and easements shall be
laid out to provide for water lines, sanitary sewers and drainage facilities
in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. Permanent improvements such as
sewers and laterals, water mains (where it is necessary that they be built in
the streets) and curbs, gutters and paving conforming to approved standards
shall be required on all streets. All streets and alleys shall be graded to a
width and improved to a grade approved by and in a manner satisfactory to the
City Engineer and in conforming with the provisions of this division.



§ 18.80.020  STREET GRADING — DRAINAGE EASEMENTS.



   A.   The street grading and improvement shall include the necessary
surface improvements, sewer, water pipes and other public utilities,
catchbasins, pipe culverts, and storm drains.



   B.   Drainage easements shall be improved in such a manner as may be
required by the City Engineer for the protection of property against
stormwater damage or erosion.



§ 18.80.030  PROPERTY UNACCEPTABLE FOR SUBDIVISION.



   A.   Property which the advisory agency determines as subject to
inundation, overflow by stormwater, or any conditions which would make such
property unsuitable for residential, commercial or industrial uses shall not
be accepted for subdivision purposes.



   B.   Reserve strips of land controlling ingress and egress from
other properties or having the effect, in the opinion of the advisory agency,
of damaging the adjoining properties or which will not be desirable for
taxing or assessing purses shall not be permitted.



   C.   No property in hillside areas which cannot be provided with
adequate water pressure and other facilities for firefighting shall be
subdivided.



   D.   Land adjacent to public water supply sources and reservoirs
shall be strictly regulated in matters of sewerage and waste disposal so as
not to endanger the health of the people of the city.



§ 18.80.040  BLOCKS BACKING ON HIGHWAYS — WALLS REQUIRED WHEN.



   Where lots back up to a street or highway and where it is intended that
there be no access from such lot to the street or highway against which they
back, a six (6) foot masonry wall shall be erected on the rear property line
as a physical separation between the lot and the street or highway.



§ 18.80.050  SUPER BLOCKS.



   Plans for special blocks, called “super blocks,” may be submitted
to the advisory agency for approval when such blocks propose special design
features which will provide for greater amenities than those set forth in the
minimum standard provisions of this chapter and where no hardship is placed
upon the community as a whole by the approval of such super block plans.



§ 18.80.060  HIGHWAYS AND RAILROADS IN INDUSTRIAL AREA.



   Where the subdivision is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or an
important truck highway and the topography of the country or the master plan
indicates that such property may be used for industrial purposes, highways
aligned in the same direction with the railroad or truck route will be
required to be located as nearly parallel to such routes of rights-of-way as
practicable.



§ 18.80.070  WATERCOURSES FOR STORM DRAINAGE.



   The subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights, dedicate a
right-of-way for storm drainage purposes conforming substantially with the
lines of any natural watercourse, channel, stream or creek that traverses the
subdivision or, at the option of the subdivider, provide by dedication
further and sufficient easements or construction, or both, to dispose of such
surface waters and stormwaters.



§ 18.80.080  CITY BOUNDARY SHALL NOT DIVIDE LOTS.



   No lot shall be divided by a city boundary line. Each such boundary
line shall be made a lot line.



CHAPTER 18.84:  DESIGN — LOTS



Section



   18.84.010   Lot area, width and depth specifications



   18.84.020   Frontage on streets



   18.84.030   Corner lots



   18.84.040   Service roads required when



   18.84.050   Key lots



   18.84.060   Side lot lines perpendicular to street



   18.84.070   Pie-shaped interior lots



§ 18.84.010  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND DEPTH SPECIFICATIONS.



   A.   Each lot in a division of land shall have the required area and
the required width as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. Where the Zoning
Ordinance does not establish a required area and/or width and/or depth in a
particular zone, the required area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet
and the required width shall be fifty (50) feet and the required depth shall
be one hundred feet (100). Strips of land intended for use as vehicular
access shall not be included in calculating average width or required area.



   B.   If a lot is in more than one (1) zone, then the area and width
thereof shall be not less than the area and width requirements, respectively,
in that zone in which any part of the lot is located which has the largest
area requirement and in that zone in which any part of the lot is located
which has the greatest width requirement.



   C.   This section does not apply to any lot which the subdivider
offers to deed or dedicate to the public.



   D.   In all cases where practical, the side lines of lots shall be
at an approximate right angle to the street upon which such lots front.



   E.   Wherever practical, divisions of property abutting
rights-of-way for freeways, highways, railroads, on lines and flood-control
channels shall be designed so as to create lots which back up to such
rights-of-way.



   F.   The advisory agency may determine that, by reason of
circumstances peculiar to the proposed subdivision for the use proposed to be
made of the property in the subdivision, the public peace, health, safety and
welfare will be protected adequately by lots of lesser frontage or area than
that specified in this section.



   G.   This section applies only to future divisions of land within
the city and shall not be deemed to limit the existing requirements imposed
under the Zoning Ordinance as to lots already subdivided.



   H.   The design of a subdivision for a tentative map, as required
pursuant to § 66426 of the Subdivision Map Act, shall provide to the extent
feasible for future solar heating or natural cooling opportunities in the
subdivision. Samples include design of lot size to permit orientation of a
structure in the east-west alignment for southern exposure or to permit
orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes.



§ 18.84.020  FRONTAGE ON STREETS.



   On local streets all lots shall front upon the street that parallels
the long dimension of the block. In the case of square blocks, the commission
shall determine on the basis of the existing uses and the purposes
established in the master plan which block face shall be considered as
frontage.



§ 18.84.030  CORNER LOTS.



   Corner lots shall be at least ten percent (10%) wider than the minimum
requirements for lots in any district, in order to maintain lines on both
side and front streets. For corner lots in single-family residential zones,
the minimum lot area shall be increased by five hundred (500) square feet and
the minimum lot width shall be increased by five (5) feet.



§ 18.84.040  SERVICE ROADS REQUIRED WHEN.



   Where lots front on a major, primary or secondary highway, or on major
traffic streets, a service road may be required.



§ 18.84.050  KEY LOTS.



   Key lots shall be avoided whenever possible.



§ 18.84.060  SIDE LOT LINES PERPENDICULAR TO STREET.



   Side lot lines of rectangular lots shall be as nearly perpendicular to
the centerline of the street upon which the lots front as is practical.



§ 18.84.070  PIE-SHAPED INTERIOR LOTS.



   All pie-shaped interior lots shall have a minimum width at the street
property line measured straight across (not on the curve) of forty (40) feet,
and a minimum width of fifty (50) feet at the twenty (20) foot setback line
also measured straight across.



CHAPTER 18.88:  DESIGN — STREETS
AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   18.88.010   Rounding radius for block corners



   18.88.020   Curbs and gutters



   18.88.030   Sidewalks, wheelchair ramps and driveways



   18.88.040   Walkways



   18.88.050   Reflectors and markers for certain streets



   18.88.060   Traffic separator strips



   18.88.070   Traffic islands



   18.88.080   Traffic control signals



   18.88.090   Center medians, striping or markers



§ 18.88.010  ROUNDING RADIUS FOR BLOCK CORNERS.



   At all block corners there shall be a rounding at the curb to a radius
of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. The property line return radius shall
be so set as to maintain a uniform parkway width or provide a uniform
transition into the intersection parkway.



§ 18.88.020  CURBS AND GUTTERS.



   Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets to the standards
approved by the City Engineer.



§ 18.88.030  SIDEWALKS, WHEELCHAIR RAMPS AND DRIVEWAYS.



   A.   Sidewalks.



      1.   Sidewalks shall be provided for all lots included in the
subdivision. Such sidewalk shall be of such width as may be required by the
use of land related to it, but in no case less than four (4) feet in width in
a residential area nor less than five (5)  feet in a commercial or
industrial area.



      2.   Special considerations shall be given to the provision of
sidewalks in acreage subdivisions, where the placement of a walk along one
(1) side of the street may be acceptable by the commission. On hilly terrain
where the width of the roadway right-of-way is controlled by the topographic
considerations, the commission may permit sidewalk on one (1) side of the
street only.



   B.   Wheelchair ramps shall be installed at concrete landings on
street intersections in accordance with standards approved by the City
Engineer.



   C.   Driveways shall be constructed as access to all parcels.
Driveway minimum and maximum widths shall be as established § 19.40.030 or
any succeeding provision thereto and otherwise constructed in accordance with
standards approved by the City Engineer.



§ 18.88.040  WALKWAYS.



   The subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve walkways to
standards prescribed by the City Engineer across blocks greater than one
thousand (1,000) feet in length to provide more convenient access to schools,
parks or other public areas.



§ 18.88.050  REFLECTORS AND MARKERS FOR CERTAIN STREETS.



   Approved reflector buttons and other delineators as approved by the
City Engineer shall be provided at the end of all dead end or cul-de-sac
streets. Reflectors shall also be placed along the outer slope edges of all
roads in hilly areas to define the shoulder of the road.



§ 18.88.060  TRAFFIC SEPARATOR STRIPS.



   A.   Dividing strips may vary in width, but in no case shall they be
less than four (4) feet wide.



   B.   The width of marginal strips may vary with the purposes to
which they are to be put.



§ 18.88.070  TRAFFIC ISLANDS.



   Traffic islands shall be provided where they are required to control
the movement of traffic.



§ 18.88.080  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   The subdivider may be required to install, modify or upgrade traffic
signals or system facilities where access to a division of land intersects an
improved public street or highway and if such action is required to control
the movement of traffic generated by tide division of land.



§ 18.88.090  CENTER MEDIANS, STRIPING OR MARKERS.



   The subdivider may be required to install or modify median
improvements, striping or markers to accommodate safe and legal use of new
streets, highways, driveways or other points of access to a division of land.



CHAPTER 18.92:  DESIGN — STREETS
AND HIGHWAYS



Section



   18.92.010   Access requirements



   18.92.020   Alignment of streets



   18.92.030   Cut or fill banks



   18.92.040   Grades for streets — drainage facilities



   18.92.050   Curves



   18.92.060   Intersections



   18.92.070   Street arrangement — effect on adjoining property



   18.92.080   Right-of-way width for streets and highways



   18.92.090   Lane width



   18.92.100   Pavement materials



   18.92.110   Cross-sections for public ways



   18.92.120   Cul-de-sac streets and alleys



   18.92.130   Highways within subdivisions



   18.92.140   Streets and highways — centerlines and alignment



   18.92.150   Right-of-way and cutoffs at corners



§ 18.92.010  ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.



   Access to a division of land shall be by means of an improved public
street or highway. Where access cannot be obtained from an improved public
street or highway, the advisory agency may approve a tentative map where
access is obtained from an off-site ingress and egress easement which shall
have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet and shall be improved with a
minimum curb-to-curb or paved width of twenty-five (25) feet.



§ 18.92.020  ALIGNMENT OF STREETS.



   All streets, as far as practicable, shall be required to be in
alignment with existing adjacent streets or their proper projection, and in
general conformity with the master plan for the city.



§ 18.92.030  CUT OR FILL BANKS.



   Where roads or streets are so constructed that cut or fill banks are
not wholly within the street line, such cut and fill banks shall be
constructed so that they do all of the following:



   A.   Permit the development of abutting lots as building sites;



   B.   Protect the road and the abutting property against slides and
settlements, all in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer.



§ 18.92.040  GRADES FOR STREETS —  DRAINAGE FACILITIES.



   No street or highway shall have a grade of less than one half of one
percent (0.5%) nor more than ten percent (10%). If, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, topographical conditions do not permit meeting the minimum
grade requirements, he or she may require mitigation measures to accommodate
such deviation from said standards.



§ 18.92.050  CURVES.



   A centerline radius of not less than one hundred (100) feet shall be
required on all local street curves. Where reverse curves are employed, there
shall be a tangent of not less than one hundred (100) feet between the
terminus of the first radius and the beginning of the next.



§ 18.92.060  INTERSECTIONS.



   Street intersections shall be at as nearly a right angle as is
possible, and care shall be taken in layout of intersections that adequate
area is offered for dedication. Grades on local streets at their point of
intersections with traffic streets or highways should be reduced to provide
for the safe meshing of traffic, turning movements and standing of vehicles
as they await opportunities to enter the traffic street.



§ 18.92.070  STREET ARRANGEMENT — EFFECT ON ADJOINING PROPERTY.



   The street arrangement shall be such that, in the judgment of the
advisory agency, no undue hardships will be worked on the owners of adjoining
property when they subdivide their land.



§ 18.92.080  RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.



   A.   1.   The right-of-way required for arterial highways within
or adjacent to the subdivision shall conform to the following dimensions:



         a.   Major, one hundred twenty (120) feet;



         b.   Primary, one hundred (100) feet;



         c.   Secondary, eighty (80) feet.



      2.   These widths shall be as measured on a line perpendicular
to the centerline of the street in a horizontal plane.



   B.   The right-of-way width for local streets within or adjacent to
the subdivision shall be based on the adjacent land use of the area to be
served. Unless otherwise approved by the advisory agency the following widths
shall be provided:



      1.   Industrial/commercial, sixty-four (64) feet;



      2.   Residential/commercial, sixty (60) feet.



   C.   Minor residential streets serving residential areas only may
have a right-of-way width of fifty-six (56) feet with forty (40) feet of
paved area, if approved by both the City Engineer and the advisory agency.



§ 18.92.090  LANE WIDTHS.



   A.   The width of all streets dedicated in conformity with this
title shall be determined by the standards set forth in this chapter. The
basis for all street, highway and road design shall be the lane. The width of
the lane shall be related to the use to which the street or roadway will be
put, and to the use of abutting land.



   B.   No street lane shall have a width less than the following:



      1.   Traffic lane. The width of a traffic lane shall not be
less than twelve (12) feet.



      2.   Curb lane.  The lane width of a curb lane (lane adjacent
to a curb including median island) shall not be less than thirteen (13) feet.



      3.   Access lane. The width of an access lane shall be not
less than ten (10) feet.



      4.   Parking lane. Parking lanes shall be a minimum of eight
(8) feet in width.



   C.   When parking is permitted on traffic streets where time limits
for parking are established, and where such parking may be prohibited during
peak traffic hours, the parking lane shall be thirteen (13) feet in width so
that it may function as a curb lane when so required.



§ 18.92.100  PAVEMENT MATERIALS.



   The type of pavement for curbs, gutters, sidewalks and streets shall be
determined by the City Engineer.



§ 18.92.110  CROSS-SECTIONS FOR PUBLIC WAYS.



   A.   Cross-sections and lane configuration on city streets shall be
in accordance with the circulation element of the general plan.



   B.   Freeways, limited-access ways and unlimited access state
highways shall have a variable cross-section conforming to the standards of
the state. Where the same are involved in any subdivision they shall be
subject to all standards of requirements of the city. Standards of the state
are deemed to be minimum standards that will be accepted.



§ 18.92.120  CUL-DE-SAC STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   A.   Cul-de-sacs shall not be more than five hundred (500) feet in
length when serving land zoned for industrial or commercial use or six
hundred (600) feet in length when serving land zoned for residential use.



   B.   A cul-de-sac street shall have a turnaround at its terminus
with a minimum forty-four (44) foot radius for the right-of-way and a minimum
thirty-eight (38) foot radius for the paved area. Alleys should have a
minimum twenty-five (25) foot corner radius and a minimum width of twenty
(20) feet.



§ 18.92.130  HIGHWAYS WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS.



   If the circulation element of the general plan shows a highway so
located that any portion thereof lies within a division of land, that portion
of the highway which is within the division shall be included in the design
of the division unless the advisory agency determines that there is a
reasonable probability that the general plan will be amended to remove or
relocate the highway so that it is no longer within the division of land.



§ 18.92.140  STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — CENTERLINES AND ALIGNMENT.



   A.   If the centerline has been established for a highway, the
alignment of the highway shall conform to the established centerline. If no
centerline has been established, the alignment shall be substantially as
shown on the circulation element of the General Plan. The centerline curve
radius of a major highway shall be not less than one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet. The centerline curve radius of a secondary highway shall be not
less than six hundred (600) feet.



   B.   On any street, no centerline curve radius of less than two
hundred (200) feet shall be provided. A centerline having an arc length of
less than one hundred (100) feet shall not be permitted unless the centerline
radius is greater than three thousand (3,000) feet.



§ 18.92.150  RIGHT-OF-WAY AND CUTOFFS AT CORNERS.



   A.   Where street right-of-way lines intersect, and if both streets
are local residential, the subdivider shall dedicate sufficient area to allow
said lines to be rounded with a curve having a minimum radius of fifteen (15)
feet unless otherwise determined by the City Engineer.



   B.   Where one or both streets are arterial highways, or one of the
streets serves a commercial or industrial development, the subdivider shall
dedicate sufficient area to provide a corner cutoff. Size of the cutoff
required will be determined by subtracting the width of the narrowest parkway
adjacent thereto from the required curb radius. In no case shall the cutoff
be less than fifteen (15) feet long on the shortest side.



CHAPTER 18.96:  IMPROVEMENT SECURITY



Section



   18.96.010   Improvement security subject to city approval



   18.96.020   Performance bond specifications



   18.96.030   Labor and material bonds — form and contents



   18.96.040   Labor and material bonds — amounts



   18.96.050   Release of security



§ 18.96.010  IMPROVEMENT SECURITY SUBJECT TO CITY APPROVAL.



   Any security in connection with the performance of any act or agreement
shall be subject to the approval of the City Council and City Attorney.



§ 18.96.020  PERFORMANCE BOND SPECIFICATIONS.



   A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties to
secure the faithful performance of any agreement shall be in the form
required by Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.1.



§ 18.96.030  LABOR AND MATERIAL BONDS — FORM AND CONTENTS.



   A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties for
the security of laborers and materialmen shall be in the form required by
Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.2.



§ 18.96.040  LABOR AND MATERIAL BONDS — AMOUNTS.



   Security to guarantee the performance of any act or agreement shall be
in the amounts required by Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.3.



§ 18.96.050  RELEASE OF SECURITY.



   The security furnished by the subdivider shall be released in whole or
in part in the manner provided by Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.7.



CHAPTER 18.100:  REVERSION TO ACREAGE



Section



   18.100.010   Initiation of proceedings — Statutory requirements



   18.100.020   Parcel map filing required when



§ 18.100.010  INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS — STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS.



   Proceedings for reversion to acreage may be initiated by the City
Council on its own motion or by petition of all the property owners of record
of the real property within the subdivision. Such proceedings shall comply
with the requirements of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66499.11 et seq.



§ 18.100.020  PARCEL MAP FILING REQUIRED WHEN.



   The city may authorize a parcel map to be filed for the purpose of
reverting to acreage any land previously subdivided and consisting of four
(4) or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership.



CHAPTER 18.104:  LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS



Section



   18.104.010   Lot line adjustment defined



   18.104.020   Use of adjustments authorized when



   18.104.030   Application for adjustment — form and contents



   18.104.040   Notice to adjoining property owners



   18.104.050   City Engineer approval authority



   18.104.060   Statutory provisions applicable



   18.104.070   Processing and recording



   18.104.080   Appeal procedure



§ 18.104.010  LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT DEFINED.



   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.  A transfer of land between two (2) or more
adjacent lots or parcels, where the land taken from one (1) lot is attached
to an adjacent lot, and where the number of lots stays the same.



§ 18.104.020  USE OF ADJUSTMENTS AUTHORIZED WHEN.



   A lot line adjustment shall be used to transfer land between two (2) or
more adjacent lots if the City Engineer determines:



   A.   The adjustment does not substantially change the size or shape
of the lots or parcels involved;



   B.   The number of lots or parcels before and after the adjustment
are the same;



   C.   The adjustment and resulting parcels do not create or intensity
any violation of the city code.



§ 18.104.030  APPLICATION FOR ADJUSTMENT — FORM AND CONTENTS.



   A lot line adjustment shall be initiated by the property owner(s) by
application on a form obtained from and application made to the engineering
services department. The application shall contain the following:



   A.   Applicant's name, address and phone number;



   B.   Declaration of ownership;



   C.   Recent lot book report or title report;



   D.   Legal description of property as it exists, and how it will
exist upon adjustment;



   E.   Map of property with the location of all buildings and
structures shown;



   F.   Property owner's list:



      1.   Prepare and submit a complete list of names and mailing
addresses of all property owners adjoinIng the subject property or property
contiguous to and in the same ownership as the subject property. This list
must be prepared from the latest available assessment rolls of the Orange
County assessor. The property owners must also be identified by the
assessor's parcel number of the parcel they own, and also the sequential
number(s) which conforms to the number of the parcel(s) they own, as shown on
the “Ownership Map;”



      2.   The property owner list shall be written legibly in ink
or typewritten on stock no larger than eight and one-half by fourteen (8½ x
14) inches;



      3.   The property owner list shall be certified to be true,
correct and complete, and the certificant's signature shall be notarized.
Such certification from a title insurance company or person who prepared the
list is appropriate;



   G.   Two (2) sets of addressed gummed labels; type sequential
number(s), assessor's parcel number, name and address of property owners as
they appear on the property ownership list of gummed labels;



   H.   One (1) copy of an “Ownership Map,” showing all property
adjoining the subject property or property contiguous to and in the same
ownership as the subject property;



   I.   Other information required to determine compliance with city
codes.



§ 18.104.040  NOTICE TO ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS.



   The City Engineer shall cause notification to be mailed to the owners,
as shown on the last adopted tax roll of Orange County, of property adjoining
the subject property or any contiguous property in the same ownership as the
subject property, at least ten (10) days prior to tendering a decision on the
lot line adjustment. Such notice shall contain the location of the
properties, the general nature of the proposal, the address where the
information may be obtained and written comments may be sent, and the final
date to receive comments for consideration.



§ 18.104.050  CITY ENGINEER APPROVAL AUTHORITY.



   The City Engineer shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove
the application for a lot line adjustment, and his or her determination shall
be final unless appealed to the City Council. His or her action shall be in
writing and sent by mail to the applicant(s) within fifty (50) days of filing.



§ 18.104.060  STATUTORY PROVISIONS APPLICABLE.



   Lot line adjustments shall be subject to requirements, conditions and
restrictions as authorized by Cal. Gov't Code § 66412(d).



§ 18.104.070  PROCESSING AND RECORDING.



   Upon approval of the lot line adjustment, the City Engineer shall
prepare all necessary documentation and shall cause such documentation to be
recorded in the office of the county recorder.



§ 18.104.080  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   The applicant, any interested person, member of the Planning Commission
or member of the City Council may appeal to the City Council the decision of
the City Engineer. All appeals shall be submitted and acted upon in the
manner prescribed for appeals of actions as specified in Cal. Gov't Code §
664525(a).



CHAPTER 18.106:  VOLUNTARY LOT MERGERS



Section



   18.106.010   Application



   18.106.020   Approvals



   18.106.030   Conditions



   18.106.040   Effective date



   18.106.050   Appeals



§ 18.106.010  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply only in the circumstances set forth
hereinafter.



   A.   Any contiguous parcels or units of land held under common
ownership may be merged at the request of the property owner(s), pursuant to
Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.20 3/4 and this chapter. Unless otherwise regulated
by law, approval and recordation of a final or parcel map over previously
subdivided property shall be deemed to have merged those properties, and this
chapter shall have no force or effect.



   B.   Record owner(s) of contiguous lots may file a request with the
Development Services Director to merge said contiguous parcels. The request
for merger shall be made on a form prescribed by the Development Services
Director, and accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1008, passed 3-3-98)



§ 18.106.020  APPROVALS.



   A voluntary lot merger may be approved by the Development Services
Director only if it is found that:



   A.   Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned
by the lot merger are unnecessary for present or future public purposes, or
that any dedications or offers of dedication which are necessary for present
or future public purposes are preserved on the merged parcels; and



   B.   All owners of an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to the lot merger.



   C.   That a parcel map would not be necessary to accomplish the
subdivision in light of the circumstances applicable to the request.



(Ord. 1008, passed 3-3-98)



§ 18.106.030  CONDITIONS.



   The Development Services Director, or the designee thereof, may require
as conditions of the approval of the lot merger:



   A.   That all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees,
deposits or improvement securities be retained if they are necessary to
accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter.



   B.   Payment of any additional fees necessary to accomplish any of
the provisions of this chapter; and



   C.   Such other conditions as are necessary to accomplish the
purposes or provisions of this City Code or necessary to protect the public
health, safety, or welfare.



(Ord. 1008, passed 3-3-98)



§ 18.106.040  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   A voluntary parcel merger shall become effective when the Development
Services Director causes a notice of merger to be filed with the Office of
the Orange County Recorder.



(Ord. 1008, passed 3-3-98)



§ 18.106.050  APPEALS.



   Any action in regards to a lot merger application can be appealed in
the manner prescribed in § 20.424.



(Ord. 1008, passed 3-3-98)



DIVISION II — FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 18.204:  PURPOSE AND METHODS



Section



   18.204.010   Purpose



   18.204.020   Methods of reducing flood losses



§ 18.204.010  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this division to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by adopting legally enforceable
regulations to be applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly
and privately owned land within flood prone areas.  These regulations are
designed to:



   A.   Protect human life and health;



   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;



   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
blighted areas caused by flood damage;



   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
an area of special flood hazard; and



   H.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.204.020  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations
to:



   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;



   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;



   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and



   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



CHAPTER 18.208:  DEFINITIONS



Section



   18.208.010   Interpretation of language



   18.208.020   Definitions



§ 18.208.010  INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter it’s most reasonable application.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.208.020 DEFINITIONS.



   A ZONE.  See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure that is either:



      1.   Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or



      2.   A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one
hundred fifty (150) square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500) in value.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use that is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.



   ALLUVIAL FAN.  A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan
shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded
from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the
valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows,
debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel
migration.



   APEX.  A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).  The base flood depths range from one (1) to
three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be
evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.



   BASE FLOOD.  A flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the ‘one hundred (100)
year flood’).  BASE FLOOD is the term used throughout this chapter.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e.
below ground level, on all sides.



   BUILDING.  see STRUCTURE.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ENCROACHMENT.  The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain that may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before April 5, 1988 pursuant to ordinance 804.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD, FLOODING, or FLOOD WATER.



      1.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and



      2.   The condition resulting from flood related erosion.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. See FLOODING.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.  The city official designated in Chapter
18.216 to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This chapter and the zoning
ordinance, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other
application of police power, which control development in flood prone
areas.  This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and their contents.  For guidelines on dry and wet
FLOODPROOFING, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.  Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE.  That area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.



   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION.  As related to Chapter 18.224 (Variance
Procedure), means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public.  In examining this requirement, the City
Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to
government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty
(50) to one hundred years (100).  Buildings that are permitted to be
constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years
to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property
and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience,
danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring.  In
addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject
to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood
insurance rates.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, and does not include long term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   GOVERNING BODY.  The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality
that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.



   HARDSHIP.  As related to Chapter 18.224 (Variance Procedure) of this
chapter, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to
grant the requested variance.  The variance shall be exceptional, unusual,
and peculiar to the property involved.  Mere economic or financial hardship
alone is not exceptional.  Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical
handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors
likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship.  All of
these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior; or



      4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.



   LEVEE.  A man made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM.  A flood protection system, which consists of a levee,
or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement (see BASEMENT).



      1.   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the
lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a
building’s LOWEST FLOOR provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation
design requirements, including, but not limited to:



         a.   The flood openings standard in subparagraph
18.220.010.C.3.;



         b.   The anchoring standards in subparagraph
18.220.010.A.;



         c.   The construction materials and methods standards in
subparagraph 18.220.010.B.; and



         d.   The standards for utilities in § 18.220.020.



      2.   For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas
are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see BASEMENT).  This
prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. 
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.



   MARKET VALUE.  Defined in the Orange County substantial
damage/improvement procedures.  See subparagraph 18.216.020.B.1.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on
a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For floodplain management purposes, means
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after April 5,
1988, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after April 5,1988.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along,
across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its
location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD or 100 YEAR FLOOD.  See BASE FLOOD.



   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY.  A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management regulations.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.  As related to Chapter 18.224 (Variance
Procedure), means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything
which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs
the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or
river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is:



      1.   Built on a single chassis;



      2.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;



      3.   Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and



      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters or recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one (1) foot.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION.  To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.  Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other
development.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.



   SHEET FLOW AREA.  See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  An area in the floodplain subject
to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.  It
is shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1 A30, AE, A99, or, AH.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit.  The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation.  Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement.  This term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed.  The term does not, however, include either:



      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which  have been identified by the local code enforcement 
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      2.   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter.  A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)
of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in
the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least
periodically.  Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which
substantial flood damage may occur.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



CHAPTER 18.212:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   18.212.010   Applicability



   18.212.020   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   18.212.030   Compliance



   18.212.040   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   18.212.050   Interpretation



   18.212.060   Warning and disclaimer of liability



§ 18.212.010  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas within the “F” zone, and any
other areas designated by the City Council as being subject to special flood
hazards within the city.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.212.020  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The area of special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the ‘Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for
Orange County and incorporated areas’ dated December 3, 2009, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM’s) and flood boundary and
floodway maps (FBFM’s), dated December 3, 2009, and all subsequent
amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this chapter.  The FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum
area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for
other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are
recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator.  The study,
FIRM’s and FBFM’s are on file at City Clerk’s Office in Brea Civic and
Cultural Center located at 1 Civic Center Circle, Brea, California.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.212.030  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.  Violation of the requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.212.040  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another chapter, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.212.050  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;



   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.212.060  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood
heights may be increased by man made or natural causes.  This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of City Council, any
officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



CHAPTER 18.216:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   18.216.010   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



   18.216.020   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator



   18.216.030   Development permits



   18.216.040   Appeals



§ 18.216.010  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The City Engineer or his or her designee is hereby appointed to
administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accord with its provisions.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.216.020  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to the following:



   A.   Permit review.  Review all development permits to determine:



      1.   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied,
including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of
existing structures;



      2.   All other required state and federal permits have been
obtained;



      3.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;



      4.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the
carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined
but a floodway has not been designated.  This means that  the cumulative
effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the city; and



      5.   All letters of map revision (LOMR’s) for flood control
projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits.  Building
permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision
(CLOMR’s).  Approved CLOMR’s allow construction of the proposed flood
control project and land preparation as specified in the ‘start of
construction’ definition. 



   B.   Development of substantial improvement and substantial damage
procedures.



      1.   Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, Answers to Questions
about Substantially Damaged Buildings, develop detailed procedures for
identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and
substantial damage, to include defining ‘market value.’



      2.   Assure procedures are coordinated  with  other
departments/divisions and implemented by community staff.



   C.   Review, use and development of other base flood data.  When
base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with §
18.212.010, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal
or state agency, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
Chapter 18.212.



NOTE:  A base flood elevation may be obtained using one (1) of two (2)
methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, Managing Floodplain Development
in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base
(100-year) Flood Elevations, dated July 1995.



   D.   Notification of other agencies.



      1.   Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:



         a.   Notify adjacent communities and the California
Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;



         b.   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency; and



         c.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.



      2.   Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:



         a.   Within 6 (six) months of information becoming
available or project completion, whichever comes first, the Floodplain
Administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits
technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).



         b.   All LOMR’s for flood control projects are
approved prior to the issuance of building permits.  Building permits must
not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR’s). 
Approved CLOMR’s allow construction of the proposed flood control project
and land preparation as specified in the ‘start of construction’
definition.  Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of
those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements are based on current data.



      3.   Changes in corporate boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing
whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other
means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the
new corporate limits.



   E.   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain
for public inspection and make available as needed the following:



      1.   Certification required by subparagraph  18.220.010.C.1.
and § 18.220.030 (lowest floor elevations);



      2.   Certification required by subparagraph 18.220.010.C.2.
(elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);



      3.   Certification required by subparagraph  18.220.010.C.3.
( floodproofing standard); 



      4.   Certification of elevation required by subparagraph
18.220.030.A.3. (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);



      5.   Certification required by subparagraph 18.220.060.B.
(floodway encroachments); and



      6.   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   F.   Map determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions.  The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
18.216.040.



   G.   Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of  this
chapter as that term is defined  in § 18.208.020.



   H.   Biennial report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.



   I.   Planning. Assure community’s general plan is consistent with
floodplain management objectives herein.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.216.030  DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood
hazard established in § 18.212.010.  Application for a development permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the
following minimum information:



   A.   Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:



      1.   Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in
question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment
and their location;



      2.   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and
other utilities;



      3.   Grading information showing existing and proposed
contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities;



      4.   Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;



      5.   Base flood elevation information as specified in §
18.212.010 or subparagraph 18.216.020.C.;



      6.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and



      7.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in
subparagraph 18.220.010.C.2. and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.



   B.   Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing
criteria in subparagraph 18.220.010.C.2.



   C.   For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of
foundation openings as required in subparagraph 18.220.010.C.3. of this
chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 



   D.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



   E.   All appropriate certifications listed in subparagraph
18.216.020.E. of this chapter.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.216.040  APPEALS.



   The City Council of the City of Brea shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



CHAPTER 18.220:  DEVELOPMENT



Section



   18.220.010   Standards of construction



   18.220.020   Standards for utilities



   18.220.030   Standards for subdivisions and other proposed
development



   18.220.040   Standards for manufactured homes



   18.220.050   Standards for recreational vehicles



   18.220.060   Floodways



§ 18.220.010  STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are
required.



   A.   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



   B.   Construction materials and methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall
be constructed:



      1.   With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;



      2.   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



      3.   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding; and



      4.   Within Zones AH or AO on the community’s flood
insurance rate map, so that there are adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.



   C.   Elevation and floodproofing.



      1.   Residential construction. All new construction or
substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest
floor, including basement:



         a.   In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones on the community’s flood
insurance rate map, elevated to or above the base flood elevation;



         b.   In an AO zone on the community’s flood insurance
rate map, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or
exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at
least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is
specified;



         c.   In an A zone on the community’s flood insurance
rate map, without BFE’s specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated
to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under subparagraph
18.216.020.C.; and



         d.   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation
of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community
building inspector to be properly elevated.  Such certification and
verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



      2.   Non-residential construction. All new construction or
substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be
elevated to conform to subparagraph 18.220.010.C.1. or:



         a.   Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subparagraph
18.220.010.C.1., so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;



         b.   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



         c.   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or
architect that the standards of subparagraphs 18.220.010.C.2.a. and b. are
satisfied.  Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.



      3.   Flood openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
(excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater.  Designs for meeting this
requirement must meet the following minimum criteria:



         a.   For non-engineered openings:



            (1)   Have a minimum of two (2) openings on
different sides having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;



            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one (1) foot above grade;



            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and



      4.   Buildings with more than one (1) enclosed area must have
openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly
enter, or be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.



      5.   Manufactured homes. See § 18.220.040.



      6.   Garages and ancillary storage structures.



         a.   Attached garages.



            (1)   A garage attached to a residential
structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be
designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters.  See subparagraph
18.220.010.C.3.  Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with
flood resistant materials.  See subparagraph 18.220.010.B.



            (2)   A garage attached to a nonresidential
structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed.  For
guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.



         b.   Detached garages and accessory structures.



            (1)   Accessory structures used solely for parking
(2 (two) car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost
sheds), as defined in § 18.208.020, may be constructed such that its floor
is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed
and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:



               (a)   Use of the accessory structure must be
limited to parking or limited storage;



               (b)   The portions of the accessory
structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;



               (c)   The accessory structure must be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;



               (d)   Any mechanical and utility equipment
in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the
BFE;



               (e)   The accessory structure must comply
with floodplain encroachment provisions in § 18.020.060; and



               (f)   The accessory structure must be
designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with
subparagraph 18.220.010.C.3.



            (2)   Detached garages and accessory structures
not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all
applicable standards in § 18.220.010.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.220.020  STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.



   A.   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:



      1.   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and



      2.   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.



   B.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.220.030  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.



   A.   All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development,
including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater
than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:



      1.   Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base
flood elevations (BFE);



      2.   Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed
structures and pads on the final plans; and



      3.   If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the
following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of
an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR F) to the
Floodplain Administrator:



         a.   Lowest floor elevation;



         b.   Pad elevation; and



         c.   Lowest adjacent grade.



   B.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   C.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   D.   All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide
adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.220.040  STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.



   A.   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home
has incurred ‘substantial damage’ as the result of a flood, shall, within
Zones A1 30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



   B.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1
30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map that are not
subject to the provisions of subparagraph 18.220.040.A. will be securely
fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:



      1.   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation; or



      2.   Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade.  Upon the
completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including
basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor, and verified by the community building inspectors to be properly
elevated.  Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.220.050  STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the
community’s flood insurance rate map will either:



   A.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;



   B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.  A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or



   C.   Meet the permit requirements of § 18.216.030 and the elevation
and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subparagraph
18.220.040.A.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.220.060  FLOODWAYS.



   Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply.



   A.   Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction,
substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate
map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 1 (one) foot at any point
within the city.



   B.   Within an adopted regulatory floodway, encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are
prohibited, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided
demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase
in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   C.   If subparagraphs A. and B. of this section are satisfied, all
new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development
shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of
Chapter 18.220.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



CHAPTER 18.224:  VARIANCE PROCEDURE



Section



   18.224.010   Variance



   18.224.020   Conditions for variances



   18.224.030   Appeal Board



§ 18.224.010  VARIANCE.



   A.   The issuance of a variance under this chapter is for floodplain
management purposes only.  Insurance premium rates are determined by statute
according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of the
variance.



   B.   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on
the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of
property and are not personal in nature.  A variance may be granted for a
parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying
with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to
the applicant or the surrounding property owners.  The characteristics must
be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels.  The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants, or the property owners.



   C.   It is a priority of the City Council to help protect its
citizens from flooding.  This need is so compelling and the implications of
the cost of insuring a structure is built below flood level are so serious
that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this
chapter are quite rare.  The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood
loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. 
Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed
and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be
properly granted.  The criteria are designed to screen out those situations
in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.224.020  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   A.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on
a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by
lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing that the procedures of Chapters 18.216 and 18.220 of this Division
have been fully considered.  As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2)
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.



   B.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
‘historic structures’ (as defined in § 18.208.20) upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.



   C.   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.



   D.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.  MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of
deviation from the requirements of this chapter.  For example, in the case
of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need
not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever
elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City
Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this
chapter.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:



      1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25) for one hundred
dollars ($100) of insurance coverage; and



      2.   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.  It is recommended that a copy of the notice
shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Orange
County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the
chain of title of the affected parcel of land.



   E.   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)



§ 18.224.030  APPEAL BOARD.



   A.   In deciding requests for variances, the City Council shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and the:



      1.   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;



      2.   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



      3.   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual
owner and future owners of the property;



      4.   Importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      5.   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



      6.   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      7.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      8.   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      9.   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and



      11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets
and bridges.



   B.   Variances shall only be issued upon a:



      1.   Showing of good and sufficient cause;



      2.   Determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



      3.   Determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see PUBLIC SAFETY AND
NUISANCE), cause fraud and victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.



   C.   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subparagraphs
18.224.030.A.  through 18.224.030.D. are satisfied and that the structure or
other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and
does not create a public nuisance.



   D.   Upon consideration of the factors set forth in subparagraph
18.224.020.A. and the purposes of this Division, the City Council may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this Division.



(Ord. 1132, passed 12-1-09)




Brea City Code


City of Brea, California
City Code




Contains 2019 S-24, current through
Ordinance 1209, passed 3-5-19










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TITLE 20:  ZONING CODE



   Chapter



   DIVISION I — GENERAL REGULATIONS



      20.00   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      20.04   ZONING REGULATIONS



      20.08   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



      20.12   RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM AND RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM
CONVERSIONS



      20.16   RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT



      20.20   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



      20.24   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES



      20.28   SIGNS



      20.32   STREET AND HIGHWAY DEDICATION IMPROVEMENTS



      20.36   HOME OCCUPATIONS



      20.40   AFFORDABLE HOUSING



      20.44   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES



      20.48   OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES



      20.52   RESERVED



      20.56   RESERVED



      20.60   HISTORIC PRESERVATION



      20.64   COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS



      20.68   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES



      20.70   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USES AND CULTIVATION



      20.71   SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS



      20.72   TEMPORARY USE PERMIT



   DIVISION II — SPECIFIC ZONE REGULATIONS



      20.200   R1-H SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL HILLSIDE ZONE



      20.204   RESERVED



      20.206   HR HILLSIDE RESIDENTIAL ZONE



      20.208   R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



      20.212   R-1 (5,000) SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



      20.216   R-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



      20.220   R-3 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



      20.224   C-P COMMERCIAL, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND PROFESSIONAL
OFFICE ZONE



      20.228   C-N NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE



      20.232   C-C MAJOR SHOPPING CENTER ZONE



      20.236   C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE



      20.240   C-M COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE



      20.244   C-RC COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONE



      20.248   M-P PLANNED INDUSTRIAL ZONE



      20.252   M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE



      20.256   M-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE



      20.258   MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS



      20.259   PARKS/RECREATION/OPEN SPACE



      20.260   PD PRECISE DEVELOPMENT ZONE



      20.261   PUBLIC FACILITIES



      20.262   WD WALL DESIGN OVERLAY ZONE



      20.263   E EQUESTRIAN OVERLAY ZONE



      20.264   O OIL PRODUCTION ZONE



      20.268   TEMPORARY TRAILER AND TRAILERS USED AS CONSTRUCTION
FIELD OFFICES



      20.272   PC PLANNED COMMUNITY



      20.276   FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT



      20.280   SGS SPECIAL GEOLOGIC STUDIES ZONE



      20.284   LARGE FAMILY DAY-CARE HOMES



   DIVISION III — ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES



      20.400   ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES GENERAL



      20.404   LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES



      20.408   ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES



      20.412   QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURES



      20.416   HEARINGS



      20.420   DECISIONS



      20.424   APPEALS



DIVISION I — GENERAL REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 20.00:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   20.00.010   Intent and purpose



   20.00.020   Authority



   20.00.030   Title



   20.00.040   Continuation of existing regulations



   20.00.050   Existing uses



   20.00.060   Existing lots



   20.00.070   Definitions



   Appendix:   Illustrations



§ 20.00.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The Brea Zoning Ordinance is hereby adopted and established as is
hereinafter set forth in this title in order to encourage the most
appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to
provide adequate open spaces for light and air, and to prevent and permit
adequate control of fires; to prevent undue concentration of population; to
lessen congestion on streets; to facilitate adequate provision for community
facilities and utilities, including transportation, water supply, sewage
disposal, schools, parks and other public requirements which tend to promote
the health, safety and public welfare; all in accordance with a comprehensive
plan for the orderly development of the city and its environs.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.00.020  AUTHORITY.



   The Brea Zoning Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Cal. Constitution,
Art. XI, § 11 and in compliance with the requirements of the Planning Law,
Cal. Gov't Code Title 7.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.00.030  TITLE.



   This ordinance shall be known as the “Zoning Code of the City of
Brea.”



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.00.040  CONTINUATION OF EXISTING REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this title, insofar as they are substantially the
same as existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be
construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.  The
adoption of this title shall not constitute a validation of any use not
conforming with the provisions of the zone in which it is located.



§ 20.00.050  EXISTING USES.



   The existing use, or uses, of all buildings, improvements and premises
not in conformity with the standards of requirements of the land use zones in
which they are located in accordance with the provisions of this title and
which uses are legal under previous zoning ordinances may continue as legal
nonconforming uses, as hereinafter defined.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.00.060  EXISTING LOTS.



   The area and dimension provisions of the sections dealing with
“Property Development Standards” shall apply to all lots, provided
however, that where a lot has a width or area less than that required in the
zone of which it is a part and was held under separate ownership, or was of
record, at the time this zoning code became effective, such lot may be
occupied by the uses permitted in the zone, subject to the area per dwelling
unit and yard requirements and such other regulations as apply uniformly to
all lots in said zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.00.070  DEFINITIONS.



   This section provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this
Zoning Code that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common
usage. If any of the definitions in this Section conflict with definitions in
other provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall control for
the purposes of this Zoning Code. If a word is not defined in this section,
or other provisions of the Municipal Code, the most common dictionary
definition is presumed to be correct.



   A.   General terminology.  When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular
number include the plural, and those in the plural number include the
singular.



   The word “building” includes the word “structure.”



   The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.



   The word “used” includes the words, “arranged for, designed for,
occupied or intended to be occupied for.”



   The word “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Brea.



   The word “Commission” shall mean the Planning Commission of the
City of Brea.



   The word “city” shall mean the City of Brea.



   B.   Specific definitions.



   ABATEMENT. An action taken to reduce, relieve, or suppress another
continuing action.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ABUT or ABUTTING LAND. A parcel having a common boundary with another
parcel, including parcels that have a common corner.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ABUTTING.  Two (2) or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common
boundary line, or two (2) or more objects in contact with each other.



   ACCESS or ACCESS WAY.  The place, means, or way by which pedestrians
and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a
property, parking space or use as required by this Zoning Code.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A detached subordinate building, the use of which
is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of
the land and which is located on the same lot with the main building or use.



   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT.  An attached or detached dwelling unit which
provides complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons
and shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation on the same parcel as the existing primary dwelling unit is
situated. An Accessory Dwelling Unit also includes the following: An
efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code,
and a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety
Code.



(Ord. 1203, passed 2-20-18)



   ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS.  Living quarters within an accessory
building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by
temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no
kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling
unit.



   ACCESSORY RETAIL USES. The retail sales of various products (including
food) in a store or similar facility that is located within a health care,
hotel, office, or industrial complex for the purpose of serving employees or
customers, and is not visible from a public street. These uses include gift
shops, pharmacies, and food service establishments within hospitals;
convenience stores, and food service establishments within hotel, office, and
industrial complexes.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure that is clearly incidental to and
detached from a principal building on the same lot and subordinate to the
principal building.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use incidental, related, appropriate, and clearly
subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which accessory use does
not alter the principal use of the subject lot or affect other properties in
the zone.



   ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES (RESIDENTIAL LAND USE).  Includes any
use that is customarily part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to a
residence and does not change the character of the residential use. These
uses include accessory structures (detached patio covers, garages, gazebos,
greenhouses, hot tubs, spas, and swimming pools, studios, workshops, and
similar structures). Includes home satellite dish antennas of eighteen (18)
inches or less in diameter, and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV
and radio broadcasts (larger satellite dish antennas, and broadcast and
receiving antennas for ham radio and commercial applications, are included
under the definition of WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ACREAGE, GROSS. The total land area within the lot lines of a parcel of
land before the deduction of areas for public rights-of-way, public parks,
public school sites, and any easement(s) constituting a substantial
impairment of the fee.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ACREAGE, NET. The area within the lot lines of a parcel of land after
all deductions are made. Deductions include public rights-of-way, public
parks, public school sites, and any easement constituting a substantial
impairment of the fee.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ACUPUNCTURE CLINICS. Establishments of independent health practitioners
(except audiologists; chiropractors; dentists; mental health specialists;
physicians; physical, occupational, and speech therapists; podiatrists; and
optometrists) who practice the physical act of acupuncture. These
practitioners operate private or group practices in their own offices (e.g.,
centers, clinics) or in the facilities of others (e.g., hospitals or medical
centers).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ADDITION. Any construction that is attached to an existing structure
and that increases the size or capacity of a structure in terms of site
coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ADJACENT.  Two (2) or more lots or parcels of land separated only by
an alley, street, highway or recorded easement, or two (2) or more subjects
that lie near or close to each other.



   ADJOINING. Refers to a parcel that shares all or part of a common lot
line with another parcel or that is directly across a street, private street
or access easement, or right-of-way (other than a freeway or principal
arterial) from a parcel.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06) 



   ADMISSION CHARGE.  A tangible benefit, monetary or otherwise, which is
expressly or impliedly required as a condition of admittance to a party. 
Customary courtesies and clearly non- commercial activity such as gifts by
guests and voluntary sharing of expenses for meals shall not be considered to
be an ADMISSION CHARGE.  ADMISSION CHARGE shall not include donations for
political, community service, charitable or religious purposes.



(Ord. 926, passed 8-18-92)



   ADVISORY AGENCY.  The City Planning Commission which is herein
designated as the advisory agency to the City Council on all matters related
to zoning and use of land and structures.



   AFFORDABLE PERIOD.  The length of time a dwelling unit is required to
remain within the price range of households in the low-to-moderate range as
specified by § 20.40.050 of this title.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



   AFFORDABLE UNITS.  Residential dwellings which are rented or sold at a
price within the range of low-to-moderate income households as established by
the City Council.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES. The retail sale of beer, wine, and/or other
alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premise consumption.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ALLEY.  A narrow service way, either public or private, that provides
a permanently reserved but secondary means of public access. Alleys are not
intended for general traffic circulation, but for services and delivery
access. Alleys typically are located along rear property lines.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ALTERNATIVE FUELS AND RECHARGING FACILITIES. A commercial facility
offering motor vehicle fuels not customarily offered by commercial refueling
stations (e.g., LPG) as well as equipment to recharge electric powered
vehicles.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION MODES.  Any mode of travel that serves as
an alternative to the single occupant vehicle.  This can include all forms
of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit,
bicycling, or walking.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   AMENDMENT. A change in the wording, context, or substance of this
Zoning Code, the General Plan, or specific plans or a change in the zoning
district boundaries of the official zoning map. See Chapter 20.74
(Amendments).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   AMUSEMENT CENTER.  Any place of amusement open to the public, operated
predominantly within a building where four (4) or more of the following games
and/or devices are located and maintained:  photography machines, talking
machines, weighing machines, muscle testers, fortune telling machines, video
games or other games of skill and science, but not including games of chance
or devices of like character.



(Ord. 689, passed 1-15-80; Am. Ord. 751, passed 12-6-83)



   ANIMAL HOSPITAL.  A place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.  The
use of the premises as a kennel or a place where animals or pets are boarded
for remuneration may be permitted only when incidental to the principal use.



   ANTENNA. Any system of poles, reflecting discs, rods, wires, or similar
devices that is external to or attached to the exterior of any structure and
that is used for the transmission, reception, or both of electromagnetic
waves.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ANTENNA, AMATEUR RADIO. Any antenna used to receive and/or transmit
radio signals on the amateur radio bandwidth, as designated by the Federal
Communications Commission.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   APARTMENT.  Two (2) or more rooms with private bath and kitchen
facilities comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a
structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units for rent.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   APPEAL. A process for the review of decisions rendered by the Director
or the Planning Agency.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   APPLIANCE STORES. Retail establishments primarily engaged in selling an
array of new household appliances (e.g., coffeemakers, dishwashers, electric
razors, hair dryers, irons, microwave ovens, ovens, radios, refrigerators,
room air-conditioners, sewing machines, televisions, and vacuum cleaners), in
combination with appliance parts and repair services.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.  Any new development project that is
determined to meet or exceed the employment threshold using the criteria
contained in § 20.08.050.B. of this title.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   ARCADES. A location where four (4) or more mechanical or electronic
amusement games are located, even if the games are provided in conjunction
with or as an accessory use to another business.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ART, ANTIQUES, COLLECTIBLES, AND GIFTS. Retail sales uses including art
galleries, antique shops, curio, gift, and souvenir shops, and the sales of
collectible items including sports cards and comic books. See RETAIL STORES,
GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ARTIST LOFTS. A room or structure combining working and living space,
in which original works of art are created, and where the area devoted to
living quarters does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of the
total space.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A special combination of housing,
supportive services, personalized assistance, and health care designed to
respond to the individual needs of those who need help with activities of
daily living. A facility with a central or private kitchen, dining,
recreational, and other facilities, with separate bedrooms and/or living
quarters, where the emphasis of the facility remains residential.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ATTACHED BUILDING.  A building having at least five (5) lineal feet of
wall serving as a common wall with the building to which it is attached, or
connected thereto by a continuous roof at least eight (8) feet wide.



   ATTACHED UNIT.  A single dwelling unit attached to one (1) or more
units by common vertical walls.



   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES (ATM'S). A pedestrian-oriented or
vehicle-oriented machine used by bank and financial service patrons for
conducting transactions including deposits, withdrawals, and fund transfers,
without contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be
located at or within banks, or in other locations, in compliance with this
Zoning Code.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.  General repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service,
including body, frame, or fender repair; over-all painting.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR.  Upholstering, replacement or parts and
motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half
(1½) tons of capacity but not including other operations named under
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD.  See SALVAGE YARD.



   AVERAGE SLOPE. Average percent slope “S” is computed by the
formula: S = (0.00229 I L)/A where S = average percent slope, I = contour
interval, in feet*, L = summation of length of contours, in feet, and A =
area in acres of parcel being considered.  *Calculations of average percent
slope should be based upon accurate topographic surveys using a contour
interval no greater than ten (10) feet and a horizontal map scale of one (1)
inch to two hundred (200) feet or larger.



   BACHELOR APARTMENTS.  One (1) room and bath, with cooking facilities,
in a multiple dwelling.



   BAKERIES. See RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BALANCE.  The cutting and filling of a site which does not require the
export or import of earth material.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   BANKS AND FINANCIAL SERVICES. Financial institutions including the
following.  See also AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES.



      1.   Banks, savings and loans, and trust companies.



      2.   Credit agencies.



      3.   Credit unions.



      4.   Holding (but not primarily operating) companies.



      5.   Lending and thrift institutions.



      6.   Other investment companies.



      7.   Securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers.



      8.   Security and commodity exchanges.



      9.   Vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BAR. Any facility licensed by the State of California which restricts
entry to persons of legal drinking age, as established by state law, at which
the sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine, and mixed drinks, is
provided for consumption on the premises.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BARBER or BEAUTY SHOPS.



      1.   BARBER SHOPS. Service establishments known as barber or
men's hair stylist shops primarily engaged in cutting, styling, and trimming
boy's and men's hair; and/or shaving and trimming men's beards.



      2.   BEAUTY SALONS/SHOPS.



         a.   Service establishments primarily engaged in one or
more of the following:



            (1)   Coloring, cutting, shampooing, styling,
trimming, waving, or weaving, or hair;



            (2)   Providing facials; and



            (3)   Applying makeup.



         b.   May also provide the following services:
electrolysis (e.g., hair removal), massage, nail care, permanent makeup, or
tanning services.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BASEMENT. A portion of a structure that is partly or wholly below
grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height
measurement where more than one-half of its height is above grade.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BEDROOM. Any separate room normally used for sleeping purposes, whether
designated as a bedroom or as a den, study, library, bonus room, media room,
or other similar term, specifically excluding dining room, living room,
kitchen, hall, and bathroom.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION.  The incorporation of labor and material
within the foundation of the building or buildings.



   BERM or BERMING.  A mound of earth or series of connected mounds that
are artificially graded and created to form a small topographic feature for
purposes of aesthetic enhancement, sound attenuation, landscape interest, or
any combination thereof.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PLAN (BMP).  Any program, technology, process, siting,
criteria, operational methods, measures, or engineered systems, which when
implemented prevent, control, remove or reduce pollution to the maximum
extent practicable.



   BILLBOARD.  Any sign or advertising structure used as an outdoor
display for advertising which does not principally pertain to the business or
activity on the premises where said sign or advertising structure is located.



   BILLIARD HALL. Any place of business where any of several games are
played on a table by driving small balls against one another or into pockets
with a cue. Also known as a pool hall.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BIOSWALES. Open channels possessing a dense cover of grasses and other
herbaceous plants through which runoff is directed during storm events. Above
ground plant parts (stems, leaves, and stolons) retard flow and thereby
encourage particulates and their associated pollutants to settle.  The
pollutants are then incorporated into the soil where they may be immobilized
and/or decomposed.



   BLOCK (FRONTAGE).  The properties abutting on one (1) side of a street
and lying between the nearest two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets,
or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way,
unsubdivided land or watercourse.



   BLUEPRINTING SHOPS. See BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BOARDING HOUSES.  A dwelling structure, or part thereof, that has no
more than one (1) dining room and in which, for compensation, three (3) or
more rooms are rented and meals are provided by the week or month.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BOOK STORES. See RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BORROW.  Earth material acquired from an off- site location for the
use in grading on a site.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   BORROW PIT.  Any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel or
other material is removed by excavation or otherwise below the grade of
surrounding land for any purpose other than that necessary and incidental to
grading or to building construction or operation on the premises.



   BUFFER. Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or a
combination of these or similar elements, used to physically and visually
separate a more intense use from a less intense use in order to mitigate the
negative impacts of the more intense use (e.g., dust, glare, light, noise,
odor, etc.). An appropriate buffer may vary depending on uses, districts,
size, etc.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BUILDING or PARCEL COVERAGE.  See SITE COVERAGE.  (Am. Ord. 1089,
passed 3-7-06)



   BUILDING CODE, ELECTRICAL CODE, and FIRE CODE. The following documents
are adopted by reference and as may be amended from time to time, as the
building codes of the City of Brea, one (1)  copy of each which is on file
in the office of the City Clerk:



      1.   Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 edition;



      2.   Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, with appendices,
part 2, volumes I, II, and Ill. (Also known as the 2001 California Building
Code);



      3.   Uniform Building Code Standards, 1997 edition. (Also
known as the 2001 California Building Standards Code);



      4.   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,
1997 edition;



      5.   Uniform Housing Code, 1997 edition; and



      6.   Uniform Mechanical Code, 2000 edition, with appendices.
(Also known as the 2001 California Mechanical Code).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BUILDING FRONTAGE. That side of a structure containing the main
entrance for pedestrian entrance and exit. If more than one (1) main entrance
exists, the entrance that more nearly faces, or is oriented to, the street of
highest classification as portrayed in the Circulation Element of the General
Plan, shall be considered the building frontage. If all streets are of the
same classification, the side of the structure with the smallest horizontal
lineal dimension containing a main entrance shall be considered the building
frontage.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or the deck line of a mansard roof or to
the highest point of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof, but exclusive
of air conditioners, chimneys, vents, or other incidental appurtenances.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BUILDING LINE.  A line on private property, established by ordinance
which regulates the location of buildings and/or structures as they relate to
the rights-of-way of alleys, streets, highways, railways and drainage
channels.



   BUILDING, MAIN.  A building within which is conducted the principal
use permitted on the lot, as provided by this title.



   BUILDING SITE.  The ground area of a building or buildings, together
with all open spaces, as required by this title.



   BUS SHELTERS. Any structure located in the public right-of-way that
covers or contains bus benches and is designed primarily for the protection
and convenience of bus passengers.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES. Establishments primarily within structures,
providing other businesses with services including maintenance, repair, and
service, testing, rental, etc., also includes:



      1.   Blueprinting services.



      2.   Business equipment repair services (except vehicle
repair).



      3.   Commercial art and design (production).



      4.   Computer-related services (rental, repair).



      5.   Copying, quick printing, and blueprinting services.



      6.   Equipment rental businesses within structures.



      7.   Film processing laboratories.



      8.   Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on
the client sitemail advertising services (reproduction and shipping).



      9.   Other "heavy service" business services.



      10.   Outdoor advertising services.



      11.   Photocopying/desktop facilities.



      12.   Photo developing/finishing/printing.



      13.   Protective services (other than office related).



      14.   Soils and materials testing laboratories.



      15.   Window cleaning.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA).  Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§
21000 et seq. requires that state, regional, county, and local agencies to
conduct environmental review for any discretionary activity proposed to be
carried out or approved by those agencies.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CANDY SHOPS/CONFECTIONERS. A retail business where candy, and other
similar sweets are offered for retail sale from the site, primarily for
off-site consumption. See RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CARETAKER/EMPLOYEE HOUSING. Living quarters, which shall not be rented,
located on the same premises with the main use, and occupied for the sole use
of caretakers/employees of the main use.



   CARPORT.  An accessory use consisting of an open-sided, roofed
structure, whether attached to or detached from a structure, established for
the parking of motor vehicles.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-14-70; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CATERING SERVICES. An establishment that prepares and delivers food and
beverages for off-site consumption. A catering service may contain kitchen
facilities and may also provide dining supplies (e.g., beverage dispensers,
place settings, and tablecloths).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CHECK CASHING. A business that serves only to exchange cash or money
orders for checks from a third party.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES.  Facilities that provide care and
supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four (24)
hours. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to
be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services:



      1.   CHILD DAY CARE HOMES, LARGE. A day care facility located
in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care
and supervision for nine (9) to fourteen (14) children. Children under the
age of ten (10) years who reside in the home count as children served by the
day care facility.



      2.   CHILD DAY CARE HOMES, SMALL. A day care facility located
in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care
and supervision for eight (8) or fewer children. Children under the age of
ten (10) years who reside in the home count as children served by the day
care facility.



      3.   COMMERCIAL DAY CARE CENTERS. A commercial or non-profit
child day care facility with a capacity of more than twelve (12) children
(unless licensed as a large family day care home allowing up to fourteen
(14)  children). Day care centers include day nurseries, extended day care
facilities, infant centers, nursery schools, and preschools. This type of
facility provides non-medical care, on a less than twenty-four (24)-hour
basis, to persons under eighteen (18) years of age in need of personal
services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities
of daily living or for the protection of the individual. These may be
operated in conjunction with a business, school, or religious facility, or as
an independent land use.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CHURCH.  See PLACES OF WORSHIP.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CITY. The City of Brea, referred to in this Zoning Code as the "City."



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CITY COUNCIL. The Brea City Council, referred to in this Zoning Code as
the "Council."



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CLUBS OR LODGES. An association of people organized for some common,
non-profit purpose to pursue common activities, goals, or interests and
usually. characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of dues,
regular meetings, a constitution, and by-laws.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   COMMERCIAL KENNEL.  Any lot or premise in a commercial or industrial
zone in which four (4) or more dogs, or four (4) or more cats, or six (6)
other small household pets, or any combination thereof, at least four (4)
months-of-age, are kept, boarded or trained, whether in special buildings or
runaways.



(Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92)



   COMMERCIAL TRADE SCHOOLS.  Business, secretarial, and vocational
schools offering specialized trade and commercial courses. Includes
specialized non-degree granting schools offering subjects including: art,
ballet and other dance, drama, driver education, language, and music. Also
includes seminaries and other facilities exclusively engaged in training for
religious ministries; and establishments furnishing educational courses by
mail. Facilities, institutions, and conference centers are included that
offer specialized programs in personal growth and development (including
arts, communications, environmental awareness, fitness, and management, as
examples).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle classified by the State of California
as a commercial vehicle in compliance with Cal. Vehicle Code § 260 and
vehicles that have a gross vehicle weight of more than twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds. 



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 3-21-17)



   COMMON PROPERTY.  A parcel or parcels of land, together with the
improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the owners
and occupants of the individual building sites in a Planned Unit Development.



   COMMUNICATION ANTENNA.  Any type of apparatus or device that is
designed for the purpose of receiving or transmitting radio waves,
microwaves, and television signals.



(Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94)



   COMMUNITY/CULTURAL CENTERS. Multi-purpose meeting and recreational
facilities typically consisting of one (1) or more meeting or multi-purpose
rooms, kitchen, and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for
use by various groups for activities including dances, meetings, parties,
receptions, etc.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   COMMUNITY/RECREATIONAL CENTERS. See COMMUNITY/CULTURAL CENTERS.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   COMMUNITY CARE FACILITIES. Any facility or place which is maintained
and operated to provide nonmedical adult day care, day treatment, foster
family agency services for adults, and residential care, including, but not
limited to, abused or neglected people, mentally impaired, mentally
incompetent persons, physically handicapped, and substance abusers. This use
includes adult day care facilities, community treatment facilities, day
treatment facilities, residential facilities, social rehabilitation
facilities, shelters for battered women, substance abuse treatment facilities
and social day care facilities.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   COMPLETELY ENCLOSED STRUCTURE.  A building enclosed by a permanent
roof and by solid exterior walls pierced only by windows and customary
entrances and exit doors.



   CONDITIONAL USE. A use or occupancy of a structure, or a use of land,
allowed within a zoning district subject to conditions and standards for the
location or operation of the use as specified in this Zoning Code and
authorized by the Council.



(Ord.1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued by the applicable review
authority allowing a use to be carried out in a particular zoning district
that is not a use permitted by right. See § 20.408.030 (Conditional Use
Permits).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CONDOMINIUMS. As defined by Cal. Civ. Code § 951(f), a development
where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled
with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are
described on a recorded final map or parcel map.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION. The development of land and existing structures
as a condominium, regardless of the present or prior use of the land or
structures, and regardless of whether substantial improvements have been made
to the structures.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CONTAINER. A bin, used either for nonresidential or private residential
purposes, provided by an approved solid waste collector for the accumulation
and collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, and green waste from any
premises in the city.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CONTOUR.  A line drawn on a plan which connects all points of equal
elevation.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   CONTOUR GRADING.  Similar to conventional grading except the slopes
are curvilinear (in plan) rather than linear, the gradients are unvarying,
and the profiles are planer.  Transition zones and slope intersections
generally have some rounding applied resulting in pad configurations that are
mildly curvilinear.  (Please see Illustration 1 in the Appendix following
this chapter.)  (Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   CONVALESCENT/REST HOMES. Also known as nursing homes, these are
facilities licensed by the California State Department of Health Services.
These facilities house one (1) or more individuals in a single room with
bathroom facilities and provide intensive medical and nursing care, including
twenty-four (24)-hour availability of licensed nursing personnel. Residents
are often convalescing from serious illness or surgery and require continuous
observation and medical supervision, or will reside in the facility as a
long-term resident. Does not include residential care facilities.



(Ord. 581, passed 11-18-75; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CONVENIENCE STORES. See MINI-MARKETS.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   CONVENTIONAL GRADING.  Grading characterized by essentially linear (in
plan), planar slopes surfaces with unvarying gradients and angular-slope
intersections resulting in pad configurations that are rectangular and
uncommonly found in natural slopes.  (Please see Illustration 2 in the
Appendix following this chapter.) (Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   CORNER CUT-OFF.  The provision for maintenance of adequate and safe
visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all intersections of
streets, alleys, or private driveways.



   COUNTY MEDIAN INCOME.  The mid-point of all household incomes within
Orange County as established yearly by the State Department of Housing and
Community Development.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



   COVERAGE. See BUILDING or PARCEL COVERAGE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   COURT.  An open unoccupied space, other than a yard on the same lot
with a building or buildings and bounded on three (3) or more sides by such
building and/or buildings.



(Ord. 708, passed 1-20-81)



   CRIB WALL.  Soil retention wall system composed of concrete material
in a cross-hatch pattern with rectangular openings for plants to grow.



   CUSTOM LOT.  A lot that contains at least ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of pad and on which a custom-designed structure will be built.



   CUT.  A portion of land surface or areas from which the earth has been
removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground
surface or excavating surface.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   CUT AND FILL.  The excavating of earth material in one (1) place and
depositing of it as fill in an adjacent place.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   CYBER CAFES.  See ARCADES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DANCE STUDIOS. Any facility in which classes are offered and held on a
regular basis that teach the techniques of any dance, aerobic routine,
martial art, or other similar activity for compensation. The use may include
facilities for the occasional recital performance of the classes for persons
enrolled in the class.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DANCING AND LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. A commercial facility where patrons
come to dance to live or recorded music or simply enjoy entertainment
performed by live entertainers.



   DAY CARE CENTERS. See CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DAYLIGHT LINE.  The line between finished grade and natural terrain
drawn by connecting points where proposed contours meet existing contours.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   DEDICATION. The turning over by an owner or developer of private land
for public use, and the acceptance of land for the stated use by the
governmental agency having jurisdiction over the public function for which it
will be used. Dedications for roads, parks, school sites, or other public
uses often are made conditions for approval of a development by the city.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DEFENSIBLE SPACE. The area between a structure and a potential oncoming
wildfire where the vegetation has been modified to reduce the wildfire threat
and which provides an opportunity to effectively defend the structure.  This
is also known as SURVIVABLE SPACE.



   DENSITY. The total number of permanent residential dwelling units for
each acre of land, exclusive of all existing public streets and rights-of-way.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DENSITY BONUSES.  As defined by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65915 et seq., an
increased residential density of at least twenty-five percent (25%) over the
maximum authorized density which is granted to an owner/developer of a
housing project agreeing to construct a prescribed percentage of very low
and/or low income dwelling units. See Chapter 20.32 (Affordable Housing
Requirements and Incentives).



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DEPARTMENT. The City of Brea Department of Development Services,
referred to in this Zoning Code as the "Department."



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DESIGNATED HISTORIC RESOURCES.  Resources within the city limits that
have special historic, cultural, aesthetic, or architectural character,
interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or history of the
city, region, state, or nation and that have been nominated and designated
pursuant to Chapter 20.60 of this title, or listed in the California State
Historic Landmarks, or in the National Register of Historic Places.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



   DETACHED UNIT.  A dwelling that is not connected or any way attached
to any other dwelling unit.



   DETENTION BASINS.  A basin for the temporary storage of stormwater in
a best management practice, which is used to control the peak discharge
rates, and which provides gravity settling of pollutants.



   DEVELOPER.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association
who proposed to develop or subdivide real property for oneself or others.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS. An agreement duly entered into in compliance
with state law (Cal. Gov't Code §§  65864 et seq.). See Chapter 20.66
(Development Agreements).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. A project in which one or more lots or parcels of
land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex
of uses, units, or structures including, planned development and/or cluster
development for residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open
space, and/or mixed uses.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DIRECTOR..  The Community Development Director.  Where this staff
title is no longer used by the city, the staff position most closely
associated with this position, as determined by the City Manager, shall be
the designated authority. 



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 3-21-17)



   DOMESTICATED ANIMAL. Any animal customarily kept by humans as household
pets (e.g., dogs, cats, birds, rabbits, hamsters, mice, turtles, etc.). Does
not include farm animal or wild animal.



   DRIP LINE.  Area around the tree trunk that generally includes the
spread of the tree branches.  It also may refer to that area around a
structure that is beneath the roof overhang.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT or REFRESHMENT STAND.  Any place or premises used
for sale, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments or beverages which may
be eaten in automobiles on the premises and including those establishments
where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food,
refreshments or beverages on the premises.



   DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT.  Any place or premises serving food,
refreshments or beverages designed with a drive-up window such that customers
do not have to exit their motor vehicles in order to purchase same.



(Ord. 635, passed 10-4-77)



   DRIVEWAY. A private roadway or access way providing direct vehicular
access to an approved garage, parking lot, or parking space. A driveway shall
not count as open space.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DROUGHT-TOLERANT PLANT MATERIALS.  Those plants that tolerate heavy
clay to sandy soil with the use of limited supplemental water. These plants
are able to thrive with deep, infrequent watering once their root systems are
established (three (3) to twelve (12) month average time period). These
plants include those that naturally grow in areas of limited natural water
supply (native and non-native plant species) and are adaptable to weather and
soil conditions prevalent in the city.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DRUG STORES. See PHARMACIES/DRUG STORES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DRY CLEANING SERVICE, DROP-OFF ONLY. A business which offers retail
laundry service, at which garments are dropped-off for cleaning but no dry
cleaning services are performed on the premises.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DUPLEXES.  See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DWELLING.  A building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively
for residential occupancy including one (1) family, two (2) family, and
multiple dwellings, but not including hotels, boarding and rooming houses.



   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  A structure, or portion of a structure,
providing occupancy for three (3) or more families living independently of
each other. Also includes: triplexes, fourplexes, townhouse developments
(three (3) or more attached single-family dwellings where no unit is located
over another unit), and senior citizen multi-family housing.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED.  A dwelling unit occupied or
intended for occupancy by only one (1) household which is structurally
connected with at least one (1) other dwelling unit. A single-family dwelling
unit contains only one (1) kitchen.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A detached structure containing no
more than one (1) dwelling unit which, regardless of form of ownership, is
designed and/or used to house not more than one (1) household, including all
domestic employees of the family. A single-family dwelling unit contains only
one (1) kitchen.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A structure containing no more than two (2) 
dwelling units.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   DWELLING UNIT.  A mobile home or structure or portion thereof,
including a manufactured home or portion thereof, which contains eating and
sleeping areas, sanitation as required by the Municipal Code, and one (1) 
kitchen area, and which is designed or used for the shelter or housing of one
(1) or more persons.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   EARTHWORK.  Excavation and embankment of earth.



   EDGE.  The perimeter areas of a development plan.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS, PRIVATE OR PUBLIC. An institution (e.g., a
private or public school, college, or university) accredited by the State
Board of Education to give academic instruction.



      1.   SCHOOLS, SPECIALIZED EDUCATION AND TRAINING. See
COMMERCIAL TRADE SCHOOLS.



      2.   SCHOOLS-K-12.  An institution which offers instructions
in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the
public schools by the State Education Code. Includes elementary, middle,
junior high, and high schools serving kindergarten through 12th grade
students. Pre-schools and child day care are included under the definitions
of CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES.



      3.   UNIVERSITIES/COLLEGES.  Includes community colleges,
public colleges, universities, and technical schools granting associate arts
degrees, certificates, undergraduate, and graduate degrees, and requiring for
admission at least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic
training.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   EFFECTIVE BULK.  The effective visual bulk of a structure when seen
from a distance or from above or below.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   ELECTRICAL CODE.  See BUILDING CODE, ELECTRICAL CODE and FIRE CODE. 
(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ELECTRONIC, RADIO, STEREO, TELEVISION, AND/OR VIDEO EQUIPMENT SALES.
See RETAIL STORE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ELEVATION.  Vertical distance in feet above sea level.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   EMERGENCY SHELTER. A facility that provides immediate and short-term
housing and may offer supplemental services to homeless persons or families
on a first-come first-serve basis where people must vacate the facility each
morning and have no guaranteed bed for the next night. Supplemental services
may include counseling, food, and access to social programs. 



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06; Am. Ord. 1128, passed 10-20-09)



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person employed by a firm, person(s), business,
educational institution, nonprofit agency or corporation, government agency,
or other entity.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   EMPLOYER.  Any person(s), firm, business, educational institution,
government agency, nonprofit agency or corporation, or other entity, and may
either be a property owner or tenant of an applicable development project.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   EMPLOYMENT GENERATION FACTORS.  Refers to factors developed for use by
the jurisdiction for projecting the potential employment of any proposed new
development project.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   EQUIPMENT RENTAL ESTABLISHMENTS. Service establishments which offer a
wide variety of materials and equipment for rent, including business
equipment (e.g., computers, copiers, desks, projectors, etc.) and equipment
and supplies for parties and other social events (e.g., chairs, fountains,
glassware, linens, tables, etc.), all available within an enclosed structure.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   EROSION.  The process by which the soil and rock components of the
earth’s crust are worn away and removed from one place to another by
natural forces such as weathering, solution, and transportation.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   EXCAVATION.  The removal of earth material, including soil and rocks.



   EXPORT.  Excess earth material that is removed from a grading project
and deposited off-site.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   FACE OF CURB.  The location at which the pavement section of a street
ends and curb begins.



   FACILITY(IES).  The total of all buildings, structures, and grounds
that encompass a worksite, at either single or multiple locations, that
comprises or is associated with an applicable development project.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   FAMILY.  One (1) or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, or any residential care facility or
group home, shall be permitted as allowed under state and federal law. See
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT.



(Ord. 1184, passed 9-20-16)



   FENCES. A solid or open barrier other than a wall above ground intended
to enclose or mark a boundary, usually made of posts and wire or wood.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   FILL.  The depositing of soil, rock or other materials by other than
natural means.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.  See BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   FINISH GRADE.  The final elevation of the ground surface after
development, which is in conformance with the approved plans.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   FIRE CODE.  See BUILDING CODE, ELECTRICAL CODE and FIRE CODE.  (Ord.
1089, passed 3-7-06)



   FLOOR AREA, GROSS.  See GROSS FLOOR AREA.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The total gross area of all structures on a
parcel divided by the parcel area (FAR). For the purpose of calculating floor
area, floor area shall:



      1.   Not include carports, elevator shafts, exterior courts,
and garages; and



      2.   Be calculated based on the exterior faces of walls.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   FLORIST SHOPS. Retail establishments primarily engaged in selling cut
flowers, floral arrangements, and potted plants purchased from others. These
establishments customarily prepare the arrangements they sell. See RETAIL
STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   FUEL MODIFICATION ZONE (FMZ).  A fuel modification zone is a wide
strip of land where combustible vegetation has been removed and/or modified
and partially or totally replaced with drought-tolerant, fire-resistive
plants to provide an acceptable level of risk from wildland fires.



   FURNITURE/FURNISHINGS, RENTALS, REPAIR, SALES, AND SERVICE STORES.
Retail stores primarily renting, repairing, and selling: home furnishings
including draperies, floor coverings, furniture, glass and chinaware,
refrigerators, stoves, other household electrical and gas appliances
including televisions and home sound systems and outdoor furniture including
lawn furniture, spas, and hot tubs. Also includes the retail sale of office
furniture and pianos.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   GARAGE.  Any detached accessory building, or an accessory portion of a
principal building enclosed on three (3) sides by permanent walls, having a
roof and a vehicle entrance door, and designed to be used primarily for the
shelter and storage of motor vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of
the principal buildings.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  Any detached accessory building, or an accessory
portion of a principal building enclosed on three (3) sides by permanent
walls, having a roof and a vehicle entrance door, and designed to be used
primarily for the shelter and storage of motor vehicles owned or operated by
the occupants of the principal buildings.



(Ord. 478, passed 12-14-70)



   GARAGES, PUBLIC.  A structure other than a private garage where
vehicles are parked or stored for hire or remuneration.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   GARDEN CENTERS. Commercial agricultural establishments engaged in the
production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover
or outdoors. Includes stores selling these products, nursery stock, lawn and
garden supplies, and commercial scale greenhouses. The sale of house plants
or other nursery products entirely within a structure is also included as an
accessory use under RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE and HARDWARE STORES.
Home greenhouses are included under ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-07-06)



   GENERAL PLAN.  The General Plan of the City of Brea adopted in
compliance with Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65301 et seq. and adopted by the Council.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   GEOGRIDS. Net-shaped, synthetic, polymer-coated fibers that are used to
reinforce earth-fill slope, wall, and base layer construction.  Incorporated
in the base layers of paved or finished surfaces, or in surface layers of
walls and slopes, they provide a stabilizing force within the soil structure
itself.



   GOVERNMENT ENTERPRISES. Facilities owned or operated by a governmental
entity (e.g., city, county, state, or federal government).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   GOVERNOR’S APPEAL BOARD.  A board formed to review the appeal by an
applicant, of an off- site hazardous waste facility land use decision
disapproved by the city or one (1) or more conditions of approval placed on
an approved off-site hazardous waste facility, or an appeal by an interested
person, based solely on the ground that the conditions imposed do not
adequately protect the public health, safety, or welfare.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   GRADE.  The average level of the finished ground surfaces surrounding
a structure.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   GRADING.  To bring an existing surface to a designed form by
excavating, filling, or landforming operations.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   GROCERY STORES.  See RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   GROSS ACREAGE.  See ACREAGE, GROSS.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   GROSS FLOOR AREA.  The area included within the surrounding exterior
finish wall surface of a structure or portion thereof, exclusive of
courtyards.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   GUEST HOUSE.  This term shall mean ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS.  Living
quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises
with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the
premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.



   GUEST ROOM.  A single room with or without bath and without kitchen or
cooking facilities, of permanent type construction, and attached to the main
dwelling or an accessory building, which room is intended and used primarily
for temporary guests of the occupants of the main building on the building
site on which such guest room is located, and not rented or otherwise used as
a separate dwelling.



   HARDSCAPE. Decorative elements that may be combined with landscaping to
satisfy the landscaping requirements of this Zoning Code. HARDSCAPE elements
include, but are not necessarily limited to, natural features (e.g., rock and
stone) and structural features (e.g., art works, benches, fences, fountains,
reflecting pools, screens, swimming pools, and walls) and crushed granite.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   HARDWARE STORES. Retail establishments primarily engaged in selling a
general line of new hardware items (e.g., builder's hardware and tools). May
also offer a general line of new home repair and improvement materials and
supplies (e.g., electrical goods, hardware, housewares, lawn and garden
supplies, lumber, paint, and plumbing goods). The merchandise lines are
normally arranged in separate departments.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of
its quantity, concentration, toxicity, corrosiveness, mutagenicity, or
inflammability, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:



      1.   Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating
reversible illness; or



      2.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or
disposed of, or otherwise managed.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY.  A project undertaken for the purpose of
siting and constructing a new off-site hazardous waste facility, or for the
purpose of significantly expanding or modifying an existing hazardous waste
facility that is being used or operated under a permit, or the granting of an
interim status pursuant to the Cal. Health & Safety Code.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   HEALTH/FITNESS CENTERS. Fitness facilities, gymnasiums, health and
athletic clubs including indoor sauna, spa, or hot tub facilities; handball,
indoor tennis, racquetball, and other indoor sports activities.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   HEALTH AND SAFETY ASSESSMENT.  A technical and environmental
evaluation of a proposed hazardous waste facility, site, and surrounding area
prior to approval of a local permit.  The assessment will consider the
qualities and the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific types
of waste that would be handled.  The assessment will include a hydraulic
evaluation as well as risks due to flooding, earthquakes, and potential water
or air pollution.  It is not intended that the Health and Safety Assessment
duplicate information developed for an environmental impact report or risk
assessments required under local, state, and federal regulations.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   HILLSIDE AREA.  Any property containing slope areas of ten percent
(10%) or greater.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   HISTORIC RESOURCE.  Any improvement listed in the Brea Historic
Resources Register, as established in § 20.60.040.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



   HOME OCCUPATIONS. A clearly accessory commercial activity or business
service conducted in a residential dwelling unit, only by residents of the
unit, in a manner clearly incidental to the residential character of the site
and surrounding neighborhood.



(Ord. 516, passed 7-3-73; Am. Ord. 1025, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 1089,
passed 3-7-06)



   HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL BUILDING ENVELOPES.  The maximum width and
height of a structure based on minimum setback requirements and maximum
building height limitations for the zone within which the project is
located.  These envelopes may be utilized to evaluate visual impacts when
specific architectural plans are not provided for subdivision review.



   HOSPITALS.  An institution, designed within an integrated campus
setting for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness, including
surgery and primary treatment.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   HOTELS.  Guest rooms or suites, provided with or without meals or
kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for overnight or other
temporary lodging. Access to the individual guest rooms is generally from an
interior hallway. Also includes incidental services that are customarily
provided by a hotel, for the convenience of hotel guests (e.g., food service,
recreational facilities, and retail services), public banquet, meeting, and
reception rooms, and accessory guest facilities (e.g., elevators, indoor
athletic facilities, swimming pools, and tennis courts).



(Ord. 776, passed 3-16-82; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   HOUSEHOLD. One (1) or more persons occupying a dwelling.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   HOUSEHOLD PET.  Any domesticated animal normally kept as a pet.



   HYDROZONES.  Areas in an irrigation system that necessitate specific
watering requirements due to plant material type.



(Ord. 932, passed 1-19-93)



   IMMOBILE POPULATIONS.  Schools, hospitals, convalescent homes,
prisons, facilities for the mentally ill, or other similar facilities.



(Ord. 932, passed 1-19-93)



   IMPACT AREA.  Area(s) where natural ground surface is impacted or
disturbed by grading activities.



   IMPERVIOUS.  Land surfaces which do not allow, or minimally allow, the
penetration of water.



   IMPROVEMENT.  Any construction, building, landscaping, or paving
activity which materially adds to the value of a facility, substantially
extends its useful life, or adapts it to new uses. Repairs performed for the
purpose of maintaining a facility in good operating condition but which do
not materially add to the value of a facility or substantially extend its
useful life are not considered improvements.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   IN-LIEU FEE.  An amount of money paid to the city by a developer in
place of construction of the required affordable unit(s).



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



   INDOOR AMUSEMENT/ ENTERTAINMENT/ RECREATION CENTERS. Indoor
establishments providing amusement/entertainment/recreation services for a
fee or admission charge, including: arcades emphasizing coin operated
amusements and/or electronic games; bowling alleys; dance halls, clubs and
ballrooms, and billiard parlors and pool halls, that are principal uses
rather than being subordinate to a bar or restaurant; ice skating, and roller
skating; skateboard ramps, and trampoline centers. Does not include ADULT
BUSINESSES, which are separately defined.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   INSTITUTIONAL USES.  An organizational use of a public character
including charitable, cultural, educational, government, medical, non-profit,
religious, scientific research, social, and sometimes recreational or
entertainment uses.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   INTERESTED PERSONS.  A person who participates in one (1) or more
public meetings or hearings held to consider an application for a conditional
use permit or any land use decision for a project.  Participation includes,
but is not limited to, attendance, submission of questions, or giving oral
and written testimony at a meeting or hearing.



(Ord. 932, passed 1-19-93)



   INTERIOR DECORATING, DRAPERY, DESIGN SHOPS.  Establishments primarily
engaged in planning, designing, and administering projects in interior spaces
to meet the aesthetic and physical needs of people using them, taking into
consideration building codes, floor planning, health and safety regulations,
traffic patterns, and mechanical and electrical needs. This industry also
includes interior decorating consultants engaged exclusively in providing
aesthetic services associated with interior spaces. May also include the sale
of new sewing supplies, draperies, fabrics, patterns, yarns, and other
related accessories.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   INTERMEDIATE SLOPES.  Two to one (2:1) slopes less than ten (10)
vertical feet in height used chiefly for utilitarian purposes and are not
readily visible such as side slopes and buried water tanks.



   INVASIVE SPECIES.  Non-native species whose introduction does or is
likely to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health and
which tend to disrupt natural ecosystems by displacing native species.



   JURISDICTIONAL WETLANDS.  Wetlands that fall under the authority of
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under § 404 of the U.S. Water Act.



   KITCHEN. Any room, all or part of which is designed and/or used for
cooking, refrigeration, storage, and the preparation of food and which
contains any combination of facilities of sufficient size for the preparation
of meals:



      1.   A cooking appliance,



      2.   A refrigeration facility, and



      3.   One (1) or more sinks.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   KNOLL.  A small natural round hill or mound.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   LAND USE DECISION.  A discretionary decision by the city concerning a
project, including, but not limited to, the issuance of a land use permit or
a conditional use permit, the granting of a variance, the subdivision of
property, and the modification of existing property lines.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   LANDFORM GRADING.  Characterized by a variety of shapes including
convex and concave forms that mimic stable natural slopes.  They are
non-linear in plan view, have varying slope gradients, and significant
transition zones between human-made and natural slopes resulting in pad
configurations that are irregular.  (Please see Illustration 3 in the
Appendix following this chapter.)



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   LANDFORM PLANTING.  A landscaping concept which replicates natural
landscape patterns found in hillside conditions including irregular visual
planes when viewed in cross section, propensity for plant groupings in
valleys as opposed to ridges, etc.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   LANDSCAPE AREA.  Part of the property exclusively set aside for living
plant materials and associated non-living ornamental materials such as mulch,
fencing, walls or decorative rock.



(Ord. 932, passed 1-19-93)



   LANDSCAPING. Areas devoted to, or developed and maintained
predominantly with, native or exotic plant materials including lawn, ground
cover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials. Landscaping may also include
small amounts of accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements (e.g.,
hardscape) (e.g., fountains, paved or decorated surfaces, and pools), all of
which are suitably designed, selected, installed, and maintained to enhance a
site.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LANDSCAPING SCREEN.  The planting and continued maintenance of a
compact screen of evergreen shrubbery forming a physical barrier or enclosure
not less than six (6) feet in height, composed of materials selected from the
city’s list of acceptable screen landscaping plant materials.  Minimum
size of materials planted shall be as specified on the city list.  An
adequate irrigation system is required.



   LAUNDROMATS, SELF-SERVICE AND DRY CLEANING, DROP-OFF ONLY.  See DRY
CLEANING SERVICE, DROP-OFF ONLY.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS).  A measure of the operational quality of a
road or intersection ranging from LOS A (best) to LOS F (worst).



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   LIBRARIES. Public or quasi-public facilities including arboretums, art
exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, and libraries,
which are generally non-commercial in nature.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS. A retail activity that is primarily devoted to
the selling of alcoholic beverages as a stand alone bar or tavern, or in
conjunction with a restaurant or nightclub facility, for consumption on the
premises.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LIQUOR STORES. A retail activity that is primarily devoted to the
selling of alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, for consumption off
the premises. A license is required from the California Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LIVE/WORK FACILITIES. An integrated dwelling unit and working space
(e.g., the creation and retail sales of arts and crafts), occupied and
utilized by a single housekeeping unit in a structure that has been modified
or designed to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity
located in a commercial, industrial, or mixed-use zoning district, and which
includes complete kitchen and sanitary facilities in compliance with
applicable building standards and working space reserved for and regularly
used by one or more occupants of the unit.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LOADED STREET.  A street from which a private driveway or driveways
takes direct access.



   LOADING SPACE.  An off-street space or berth that is on the same
parcel as the structure(s) it services; abuts a street, alley, or other
appropriate means of access; and is used for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle that is being loaded or unloaded with merchandise,
materials, or people.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LOCAL ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE (LAC).  A state-required committee of
locally appointed representatives, designed to negotiate with the proponents
of a proposed hazardous waste facility.  The membership, duties, and mission
of the Committee are defined by the California Health and Safety Code.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   LODGE. See CLUBS OR LODGES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LOFFELSTEIN WALLS.  Retaining wall system based on pre-cast concrete
units that stack and interlock by friction to create a gravity style
retaining wall.



   LOT.  A parcel of land, as shown on a subdivision map or Assessor’s
Parcel Map, occupied or intended for occupancy by one (1) main building,
together with any accessory buildings including the open spaces required of
the hillside regulations and having adequate frontage on a public or private
street.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets.  A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a
corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot
lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than
one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).



   LOT, DEPTH.  The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot having frontage on two (2) streets.



   LOT, FRONTAGE.  That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting
on a street except the side dimension of a corner lot.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.



   LOT, KEY.  The first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot whether
or not separated by an alley.



   LOT, REVERSED CORNER.  A corner lot, the side line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the lots to its rear;
whether across an alley or not.



   LOT, THROUGH.  A lot having a frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel dedicated streets, not including a corner or reversed
corner lot.



   LOT, WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front
and rear lot lines.



   LOT AREA.  The computed area contained within the lot lines.  If
there is a recorded subdivision or parcel map, LOT LINES as defined herein
shall be located as shown thereon.



(Ord. 494, passed 10-26-72)



   LOT LINE or PROPERTY LINE. Any recorded boundary of a parcel. Types of
lot lines are as follows.



      1. FRONT LOT LINE. The line separating the narrowest street
frontage of the parcel from the street right-of-way, except in those cases
where the subdivision or parcel map specifies another line as the front lot
line. On through lots or corner lots, the Director shall determine which
property line is the front lot line.



      2.   INTERIOR OR SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than the
front or rear lot lines. 



      3.   REAR LOT LINE.  The lot line opposite and most distant
from the front lot line; or in the case of an irregularly shaped parcel, a
straight line not less than ten (10) feet long entirely within the parcel and
most nearly parallel to, and at the maximum distance from, the front lot line.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   LOW-TO-MODERATE INCOME HOUSING.  A dwelling unit affordable to
households whose gross income is less than one hundred twenty percent (120%)
of the county median income adjusted for family size.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



   LOW WATER FLOW IRRIGATION. A system of watering plant material using
drip/trickle, reduced water emitting devices, low precipitation heads, soaker
lines, or other similar mechanisms that restricts the amount of water in
gallons per minute to allow for deep percolation into the soil. The low water
flow irrigation system, combined with watering practices outlined in this
Zoning Code, will reduce water loss through evaporation, wind drift, and
overwatering.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MAJOR ALTERATION TO HISTORIC STRUCTURE(S).  Any change or modification
to the character-defining, significant physical feature, or visual quality of
historic properties as established in § 20.60.040 of this title, such as
changes to the exterior of historic structure(s) or changes to architectural
details or visual characteristics of the historic structure(s), the cost of
which is more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the building valuation prior
to alteration as determined by the City Building and Safety Manager.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



   MANUFACTURED SLOPE.  Human-made slope created by grading that consists
wholly of cut or filled material.



   MASS GRADING.  The movement of large quantities of earth over large
areas.  Disruption of the majority of the on-site surface terrain is common
and often results in a successive pad/terrace configuration.  Modification
or elimination of natural landforms may result.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   MASSAGE.  Any method of treating the external parts of the human body
for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes by means of pressure on or
friction against; or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding; or
stimulating the external parts of the human body, with or without the aid of
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; or with or without
supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations.



(Ord. 890, passed 6-19-90)



   MASSAGE THERAPY. Therapeutic (non-sexual) rubbing or kneading of parts
of non-specified anatomical areas of the body to aid circulation or to relax
muscles, provided by a licensed professional.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MEAT MARKETS OR DELICATESSENS. See RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MEDICALSERVICES, CLINICS/OFFICES.  Facilities primarily engaged in
furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical, and other personal
health services. These include: medical, dental, optical, and psychiatric
offices (counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists
are included under OFFICES); out-patient care facilities; emergency room
services; and allied health services. Associations or groups primarily
engaged in providing medical or other health services to members are included.



(Ord. 689, passed 1-15-80; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MEDICAL SERVICES, LABORATORIES. Facilities primarily engaged in
furnishing medical and dental laboratory services.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MEETING HALLS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE. A facility for public or private
meetings, not including sports or other commercial entertainment facilities,
or convention centers. Includes clubs, lodges, and private meeting halls,
community centers, and places of worship (e.g., churches, mosques,
synagogues, etc.), civic and private auditoriums, grange halls, union halls,
etc. Related accessory on-site facilities (e.g., day care centers and
schools) are separately defined, and separately regulated by Article 2
(Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses, and Zoning District Standards).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION FACILITIES. Permanent, headquarters-type, and
meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the
promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for business
associations; civic, social, and fraternal organizations; labor unions and
similar organizations; political organizations; professional membership
organizations; other membership organizations.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MINI-MARKETS. A high-volume retail facility that sells a variety of
products for consumption off-premises, including but not limited to alcoholic
beverages, food and beverages, household goods, magazines, snacks, and
accessory motor vehicle supplies. May include the incidental sale of food
items on site. These stores may be part of a service station or an
independent facility. See RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MINIMAL GRADING.  Grading that is limited to the individual flat pad
areas for residential building sites, with minimal cut and fill. Grading
shall be limited to only the required building area and adjoining
infrastructure.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   MINOR ALTERATION TO HISTORIC STRUCTURE(S).  Any change or modification
to the character-defining, significant physical feature, or visual quality of
historic properties as established in § 20.60.040 of this title, such as
changes to the exterior of the historic structure(s) or changes to
architectural details or visual characteristics of the historic structure(s),
the cost of which does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of building
valuation prior to alteration as determined by the City Building and Safety
Manager.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



   MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS.  A project that combines both commercial
(e.g., retail, office, etc.) and residential uses, where the residential
component is generally located either above or behind the commercial portion
of the development.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MOBILE HOME.  A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections,
designed and equipped to contain not more than two (2) dwelling units to be
used with or without a foundation system.  MOBILE HOME does not include a
recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing.



(Ord. 699, passed 7-1-80)



   MORATORIUM. A temporary halting or severe restriction on specified
development activities.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MOTELS.  Guest rooms or suites, provided with or without meals or
kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for overnight or other
temporary lodging. Access to the individual guest rooms is generally from an
exterior walkway. Also includes accessory guest facilities (including
accessory retail uses, elevators, indoor athletic facilities, swimming pools,
and tennis courts).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS AND SUPPLIES. Retail stores that sell new motor
vehicle parts, tires, and accessories. Does not include minor vehicle
maintenance or parts installation.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MOTOR VEHICLES. A vehicle bearing a current license plate used
primarily for transporting people on streets and highways. Does not include
recreational vehicles or other equipment or vehicles used primarily for
purposes other than transporting people on streets and highways.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MULCH. Shredded or chipped wood from tree branches, tree trunks,
uncontaminated wood products, or lumber. This material is often mixed with
leaves and grass clippings for optimal effect.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06) 



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS. See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MULTI-TENANT. More than one (1) tenant occupying a site or structure
where each tenant is operating under a separate lease agreement with the
property owner.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MUNICIPAL CODE. The City of Brea Municipal Code and all amendments.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MUSEUMS. Public or semi-public facilities including aquariums,
arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits,
museums, and planetariums, which are generally non-commercial in nature.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   MUSIC (RECORD) STORES.  See RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   NATIVE PLANTS.  Plant species occurring naturally and native to a
given ecosystem or plant community.



   NATURAL SLOPE.  A slope that is not man-made.  A NATURAL SLOPE may
retain the natural vegetation during adjacent grading operations or it may be
partially or completely removed and replanted.  A NATURAL SLOPE is a slope
that has not been graded nor the surface manufactured in any manner other
than by natural forces.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   NATURAL VEGETATION.  Plant materials which are indigenous to the area
and exist on a site prior to any construction or earth moving activity.



   NET ACREAGE.  See ACREAGE, NET.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   NIGHTCLUBS. Commercial establishments, with or without food service,
providing opportunities for dancing, music, and other related forms of
entertainment, including cabarets. These establishments may be part of a
restaurant, where the food service is subordinate to the dancing and
entertainment. Does not include adult entertainment.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL.  Any lot or premise in a residential zone in
which four (4) or more dogs, or four (4) or more cats, or six (6) other small
household pets, or any combination thereof, at least four (4) months of age,
are kept, boarded or trained, within or without special buildings or runaways.



(Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92)



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING.  A building or structure or portion thereof
which was designed, and erected or structurally altered prior to the
effective date of these regulations or any subsequent amendments thereto, for
a use which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which
it is located but which was a legally permitted use at the time of initial
construction.



   NONCONFORMING LOT.  A legal parcel of land having less area, frontage,
or dimensions than required in the zone in which it is located.



   NONCONFORMING PARCEL. Any subdivision of land that was lawfully
established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the
time the parcel was subdivided, but which, due to a subsequently enacted
ordinance or law, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and
standards of the zoning district in which the property is located. See
Chapter 20.72 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any structure or improvement that was lawfully
established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the
time it was erected, but which, due to a subsequently enacted ordinance or
law, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of
the zoning district in which it is located. See Chapter 20.72 (Nonconforming
Uses, Structures, and Parcels).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   NONCONFORMING USE.  A use or activity that was lawfully established
and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time it was
undertaken, but which, due to a subsequently enacted ordinance or law, no
longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of the
zoning district in which the use is located. See Chapter 20.72 (Nonconforming
Uses, Structures, and Parcels).



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   NOXIOUS WEEDS.  Plant species designated as such by the Secretary of
Agriculture, Secretary of the Interior, or by state law or regulation. 
Generally, NOXIOUS WEEDS will possess one (1) or more of the characteristics
of being aggressive and difficult to manage, parasitic, a carrier or host of
serious insects or disease.  Other characteristics of NOXIOUS WEEDS are
plants that are non-native, or new, to or not common to the United States or
parts thereof.  NOXIOUS WEED species have extensive and costly impacts on
human health, safety, commerce, recreation, and general well-being.  NOXIOUS
WEEDS can adversely affect food production, wilderness values, wildlife
habitat, visual quality, forage production, reforestation, recreational
opportunities, natural wildfire regimes, and land values.



   NURSERY SCHOOL.  A school providing instruction and/or day care for
pre-elementary school age children.



   NURSING HOME.  See RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY.



   OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF.  A discontinuance of an existing use and the
substitution therefor of a use of a different kind or class.



   OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY.  Any structures, other
appurtenances and improvements on the land, and all contiguous land serving
more than one (1) producer of hazardous waste and used for treatment,
transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal, or recycling of hazardous
waste including, but not limited to:



      1.   Incineration facility (i.e., rotary kiln, fluid bed,
etc.);



      2.   Residual repository (receives only residuals from
hazardous waste treatment facilities);



      3.   Stabilization/solidification facilities;



      4.   Chemical oxidation facilities;



      5.   Neutralization/precipitation facilities; or



      6.   Transfer/storage facilities.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   OFFICES, ADMINISTRATIVE OR EXECUTIVE. Offices of a business or
industrial establishment, including a corporate headquarters.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   OFFICES, PROFESSIONAL.



      1.   Professional or government offices including:



         a.   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services.



         b.   Advertising agencies.



         c.   Architectural, engineering, planning, and surveying
services.



         d.   Attorneys/law offices.



         e.   Clerical, secretarial, stenographic, and word
processing services.



         f.   Counseling services.



         g.   Court reporting services.



         h.   Data processing and computer services.



         i.   Detective agencies and similar services.



         j.   Educational, scientific, and research organizations.



         k.   Employment.



         l.   Escrow.



         m.   Insurance agencies.



         n.   Governmental offices including agency and
administrative office facilities.



         o.   Management, public relations, and consulting
services philanthropic enterprises.



         p.   Philanthropic enterprises.



         q.   Photography and commercial art studios.



         r.   Political or philanthropic headquarters.



         s.   Public services/utilities.



         t.   Real estate agent/broker services.



         u.   Travel agencies.



         v.   Writers and artists offices outside the home.



         w.   Similar use as determined by the Director.



      2.   Does not include: medical offices, which are allowed
under MEDICAL SERVICES,  CLINICS/ OFFICES that are incidental and accessory
to another business or sales activity that is the principal use. Incidental
offices that are customarily accessory to another use are allowed in any
non-residential zoning district as part of an approved principal use.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   OPEN SPACE.  The area of a lot which is not occupied by building
coverage, parking lot or driveway.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON.  An outdoor area (does not include
driveways/storage areas/walkways) within a development project that is not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, but is designed and intended
for the common use or enjoyment of all residents/tenants of the development
project.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   OPEN SPACE, IMPROVED.  Open space that is developed for active
recreational use with improvements such as, but not limited to, sports fields
or turf area, sports courts, concrete or other decking area, playgrounds, and
enclosed recreation buildings, all either for general public use or as common
open space for a development project.



   OPEN SPACE, NATURAL.  Open space or area that is permanently set aside
for public or private use and is not nor will be developed or improved in any
manner beyond the establishment of trails and viewing areas.  The space may
be used for passive recreation or may be reserved to protect or buffer
natural areas.



   OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE. An outdoor area (does not include
driveways/storage areas/walkways) within a development project that is
reserved for use by the residents/tenants of a specific unit or portion of
the site.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC. Any parcel or area of land or water set aside,
dedicated, designated, or reserved for public use or enjoyment.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE.  An area on the lot that is kept free and clear
of all buildings and is intended for outdoor activities.



   OUTDOOR RETAIL SALES AND ACTIVITIES. Permanent outdoor sales and rental
establishments including auction yards, flea markets, lumber and other
material sales yards, newsstands, outdoor facilities for the sale or rental
of vehicles/equipments, and other uses where the business is not conducted
entirely within an enclosed structure.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT, OR OVERLAY ZONE. A supplementary zoning
designation that is applied to property in addition to a primary or base
zoning district to highlight special regulations applicable to properties
within the overlay district.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   OWNER/DEVELOPER/BUILDER. An individual, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek
development of land.



   PAD.  The flat buildable area of a lot that does not exceed two
percent (2%) crossfall in any direction and does not include any slopes on
which a building will be sited.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   PAD EDGE.  That component of a graded pad area defined by either the
toe or top of a slope, whether artificially created or existing as a natural
slope.



   PARCEL.



      1.   A recorded lot or parcel of land under single ownership,
that:



         a.   Abuts at least one public street (with a minimum of
twenty (20) feet of frontage) or any numbered or otherwise designated parcel
of land; and



         b.   Was lawfully created as required by the Subdivision
Map Act and city ordinances, including this Zoning Code, and is shown on:



            (1)    A recorded tract map,



            (2)   A record of survey map recorded in
compliance with an approved division of land, or



            (3)   A parcel map.



      2.   Types of parcels include the following.



         a.   CORNER PARCEL. A lot or parcel of land abutting
upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon two (2) parts of
the same street forming an interior angle of not more than one hundred
thirty-five (135) degrees. If the intersection angle is more than one hundred
thirty-five (135) degrees, the parcel is considered an interior parcel.



         b.   CUL-DE-SAC PARCEL. A parcel located at any position
on the circular portion of a cul-de-sac street, which is a street with a
single common ingress and egress and with a vehicular turnaround.



         c.   FLAG PARCEL. A parcel having access from the
building site to a public street by means of a narrow private right-of-way
strip that is owned in fee.



         d.   INTERIOR PARCEL. A parcel other than a corner
parcel or a reverse corner parcel. Also a parcel abutting only one street.



         e.   KEY PARCEL. An interior parcel, the front of which
adjoins the side property line of a corner parcel.



         f.   REVERSE CORNER PARCEL. A corner parcel in which the
rear lot line abuts the side lot line of the nearest parcel to its rear.



         g.   THROUGH PARCEL. A parcel that fronts upon two (2)
streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the parcel.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARCEL, SUBSTANDARD. Any parcel that does not meet the minimum
dimensions required by the Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARCEL AREA. See ACREAGE, GROSS and ACREAGE, NET.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARCEL COVERAGE.  See SITE COVERAGE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARCEL DEPTH. The average distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARCEL FRONTAGE. The length of the defined front lot line measured at
the street right-of-way line.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARCEL MAP. The subdivision map described by the Subdivision Map Act,
Article 3, Chapter 2, which is required to complete a subdivision of four or
fewer parcels. See also Chapters 18.04 et seq.



(Subdivisions) of the Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARCEL WIDTH. The average linear distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to the line measuring parcel depth. The width should
be measured at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARKING LOTS/STRUCTURES. Service establishments, either publicly or
privately owned, used for: the storage of operative cars, buses, recreational
vehicles, trucks, vans, and other motor vehicles for clients. Includes day
use commercial garages, parking lots and structures, except when accessory to
a primary use.  (All principal uses are considered to include any customer
or public use off-street parking required by the Zoning Code.) Also includes
sites where vehicles are stored for rental or leasing.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARKING SPACE.  A permanent area for the parking of one (1) motor
vehicle designed to meet the minimum dimensions and access requirements
established by the city.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARKING SPACE, COVERED. A parking space located within a carport,
parking structure, or similar structure that provides protection from the
elements in the form of a roof but that does not provide full enclosure or a
closing and locking door.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARKING SPACE, GARAGE. A parking space provided within an enclosed
structure, with a closing and locking door, whose primary use is the storage
of motor vehicles.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. A permanent parking space designed to city
standards and not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARKING SPACE, ON-STREET. A parking space designed to city standards
and located on a dedicated street right-of-way.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARKING SPACE, OPEN. A parking space, designed to city standards and
located in a designated area , that does not provide any protection from the
elements in the form of a carport, parking structure, garage, or other
structure.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARKS, PUBLIC.  Includes public parks, play lots, playgrounds, and
non-professional/ non- commercial athletic fields, including park and
playground equipment, accessory structures, and facilities.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PARTY.  Twelve (12) or more persons meeting together for social,
recreational or amusement purposes.



(Ord. 926, passed 8-18-92)



   PEAK PERIOD.  Those hours of the business day between 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday, which is the priority period for
reducing work-related vehicle trips.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   PERMIT.  A ministerial or discretionary permit, license, certificate,
or other use entitlement of the city or other permits required by enforcement
agencies that may be affected by a particular project, i.e., South Coast Air
Quality Management District, Regional Water Quality Control Board, the State
of California Office of Permit Assistance.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   PERMITTED USE. Any use of land identified by Division 2 (Zoning
Districts, Allowable Land Uses, and Zoning District Standards) as being
allowed in a particular zoning district and subject to the restrictions
applicable to that zoning district.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PERSONAL SERVICES, GENERAL.



      1.   Establishments providing non-medical services as a
primary use, including:



         a.   Consumer products repair.



         b.   Home electronics and small appliance repair.



         c.   Laundromats (self-service laundries).



         d.   Nail salons.



         e.   Shoe repair shops, spas and hot tubs.



         f.   Tailor shops.



         g.   Tanning salons.



         h.   Ticket agencies.



         i.   Similar use as determined by the Director.



      2.   These uses may also include accessory retail sales of
products related to the services provided. These uses do not include body
piercing, psychic readers, tattoo parlors, or any of the other uses listed
under PERSONAL SERVICES, LIMITED.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PERSONAL SERVICES, LIMITED. Establishments providing non-medical
services of a very limited and restricted nature as a primary use, including
body piercing/tattoo and massage parlors.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PET STORES. See RETAIL STORE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PHARMACIES/DRUG STORES. A retail store where the primary business is
the filling of medical prescriptions by a licensed pharmacist. Also includes
the sale of over-the-counter medicines, medical devices, and supplies, but
where non-medical products (e.g., candy, cards, cosmetics, and other
miscellaneous products) are also sold.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PHILANTHROPIC ENTERPRISES. See  OFFICES, PROFESSIONAL.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PHOTOCOPYING/DESKTOP FACILITIES. See BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PHOTO DEVELOPING/PRINTING SHOPS. See BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO/SUPPLY SHOPS. See RETAIL STORE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PLACES OF WORSHIP.  Facilities operated by religious organizations for
worship, or the promotion of religious activities, including churches,
mosques, synagogues, temples, etc., and religious schools; and accessory uses
(e.g., convent, monastery, nursery, and parsonage) on the same site,
including living quarters for ministers and staff, and child day care
facilities where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for
the religious facility itself. Other establishments maintained by religious
organizations, including full-time educational institutions, hospitals, and
other potentially related operations (e.g., a recreational camp) are
classified according to their respective land use activities.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PLAN REVIEW.  The procedure by which responsible city departments
review development proposals for conformity with applicable provisions of the
city code, and all requirements of law.



(Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



   PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS. Two (2) or more dwelling units,
including dwelling units in developments commonly known as town or
row-housing, condominiums and cluster housing, together with related land and
structures, planned and developed as a whole single development operation or
a programmed series of operations in compliance with detailed, comprehensive
plans encompassing a circulation pattern and parking facilities, open space,
recreational areas, utilities, and building sites, together with a program
for provisions, operation, and maintenance of all areas, facilities,
improvements, and services provided for common use of the residents within
the development.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A real estate development which has both
individual building sites and common property and is designed, organized and
maintained in a manner which is acceptable to the Commission and the Council
of the city.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Brea Planning Commission, referred to in this
Zoning Code as the "Commission."



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PLANT PALETTE.  A list of plants or vegetation that is recommended to
be planted in the Hillside Residential Zone.



   PLAYLAND. A designated area associated with and incidental to a
fast-food, drive-through, or sit-down restaurant that contains climbing bars,
slides, swings, or other similar structures for the primary purpose of
providing entertainment to children under the care of on-premise customers.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   POOL HALL.  See BILLIARD HALL.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PORTE COCHERE.  An accessory structure open on three (3) sides and
attached to the side or front of a dwelling through which cars pass and is
established for the convenient loading and unloading of passengers from an
automobile.



   POTENTIAL HISTORIC RESOURCE.  An improvement, building, structure,
feature, site, or other object of aesthetic, educational, cultural,
architectural, or historic significance to Brea residents, the Southern
California Region, the state, or nation which may have the potential for
designation in the Brea Historic Resources Register, a State Historic
Landmark, and/or National Register of Historic Places.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



   PRESCHOOL.  See CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PRESERVATION.  The identification, study, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, or if practicable, acquisition of historic resources.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE. The primary or predominant structure on a
parcel.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PRINCIPAL USE.  The main purpose for which a site is developed and/or
used, including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of
the hours during which activities occur. A site may have more than one
primary use.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PRINTING AND PUBLISHING.  Establishments engaged in printing by
gravure, letterpress, lithography, offset, screen, or other common process,
including electrostatic (xerographic) copying and other "quick printing"
services, and blueprinting; and establishments serving the printing trade
including bookbinding, electrotyping, engraving, photoengraving, silk
screening, and typesetting. This use also includes establishments that
publish books, newspapers, and periodicals; and establishments manufacturing
business forms and binding devices.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PRIVACY WALL.  Any wall other than a retaining wall that serves to
separate private property from public or common areas.



   PRIVATE CLUBS. See MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION FACILITIES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PRIVATE GARAGE/YARD SALES. The offering for sale, or the actual sale of
goods, merchandise, or wares from residential property where the public is
invited on to the property to purchase the items. A garage sale may also
include "estate," "moving," "rummage," "yard," or similarly described sales.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PROJECT. An activity involving the issuance to a person of a
certificate, license, permit, or other entitlement.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   PROMINENT RIDGE.  A ridge location which is visible from a major
arterial, secondary or collector street, which is seen as a distinct edge
against a backdrop of land.  Said ridge locations are designated on the City
Map of Prominent Ridges, contained in Exhibit “A” of Ordinance 948.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The legal owner of the applicable development project
who serves as the lessor to an employer or tenant.  The property owner shall
be responsible for complying with the provisions of § 20.08.050 of this
title either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to
an employer or tenant.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   PUDDLING.  The formation of small pools of water or any other liquid
due to depressions on the surface that have no outlet.



   QUASI-PUBLIC.  See SEMI-PUBLIC.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RADIO OR TELEVISION TRANSMITTERS. See WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RE-CREATED RIDGELINE. In cases when a ridgeline, due to past
activities, has been eliminated, a RE-CREATED RIDGELINE is the replacement of
the eliminated ridgeline through landform grading and berming practices.



   RECEPTION WINDOW.  The area within the direct line of connection
between the device that transmits radio waves (such as orbiting satellites
and radio towers) and the apparatus designed to receive the transmitting
signals.



(Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94)



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A motorized vehicular portable structure without
a permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven; that is
primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational,
camping, and travel use; and that may include, but is not limited to, boats,
camping trailers, travel trailers, truck campers, and self-propelled motor
homes.



(Ord. 699, passed 7-1-80; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RECYCLING FACILITIES.



      1.   This land use type includes a variety of facilities
involved with the collection, sorting, and processing of recyclable materials.



      2.   REVERSE VENDING MACHINES. An automated mechanical device
which accepts at least one (1) or more types of empty beverage containers and
issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than
the containers redemption value, as determined by state law. A bulk reverse
vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty (50)
square feet, is designed to accept more than one (1) container at a time, and
issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container. These
vending machines may accept aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and
other containers.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   REGISTERED HISTORICAL SITE.  A site or area, including structures,
objects, and landmarks, that is either listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, the State Historic Landmarks, the County Historic Register,
or the local historic register.



(Ord. 932, passed 1-19-93)



   REPAIR/MAINTENANCE, CONSUMER PRODUCTS.  Service establishments where
repair of consumer products is the principal business activity, including:
electrical repair shops; furniture repair; television and radio and other
appliance repair; re-upholstery; and watch, clock and jewelry repair. Does
not include shoe repair (included under PERSONAL SERVICES, GENERAL). Does not
include heavy equipment repair businesses, which are included under BUSINESS
SUPPORT SERVICES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RESIDENTIAL CARE HOMES. Facilities where twenty-four (24)-hour a day
non-medical care is provided to persons residing on the premises, in need of
assistance, guidance, personal services, protection, supervision, and
training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
protection of the individual. The establishments shall be licensed by the
State of California Department of Social Services for non-medical care in
compliance with the provisions of the State Community Care Facilities Act or
other applicable state law; and no medical care shall be provided at the
establishments ept incidental medical service as may be allowed, without
additional authorization, certification, or licensing for non-medical care in
compliance with state law. Also includes: children's homes; orphanages;
rehabilitation centers; self-help group homes; and transitional houses.
Convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar facilities providing medical
care are included under the definition of MEDICAL SERVICES,  EXTENDED CARE.



(Ord. 581, passed 11-18-75; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RESIDENTIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, PRIVATE. Playground equipment,
swimming pools and spas, tennis and other sport courts, and similar
facilities and accessory structures that are operated for the residents of a
specific residential development and their invited guests, and are not open
to the general public. Does not include these facilities for individual
homes, which are defined as ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RESIDUALS REPOSITORY.  A waste disposal facility specifically
restricted to receive only remains from hazardous waste facilities.



   RESTAURANT.



      1.   RESTAURANTS, FAST FOOD. Establishments whose primary
business is the sale of food and beverages to customers for consumption
on-site or off-site. Customarily less than fifty  percent (50%) of the total
gross floor area is used for customer seating. Interior furnishings include
standardized floor plans, stationary seats, and tables. Food is primarily
prepackaged rather than made to order. Condiment bars and trash disposal are
self-service. Fast food restaurants have a higher turnover rate than standard
restaurants.



      2.   RESTAURANT, OUTDOOR DINING. Establishments where tables
and seating are provided and food and/or beverages are served in outdoor
areas, which front a street, and have at least one side open.



      3.   RESTAURANTS, SIT DOWN. Establishments whose primary
business is the sale of food and beverages to customers for their consumption
within the restaurant or restaurant patio area. Customarily at least fifty
percent (50%) of the total gross floor area is used for the seating of
customers. The restaurant may be open for breakfast, lunch, and/or dinner.
Alcoholic beverages and carry-out food service are allowed if they are
incidental to the primary purpose of consumption of food and beverages in the
restaurant.



      4.   RESTAURANTS, SPECIALTY. Establishments whose primary
business is the sale of a single specialty type of food or beverage that is
not considered a complete meal (e.g., candy, coffee, ice cream, or yogurt).
The sale of other food, beverages, or merchandise is incidental to the sale
of the specialty food or beverage, Food and beverages are for customer
consumption within the restaurant or restaurant patio area.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RETAIL STORES, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.  Retail trade establishments
selling many lines of merchandise. These stores and lines of merchandise
include:



      1.   Apparel shops.



      2.   Appliance stores.



      3.   Artists' supplies.



      4.   Arts, antiques, and collectibles stores.



      5.   Bakeries (retail only).



      6.   Beauty supply shops.



      7.   Bicycle shops.



      8.   Book stores.



      9.   Boutiques.



      10.   Cameras and photographic supplies.



      11.   Candy shops/confectioners.



      12.   Clothing shops (sales and rentals).



      13.   Coin shops.



      14.   Drug and discount stores.



      15.   Dry goods.



      16.   Electronic, radio, stereo, television, and/or video
equipment sales.



      17.   Fabrics and sewing supplies.



      18.   Florists.



      19.   General stores.



      20.   Gifts, novelties, and souvenirs shops.



      21.   Grocery stores (including meat markets and
delicatessens).



      22.   Handcrafted items (stores may include crafting
preparations subordinate to retail sales).



      23.   Hardware stores.



      24.   Health food stores.



      25.   Hobby shops.



      26.   Jewelry stores.



      27.   Liquor stores, off-site consumption.



      28.   Luggage and leather good stores.



      29.   Music stores (cd's, instruments, and records).



      30.   Newsstands.



      31.   Orthopedic supplies.



      32.   Pet shops.



      33.   Photography studio/supply shops.



      34.   Religious goods.



      35.   Shoe stores.



      36.   Small wares.



      37.   smoke/tobacco shops.



      38.   Specialty shops (stamps).



      39.   sporting goods and equipment stores.



      40.   Stationery stores.



      41.   Toys and games stores.



      42.   Variety stores.



      43.   Video stores (rentals and sales).



      44.   Yardage stores.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RETAINING WALL.  A wall or terraced combination of walls used solely
to retain material or water but not to support or to provide a foundation or
wall for a building.



   REVIEW AUTHORITY. The person, committee, or Council responsible for the
review and final determination on a land use entitlement, map, or amendment.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   RIDGE.  A long, narrow, conspicuous elevation of land.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A defined area of land, either public or private, on
which a right of passage has been recorded.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ROCK OUTCROPPING.  Any surface rock or group formation of rocks that
are part of and connected to a bedrock formation.



   RUNNING OF ANIMALS AT LARGE.  Any animals, except for carrier or
homing pigeons, not kept continuously under restraint and/or controlled by
leash, in pens, corrals, or buildings.



(Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92)



   SALVAGE YARD.  A place where waste, discarded or salvage materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled or stored,
including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and
places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel
materials and equipment.  SALVAGE YARD does not include pawn shops and
establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of second hand books,
clothing, furniture and household equipment provided that these
establishments are conducted within a completely enclosed structure.



   SANITARIUMS.  See HOSPITAL.



   SATELLITE DISHES/ANTENNA. See WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES;
however these facilities shall be less than three (3) feet or two (2) meters
in diameter.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SCHOOL, PRIVATE.  An institution conducting regular academic
instruction at kindergarten, elementary, secondary or higher levels operated
by a nongovernmental organization and which is not a trade school.



   SCHOOL, TRADE.  Private schools offering preponderant instruction in
the technical, commercial and/or trade skills, such as real estate schools,
business colleges, electronic schools, automotive and aircraft technicians
schools, and similar commercial establishments.



   SCREENING. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or
nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely
planted vegetation.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR’S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION.  The
guidelines prepared by the National Park Service of the U.S. Department of
the Interior for applying standards for rehabilitation of historic buildings
and historic preservation projects.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



   SEMI-PUBLIC. A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious, or
charitable institution and providing educational, cultural, recreational,
religious, or similar types of public programs.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SENSITIVE AREA.  That area of land within two thousand (2,000) feet of
the exterior boundaries of a specific off-site hazardous waste facility,
unless otherwise specified as being larger.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   SENSITIVE POPULATION.  Residential populations and immobile
populations and similar facilities one thousand (1,000) feet of the exterior
boundaries of a hazardous waste site.  The one thousand (1,000) feet shall
be measured from subject property lines.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



   SENSITIVE SPECIES.  Plant or animal species which are susceptible to
habitat changes or impacts from activities.  The official designation is
made by the USDA Forest Service at the regional level and is not part of the
designation of threatened or endangered species made by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.



   SENSITIVE HABITAT. The environment in which sensitive species lives or
grows.



   SERVICE STATION.  An area which may provide for the servicing of motor
vehicles, including tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage of
merchandise, and supplies, sale of gasoline and lubricants, automobile
washing (not including mechanical car wash) and grease racks, but excluding
automobile repairs, body and fender works, engine over-hauling or other
similar activities of a major source.



   SETBACK. The minimum distance by which structures, parking, or uses on
a parcel shall be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line. Setbacks
from private streets are measured from the edge of the easement. See also
YARD.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SETBACK LINE.  A line within a parcel, parallel to and measured from a
corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and governing
the placement of structures, parking, or uses on a parcel.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD.  The line which defines the depth of the
required front yard.  Said setback line is parallel with the street line or,
when established by the General Plan, with the highway right-of-way line,
removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the front yard
in the zone.



   SETBACK LINE, REAR AND SIDE YARD.  The line which defines the width or
depth of the required rear or side yard.  Said setback line is parallel with
the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed
for the yard in the district.



   SHARED PARKING. The approved use of the same off-street parking spaces
for two (2) or more distinguishable uses where peak parking demand of the
different uses occurs at different times of the day, or, where various uses
are visited without moving the motor vehicle, where the division of parking
spaces is a net decrease from the combined total of each use's individual
off-street parking requirements if required separately.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SHOPPING CENTER.  A group of not less than fifteen (15) contiguous
commercial stores originally planned and developed as a single project.



(Ord. 689, passed 1-15-80)



   SIGN.  See Chapter 20.42 (Sign Standards) for definitions and
standards governing signs.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SIGN AREA.  The area in square feet of the smallest rectangle
enclosing the total exterior surface of a sign having but one (1) exposed
exterior surface; should the sign have more than one (1) surface, the sign
area shall be the aggregate area of all sign surfaces measured as above.



   SIGN BUSINESS.  Any sign or structure designed, intended or used for
advertising the particular business, product or service located or sold on
the same premises as that on which the sign or structure is located.



   SIGNIFICANT FEATURE.  The man-made elements embodying style or type of
historic resource, design, or general arrangement and components of an
improvement, including but not limited to color, texture of building
materials, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light, signs, and
other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



   SIGNIFICANT RIDGELINE.  A long, conspicuous, continuous elevated
landform that forms a part of the natural backdrop and skyline to the city. 
Said landform may consist of one (1) or more ridge features each of varying
elevations dependent on the characteristics of the ridgeline being evaluated.



   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS. See DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED and
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. The functional equivalent of a traditional
family, whose members are an interactive group of persons jointly occupying a
single dwelling unit, including the joint use of and responsibility for
common areas, and sharing household activities and responsibilities (e.g.,
meals, chores, household maintenance, expense, etc.) and where, if the unit
is rented, all adult residents have chosen to jointly occupy the entire
premise of the dwelling unit, under a single written lease with joint use and
responsibility for the premises, and the makeup of the household occupying
the unit is determined by the residents of the unit rather than the landlord
or property manager. 



(Ord. 1184, passed 9-20-16)



   SITE. A parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single
control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SITE COVERAGE. The percentage of total site area occupied by
structures. Site coverage includes the primary structure, all accessory
structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash
dumpster enclosures, etc.) and architectural features (e.g., balconies,
chimneys, decks above the first floor, porches, stairs, etc.). Site coverage
is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SITE PLAN. A plan drawn to scale, showing uses and structures proposed
for a property as required by the applicable regulations, including lot
lines, streets, grades, building sites, reserved open space, and other
specific development proposals.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SLOPE.  An inclined ground surface, the angle of which is expressed as
a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.  (Please see
Illustration 4 in the Appendix following this chapter.) 



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   SLOPE FACE.  The slopes located directly below, and leading up to, the
crest of a significant ridgeline or prominent landform.



   SLOPE GRADE.  The relationship (ratio) between the change in elevation
(rise) and the horizontal distance (run) over which that change in elevation
occurs.  The percent of steepness of any given slope is determined by
dividing the rise by the run on the natural slope of land, multiplied by one
hundred (100).



   SLOPE, MAN-MADE.  A manufactured slope consisting wholly or partially
of either cut or filled material.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   SLOPE TRANSITION ZONE.  The area where a slope bank meets the natural
terrain or a level graded area either vertically or horizontally.



(Ord. 948, passed 2-1-94)



   SMOKE/TOBACCO SHOPS. A tobacco retailer whose business exclusively or
primarily involves the sale of tobacco products arid related goods. See
RETAIL STORE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SPECIFIC PLAN. Under Cal. Gov't Code, Article 8, §§  65450 et seq.,
a legal tool for detailed design and implementation of a defined portion of
the area covered by a General Plan. A specific plan may include all detailed
conditions, programs, regulations, and/or proposed legislation that may be
necessary or convenient for the systematic implementation of any General Plan
element(s).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SPLIT LEVEL CONSTRUCTION.  An approach to grading and development of a
structure whereby the foundation of the structure is placed on more than one
(1) graded pad area.



   SPLIT LEVEL ROADS. Roads which are constructed so as to have two (2)
traffic ways, each at a different level within the same right-of-way.



   SPORTING GOODS AND EQUIPMENT STORES. Establishments primarily engaged
in retailing new sporting goods (e.g., athletic uniforms; bicycles and
bicycle parts; camping equipment; exercise and fitness equipment; specialty
sports footwear) and sporting goods, equipment, and accessories. See RETAIL
STORE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   STANDARDS, DEVELOPMENT. Standards in this Zoning Code that govern the
size of structures and the relationships of structures and uses to each other
and to open areas and lot lines. Development standards include regulations
controlling minimum parcel area, maximum height, minimum parcel frontage,
minimum size of yards and setbacks, maximum parcel coverage, and maximum
floor area ratio.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   STANDARDS, PERFORMANCE. Standards in this Zoning Code that govern the
operation and maintenance of uses in a particular zoning district Performance
standards include regulations controlling fire and explosive hazards, glare
and light, noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, and other
potential nuisance elements generated by or inherent in uses of land or
structures.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   STORAGE, OUTDOOR.  The storage of various materials outside of a
structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   STORY. That portion of a structure included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a structure included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   STREET. A public thoroughfare or right-of-way, or approved private
thoroughfare or right-of-way determined by the city to be adequate for the
purpose of access, which affords the principal means of access for abutting
property including avenue, place, way, drive, land, boulevard, highway, road,
or any other thoroughfare. The word "street" shall include all major and
secondary highways, traffic collector streets, and local streets.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   STRUCTURE.  As defined in the Uniform Building Code.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   STUDIOS - ART, DANCE, MARTIAL ARTS, MUSIC, PHOTOGRAPHY, ETC. Small
scale facilities, typically accommodating one (1) group of students at a
time, in no more than one instructional space. These include facilities for:
individual and group instruction and training in the arts; karate/martial
arts training studios; photography, and the processing of photographs
produced only by users of the studio facilities; production rehearsal;
gymnastics instruction, and aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other
fitness facilities or equipment.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SUBDIVIDER. An association, corporation, firm, partnership, or person
who proposes to divide or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for oneself or for others; except that employees and consultants
of persons or entities, acting in this capacity, are not subdividers. See
DEVELOPER.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SUBDIVISION.  The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion
of land shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or
contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether
immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even
if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement, or railroad
rights-of-way. SUBDIVISION includes the following, as defined in Cal. Civil
Code § 1351, a condominium project; a community apartment project; or the
conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  Specific development plans for an
approved tentative map, including plot plans, building elevations, grading
plans and landscape plans applicable to individual lots within said tentative
map.



   SUBDIVISION MAP ACT, OR MAP ACT.  Cal. Gov't Code, Division 2, Title
7, commencing with § 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to
those provisions regarding the subdivision of real property.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SUPER SLOPES.  Manufactured slopes that exceed forty-five (45)
vertical feet in height.  SUPER SLOPES serve three (3) beneficial purposes:



      1.   Allow for landscaping opportunities in hillsides while
preserving off-site views within a hillside community;



      2.   Create a visual break between terraced rows of housing
units; and



      3.   Help conform to natural topography by blending
manufactured slopes with the height of adjacent natural slopes.



   SWALE.  Open channels possessing a dense cover of grasses and other
herbaceous plants through which runoff is directed during storm events. 
Above ground plant parts (stems, leaves, and stolons) retard flow and thereby
encourage particulates and their associated pollutants to settle.  The
pollutants are then incorporated into the soil where they may be immobilized
and/or decomposed.



   SWIMMING POOLS. See ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE. A water-filled enclosure, permanently
constructed or portable, having a depth of more than twenty-four (24) inches
below the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a
depth of more than twenty-four (24) inches, designed, used, and maintained as
an accessory use for swimming and bathing by not more than three (3) owner
families and their guests and intended for non-commercial use.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TANNING STUDIOS. See PERSONAL SERVICES, GENERAL.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure without any foundation or footings
that will be removed when the permit for the activity, or use for which the
temporary structure was erected, has expired.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TEMPORARY USES/ACTIVITIES. See § 20.62.060 (Temporary Use Permits).



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TENANT.  Any person who occupies a site or structure for a fixed
period of time, usually through a lease agreement with the property owner.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TENNIS COURTS, PRIVATE. One (1)  or more tennis courts designed and
maintained for the sole and exclusive use of the residents/tenants of a
specific unit or portion of the site and their invited guests.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TERRACING.  The method separating and elevating one (1) development
area above another development area by a slope.



   THEATERS, AUDITORIUMS, AND MEETING HALLS. Indoor facilities for public
assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, including:
public and quasi-public auditoriums; exhibition and convention halls; civic
theaters, meeting halls and facilities for live theater and concerts; meeting
halls for rent; motion picture theaters; and similar public assembly uses.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TICKET AGENCIES. See PERSONAL SERVICES, GENERAL.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TOE OF SLOPE.  That portion of intersection created by the bisection
of a horizontal plane by a transverse plane with a deflection angle less than
ninety (90) degrees.



   TOP OF SLOPE.  That portion of intersection created by the bisection
of a horizontal plane by a transverse plane with an angle of impose greater
than ninety (90) degrees.



   TOPOGRAPHY.  The surface relief of slope of any given area of land.



   TOWNHOUSES. A group of attached single-family dwelling units in a row
of at least four (4) units, in which each unit has its own front and rear
access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant
walls.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TRAFFIC SAFETY VISIBILITY AREAS. A triangular area on a corner parcel
formed by measuring thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the front
and street side property lines, and connecting the lines across the property.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06) 



   TRAILER.  A vehicle without motive power, designed so that it can be
drawn by an automotive vehicle, for the transporting of personal property,
not including trailers used for human habitation, such as recreational
vehicles.



(Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



   TRAMPOLINE CENTERS. See INDOOR AMUSEMENT/ENTERTAINMENT/RECREATION
CENTERS.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM).  The implementation of
programs, plans, or policies designed to encourage changes in individual
travel behavior.  TDM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to
the single occupant vehicle (SOV) such as carpools, vanpools, and transit,
reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips, or shifts in the
time of vehicle commutes to other than the peak period.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   TRAVEL AGENCIES. See OFFICES, PROFESSIONAL.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   TRIP REDUCTION.  Reducing the number of work-related trips taken
between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday in single-
occupancy vehicles.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   UNLOADED STREET.  A street on which no front entrance or driveway of a
home is located.



   USE.  The purpose for which land or a structure is use, arranged,
designed, or intended, or for which the land or structure is or may be
occupied or maintained. See also ACCESSORY USE, PRINCIPAL USE, and TEMPORARY
USE.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   UTILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE. Any regulated agency which, under public
franchise or ownership, or under certificate of convenience and necessity,
provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail
transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   VALVE.  A device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation
system.



(Ord. 932, passed 1-19-93)



   VARIANCE. Permission to depart from provisions of this Zoning Code
when, due to special circumstances applicable to the property, strict
application of the requirements deprives the property of privileges enjoyed
by other property in the vicinity which is subject to identical zoning
regulations. See § 20.62.070 (Variances).



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   VETERINARIAN CLINICS/SERVICES AND ANIMAL HOSPITALS. Office and indoor
medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small
animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. May also include kennels and
boarding operations which are commercial facilities for the boarding,
keeping, or maintaining of four (4) or more dogs four (4) months of age or
older, or four (4) or more cats, except for dogs or cats in pet shops. Use as
a kennel shall be limited to short-term boarding and shall be incidental to
the veterinary clinic use.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   VIEWSHED.  Areas of development that can be viewed from arterial
roads, freeways, major collector roads and public gathering places such as
major shopping centers, etc.



   VISUAL DOMINANCE.  Any object as viewed from a public area or public
right-of-way that supersedes the presence of all other elements in the area
shall be considered to be visually dominant.



   WALL. A barrier intended to mark a boundary that presents a continuous
surface except where pierced with doorways, gates, or decorative masonry. A
wall is usually constructed of brick, concrete, concrete block, stucco, or a
combination of these materials.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   WAREHOUSE RETAIL STORES. Retail stores that emphasize the packaging and
sale of products in large quantities or volumes, some at discounted prices,
where products are typically displayed in their original shipping containers.
Sites and structures are usually large and industrial in character. Patrons
may or may not be required to pay membership fees.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   WATER CONSERVING LANDSCAPE.  A combination of landscaping and
irrigation techniques which reduce the demand for water that is required to
maintain a given landscape.  The primary techniques include:



      1.   Use of water conserving plants.



      2.   Reduction of turf (grass) to location where it provides
functional benefits.



      3.   Grouping of plants in hydrozones.



      4.   Water efficient irrigation system and techniques to meet
plant needs.



(Ord. 932, passed 1-19-93)



   WINDOW. An opening that is in a wall of a structure; designed to allow
light and/or ventilation into the structure; enclosed by casement or sash;
and containing glass or other similar transparent or semi-transparent
material.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   WIRELESS CABLE.  Any antenna used to receive television signals by a
line of sight connection from a ground mounted transmitting radio tower.



(Ord. 958, passed 9-20-94)



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES - STEALTH.  A land use facility
supporting antennas that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals. See
Chapter 20.54 (Wireless Communication Facilities).



      1.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Wireless
telecommunications facilities include antennas and all other types of
equipment for the transmission or receipt of these signals; telecommunication
towers or similar structures built to support the required equipment;
equipment cabinets, base transceiver stations, and other accessory
development. Also referred to as a TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.



      2.   STEALTH FACILITY. A stealth facility is any
telecommunications facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding
environment, and is visually unobtrusive. Examples of stealth facilities may
include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, facade mounted
antennas painted and treated as architectural elements to blend with the
existing structure. Also known as CONCEALED TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   WORKSITE.  A building, or grouping of buildings, located within the
jurisdiction which are in actual physical contact or separated solely by a
private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, and which
are owned or operated by the same employer (or by employers under common
control).



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



   YARD. An open space on a developed parcel that, except as otherwise
provided for in this Zoning Code, is unoccupied or unobstructed from the
ground upwards; except for allowed projections. See § 20.30.060 (Setback
Requirements and Exceptions). When a yard dimension is given, it represents
the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line from which the distance
shall be measured and a line parallel to the lot line.



      1.   FRONT YARD. The open space on a developed parcel
extending across the full width of the front of the parcel, the depth of
which extends from the rear of the public right-of-way to the most distant
forward-facing facade of the dwelling and its attached garage or carport.
When applied to a multi-family dwelling, these standards shall be applied to
the dwelling, garage, or carport closest to the public right-of-way by which
access to the site is taken.



      2.   REAR YARD. The open space extending across the full width
of the rear of a parcel, the depth of which is the horizontal distance
between the rear lot line and a line parallel to the rear lot line.



      3.   SIDE YARD. The space between the principal structure and
the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard; the
measured distance of the yard shall represent the shortest distance between
the side lot line and that portion of the principal structure nearest the
line from which the measurement is taken.



(Am. Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ZONING CODE. That portion of the Brea Municipal Code entitled Title 20,
as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ZONING DISTRICTS. A portion of the city within which certain uses of
land and structures are defined, and regulations are specified.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



   ZONING MAP.  The map or maps that are a part of this Zoning Code and
that delineate the boundaries of zoning districts.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1089,
passed 3-7-06; Am. Ord. 1128, passed 10-20-09; Am. Ord. 1184, passed 9-20-16)



APPENDIX:  ILLUSTRATIONS



Illustration



   1.   Contour grading



   2.   Conventional grading



   3.   Landform grading



   4.   Slope



ILLUSTRATION 1.  CONTOUR GRADING.




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the illustration




ILLUSTRATION 2.  CONVENTIONAL GRADING.




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the illustration




ILLUSTRATION 3.  LANDFORM GRADING.




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the illustration




ILLUSTRATION 4.  SLOPE.




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the illustration




         SLOPE = RISE X 100



                         RUN



         30 = 30 x 100



                 100



         OR 30% SLOPE



CHAPTER 20.04:  ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



   20.04.010   Establishment of zones



   20.04.020   Official zoning map



   20.04.030   Zone boundaries



   20.04.040   Annexed territory



§ 20.04.010  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES.



   A.   For purposes related to the orderly development of the city,
and in order to carry out the provisions of this title, the city is hereby
divided into the following zones:



Symbols         Zone Name



HR            Hillside Residential Zone



R-1            Single Family Residential Zone



R1-H            Single Family Residential Hillside Zone



R-1 (5,000)         Single Family Residential Zone (5,000 square
foot lots)



R-2            Multiple Family Residential Zone



R-3            Multiple Family Residential Zone



C-P            Commercial, Administrative and Professional Office
Zone



C-N            Neighborhood Commercial Zone



C-C            Major Shopping Center Zone



C-G            General Commercial Zone



C-RC            Commercial Recreation Zone



M-P            Planned Industrial Zone



M-1            Light Industrial Zone



M-2            General Industrial Zone



P-D            Precise Development Zone



O            Oil Production Zone



P-C            Planned Community Zone



FP-1            Flood Plain Overlay District No. 1



FP-2            Flood Plain Overlay District No. 2



SGS            Special Geological Studies Zone



SP            Specific Plan



   B.   No parcel of land or lot in any zone shall hereafter be used
for any purpose except as specifically permitted in the zoning classification
applied to such parcel or lot pursuant to this section or hereafter permitted
by any other provisions of this title.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95)



§ 20.04.020  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   The zones listed above and the boundaries of said zones are shown on
the Official Zoning Map which is made an integral part of this zoning code. 
All notations, references and other information shown on the Official Zoning
Map shall be as much a part of this zoning code as if the matters and
information were described herein.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 999, passed 9-16-97; Am. Ord. 1011,
passed 5-5-98; Am. Ord. 1080, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.04.030  ZONE BOUNDARIES.



   A.   Where indicated zone boundaries are approximately street, alley
or lot lines, said lines are determined to be the boundaries of the zone.
Otherwise, the boundaries shall be determined by the dimensions shown on the
Official Zoning Map.  In the absence of a dimension, the boundary shall be
determined by use of the scale shown on said map.



   B.   A street, alley, railroad or railway right-of-way, water
course, drainage channel or body of water, included in the zoning map shall,
unless otherwise indicated, have no zoning and shall not be used or improved
for other than the purpose for which they exist.



   C.   In the event that a vacated street, alley, right-of-way or
easement was the boundary between two (2) zones, the new zone boundaries
shall be at the new property line and the vacated portion of the street,
alley, right-of-way, or easement shall take the zone of the property abutting
same and the new zoning boundary shall be at the new property line.



   D.   If after the adoption of the above rules, uncertainty exists as
to any zone boundary, the Commission shall, upon letter of request or upon
its own motion, interpret the map and determine said boundary, and said
determination shall be final and made a permanent public record.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.04.040  ANNEXED TERRITORY.



   The city may prezone unincorporated territory adjoining the city for
purposes of determining the zone that will apply to such property in the
event of subsequent annexation to the city.  The procedure for prezoning
shall conform to the provisions of § 20.404.020 of this title. Such zoning
shall become effective at the same time that annexation of said property
becomes effective.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



CHAPTER 20.08:  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



Section



   20.08.010   Lot area and dimensions



   20.08.020   Yards



   20.08.030   Outdoor living space



   20.08.035   Small lot development standards



   20.08.040   Off-street parking and loading



   20.08.050   Transportation demand management requirements



   20.08.060   Corner cut-off areas



   20.08.070   Utility service lines — underground



   Appendix:   Parking standards; Diagrams A through F



§ 20.08.010  LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS.



   A.   Area accepted as the required area.  The minimum area and/or
dimensions of a lot or parcel of land shall not be less than the minimum area
and dimensions indicated by the zoning symbol except under the following
special conditions:



      1.   Subdivision.  Lots which are substandard in area and/or
dimension created by recorded subdivision prior to establishment of the zone
shall be accepted as conforming subject to all other development standards of
the zone and, shall not be reduced below the area or dimensions set forth on
the recorded map.



      2.   Any lot which is substandard in area and/or dimension and
which is of record prior to the adoption of this zoning code shall be
accepted as conforming subject to all other development standards of the zone
and shall not be reduced below the area or dimensions set forth on the
recorded map.



   B.   Required area and/or dimensions reduced by public use.  Where
a lot or parcel of land has its area and/or dimensions(s) reduced by yielding
land for public use in any manner including, but not limited to, dedication,
condemnation or purchase, the gross area prior to said reduction may be used
in calculations of density.  The remaining lot or parcel of land shall be
accepted as a conforming lot provided that the area and/or dimensions are not
reduced below eighty percent (80%) of the minimum requirements of the zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.08.020  YARDS.



   A.   General conditions.



      1.   Yards shall be measured perpendicular to the property
line or from a future street or highway line as shown on the General Plan or
established as a special setback provision of this title.



      2.   Yard provisions shall apply to both main and accessory
structures unless otherwise specified.



      3.   Required yard or other open space around an existing
building or any building hereafter erected shall not be considered as
providing a yard or other open space for any other building on an adjoining
lot or building site.



   B.   Permitted projections into required yards.



      1.   Landscape architectural features, including uncovered
patios, open air grills, fountains, sculptures, and similar features, and
guard railings for safety protection around depressed ramps may be located in
any front or side yard, provided the height does not exceed thirty (30)
inches and within any rear yard, provided the height does not exceed six (6)
feet.  Swimming pool equipment or similar mechanical equipment may be
located within the rear yard area, provided it is a minimum of five (5) feet
from any property line and is screened from view of adjoining properties. 
The combined coverage by the main building, accessory buildings and accessory
features and equipment shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the
required rear yard area.



      2.   Fire escapes may extend or project into any yard not more
than four (4) feet, provided, however, that the yard shall not be reduced to
less than three (3) feet in clear width.



      3.   Cornices, canopies, eaves, belt courses, sills, and other
similar architectural features may extend or project into a required front
yard not more than four (4) feet, and may extend into a required side yard on
the street side of a corner or reversed corner lot or rear yard not more than
six (6) inches for each foot of required yard width.



      4.   Uncovered porches, platforms, or landing places which do
not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend into
any front yard a distance of not more than twenty percent (20%) of such front
yard, and in no instance more than five (5) feet and may extend into rear
yard of side yard on street side of a corner or reversed corner lot not more
than four (4) feet.  An openwork railing may be installed or constructed on
any such porch, platform or landing place provided it does not exceed thirty
(30) inches in height.



      5.   Open, unenclosed stairways or balconies not covered by a
roof or canopy may extend or project into a required front yard not more than
four (4) feet.



      6.   No projections shall be permitted into any required side
yard except that a fireplace may extend not more than six (6) inches and
eaves may extend not more than eighteen (18) inches into said required yard.



      7.   Accessory recreational uses, such as outdoor tennis
courts shall be permitted within the rear yard area, subject to the
provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title and the following performance
standards:



         a.   Fencing shall be open work (not less than ninety
percent (90%) open) and shall be a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height. 
Translucent backdrops or windscreens may be attached to such fencing.



         b.   Lighting shall be mounted a maximum of ten (10)
feet above court level and designed so as to confine direct rays to the
court.  Lighting shall be operative only between the hours of dusk to 11:00
p.m.



         c.   Said courts shall not be located closer than
twenty-five (25) feet to any existing dwelling on adjacent property.



   C.   Yard requirements - special conditions.  Churches, schools,
institutions or other similar uses when permitted in any R Zone shall be
located not less than twenty (20) feet from all common property lines not
less than fifty (50) feet from the front property line and not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from any side property line on a street.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 616, passed 2-1-77; Am. Ord. 965, passed
4-4-95)



§ 20.08.030  OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE.



   The following provisions shall apply to the outdoor living space
required in residential zones:



   A.   Required outdoor living space may include those portions of the
side and rear yards which are contiguous with and designed as an integral
part of the common area and are usable.  The front yard shall not, however,
be considered in calculating required outdoor living space.



      1.   Single family.  The required outdoor living space
provided for single family dwelling shall be a single common area with a
minimum dimension of twenty-five (25) feet.



      2.   Two (2) family.  The outdoor living space may be
provided in two (2) private areas with a minimum dimension of fifteen (15)
feet.



      3.   Multiple family, three (3) units and more.  Not more
than fifty percent (50%) of the total required outdoor living space serving a
multiple family development shall be provided in a common area with a minimum
dimension of twenty-five (25) feet.  The remaining outdoor living space
requirement may be provided in private spaces on or above ground level
(balconies, roof tops).  Individual areas shall not be less than one hundred
(100) feet in area and the minimum dimension shall not be less than eight (8)
feet.



   B.   Elements excluded.  The following elements shall not
constitute outdoor living space and shall not be included in calculating the
required space:



      1.   Driveways and parking spaces for vehicles.



      2.   Covered pedestrian access ways.



      3.   Utility areas, drying yards and areas for storage of
trash.



   C.   Elements included.  The following elements may be constituted
as outdoor living space and included in calculating the required space:



      1.   Swimming pools and pool decks.



      2.   Paved recreation areas.



      3.   Landscaped area, garden, etc.



      4.   Uncovered patios and balconies.



§ 20.08.035  SMALL LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards apply to residential developments
with lot sizes less than 5,000 square feet which are approved through
Development Agreements or other specific review and do not otherwise have
prescribed development standards.



   A.   Uses expressly prohibited.  All uses as set forth is §
20.212.030 of this title.



   B.   Minimum dwelling unit area.  Each dwelling unit  shall have a
livable gross floor area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
Computation of gross floor area shall not include the garage square footage.



   C.   Setbacks.  The following minimum standards shall apply:



      1.   The minimum building setback for residential units having
side yards on a public or private street shall be eight (8) feet from the
property line.



      2.   The minimum building setback for residential units
fronting either on a private street, a public street, or a pedestrian access
paseo shall be eight (8) feet from the property line.



      3.   The minimum rear and side yard setbacks shall be three
(3) feet from the property line.



      4.   All setbacks not addressed in this section shall be as
reviewed and interpreted by the City Planner.



   D.   Projections into required yards. Architectural features and
projections which are part of the dwelling unit such as eaves, cornices,
awnings, chimneys, rain gutters and other similar features may project into
setback areas one (1) foot. Projection issues not addressed by this Section
shall be as reviewed and interpreted by the City Planner.



   E.   Room additions and expansions.  Proposed room additions and
expansions to the main building shall be subject to Plan Review procedures as
set forth in § 20.408.040 of the Brea Zoning Ordinance. The Plan Review
procedures shall be used to determine that any proposed room addition or
expansion to the main building complies with the standards described herein.



   F.   Accessory structures.  Accessory structures incidental to
single family detached dwelling units are permitted. These structures include
patios, gazebos, arbors, trellis work and other similar structures.  The
minimum standards for open accessory structures are as follows:



      1.   All open accessory structures shall maintain a minimum
setback of three (3) feet from all property lines. No projections shall
extend into this three foot setback.



      2.   All accessory structures detached from the main building
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.



      3.   Setbacks for covered structures shall follow the building
setback requirements. For the purpose of this Section, a covered structure
shall be defined as "being less than fifty (50) percent open free and clear
to the sky."



   G.   Lot coverage.  Each lot shall have a maximum building coverage
of sixty (60) percent.



      1.   The dwelling unit, garage, plus any additions and
expansions, covered patios, and balconies shall be calculated as lot coverage.



      2.   Open patios, ground level decks, terraces, trellis work
and other similar structures intended for outdoor living shall not be
included in the lot coverage requirement.



   H.   Property maintenance.  The property shall be maintained as
required in § 20.208.040E.1.b., 2.c.,and 3.b.of this title.



(Ord. 998, passed 9-2-97)



§ 20.08.040  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   A.   Intent and purpose.  These regulations are established to
provide for on-site maneuvering and parking of motor vehicles that are
attached to and generated by land uses within the city.  The parking
requirements contained herein are assumed to be minimums only.  It is the
responsibility of the developer, owner or operator of any specific use to
provide adequate off-street parking and maneuvering facilities.  The
following requirements are designed to lessen traffic congestion and
contribute to public safety by providing sufficient on-site parking
facilities.



   B.   General requirements.



      1.   Application.



         a.   These standards shall apply when:



            (1)   A main building is constructed.



            (2)   An existing building is enlarged for any
purpose.



            (3)   The occupancy or use of any premises is
changed to a different use or occupancy.



         b.   Parking (or additional parking) to meet the
requirements of this section shall be provided for:



            (1)   An existing building that is enlarged.



            (2)   When the category of use listed in paragraph
D. of this section is changed to a different category of use.



         c.   Where insufficient parking is serving a building or
use existing at the time this zoning code became effective, said building may
be enlarged only if adequate parking is provided for the total building in
accordance with the requirements of this section.  If the category of use is
listed in paragraph D. of this section, changes to a category of use which
requires more parking stalls, additional parking stalls must be provided
meeting all requirements of this section.



      2.   Location.



         a.   All required parking spaces and garages shall be
located on the same lot, or the same building site in the case of a shopping
center.  Where a parking lot owned by the city is located within four
hundred (400) feet of the front door or main entry of the building, parking
requirements listed in paragraph D. of this section may be reduced as
determined by the Development Services Director.



         b.   All required parking spaces shall be located not
more than two hundred (200) feet from the building or use to be served. 
Buildings with floor area in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet
shall be exempt from this requirement except that all required parking shall
be located on the same or contiguous lots.



         c.   All required parking spaces for individual tenants
of shopping centers, shall have his or her required parking within a two
hundred (200) foot radius of the main entrance.  Parking immediately in
front of a tenant space, if not required for fire access, may be reserved for
customers of that tenant.



      3.   Computation of required parking.  Whenever the
computation of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this
section results in a fractional parking space, one (1) additional parking
space shall be required for one-half (½) or more fractional parking space,
and any fractional space less than one-half (½) of a parking space shall not
be counted.



         a.   All access to a parking area from a public street,
alley or highway shall be designed so that motor vehicles leaving the
driveway or parking area will enter the highway traveling in a forward
direction.  This shall not apply to single family subdivisions, or multiple
family residential properties serving four (4) units or less.



         b.   The parking area shall be designed so that a
vehicle within the parking area will not have to enter a public street to
move from one location to any other location within the parking area.



         c.   Vehicular access to arterial streets and highways
will be permitted only in accordance with driveway locations and access
design to be approved by the Traffic Engineer of the city.



      4.   Surfacing.  All parking spaces, driveways, and
maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphaltic
concrete or cement concrete, with a structural section to be approved by the
City Engineer.



      5.   Striping.  All parking stalls and directional arrows and
instructions shall be delineated with paint, as required by the Traffic
Engineer.



   C.   Design.



      1.   Maximum grades permitted.



         a.   Entrance - four (4) or less dwelling units.  The
driveway or accessway shall have a maximum grade of plus fifteen percent
(+15%) or minus six percent (-6%) measured along the driveway centerline, for
a distance of not less than twenty (20) feet from the ultimate right-of-way
line of the street or alley.



         b.   Entrance - five (5) or more dwelling units,
industrial, commercial, office and parking areas serving buildings or
recreation areas owned or operated by any governmental agency.  The driveway
or accessway shall have a maximum grade of plus fifteen percent (+15%) or
minus two percent (-2%), measured along the driveway centerline, for a
distance not less than twenty (20) feet from the ultimate right-of-way line
of the street or alley.



         c.   Parking spaces.  All parking spaces and abutting
access aisle shall have a maximum grade of five percent (5%), measured in any
direction.



         d.   Interior driveways.  Ramps or driveways within the
interior of a parking area (beyond twenty (20) feet from ultimate
right-of-way line) shall have a maximum grade of twenty percent (20%).  If
such a ramp or driveway exceeds ten percent (10%), the ramp or driveway
design shall include transitions (at each end of the ramp) not less than
eight (8) feet in length, having a slope equal to one-half (½) the ramp or
driveway slope.



      2.   Parking spaces.



         a.   All parking stalls shall be double or “hairpin”
striped. (Please see Diagram “A” in the Appendix following this chapter.)



         b.   Sizes.



            (1)      Perpendicular or angular stalls.



               (a)   Residential.



                  (i)   Covered - ten (10) feet wide by
twenty (20) feet long (interior clear dimension to be nine (9) feet wide by
nineteen (19) feet long), minimum seven (7) feet height clearance.



                  (ii)   Uncovered - nine (9) feet wide
by nineteen (19) feet long.



               (b)   Commercial and office uses and
community facilities.  Nine and one-half (9½) feet wide by nineteen (19)
feet long, minimum eight (8) feet height clearance.



               (c)   Industrial uses.  Nine (9) feet wide
by nineteen (19) feet long.



            (2)   Parallel stalls.  Eight (8) feet wide by
twenty-three (23) feet long.



            (3)   Handicapped stalls.  Nine (9) feet wide by
nineteen (19) feet long with a minimum five (5) foot ramp at the side and
front of the stall.



            (4)   Compact stalls shall be a minimum of eight
(8) feet wide by sixteen (16) feet long.



               (a)   Compact stalls may be permitted in
multiple family residential projects of five (5) or more units in accordance
with the provisions of this paragraph C.



               (b)   Compact stalls may be permitted in
commercial and industrial projects requiring a minimum of forty (40) parking
spaces in accordance with the following conditions:



                  (i)   A maximum of fifteen percent
(15%) of the required number of parking spaces may be compact stalls.



                  (ii)   The maximum number of compact
parking stalls may be increased upon approval of a conditional use permit,
but in no event shall the number of compact stalls exceed thirty percent
(30%).



                  (iii)   Each compact stall approved
hereunder shall be individually designated as a compact stall per the City of
Brea Public Works Standards.



               (c)   All parking areas containing compact
stalls shall be approved by the Development Services Director and the City
Traffic Engineer.



            (5)   Overhang.  Parking stall lengths, except
parallel spaces, may be reduced by two (2) feet [seventeen (17) feet for
standard size stalls; fourteen (14) feet for compact stalls] where the front
of the parking stall abuts a landscaped area or sidewalk which is a minimum
of four (4) feet clear. Said landscape area shall be enclosed with a minimum
of six (6) inch high curb and no trees or shrubs shall be planted in the two
(2) foot reduced area.



         c.   Locations.



            (1)   The point of exit or entry from any
off-street parking space shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet from the
ultimate right-of-way line of a street and five (5) feet in the case of an
alley.



            (2)   Industrially zoned facilities on arterial
streets and commercially zoned facilities providing parking for fifty (50) or
more vehicles shall be designed with access driveways which shall not be
intersected by a parking aisle, parking space, or another access driveway for
a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from the street right-of-way line.
(Please see Diagram “C” in the Appendix following this chapter.)



            (3)   Required off-street parking in residential
zones shall not be provided in areas required for ingress and egress to other
parking spaces; no tandem parking is permitted, except with properties
associated with an accessory dwelling unit pursuant to the standards as set
forth in Section 20.208.040 of this title.



            (4)   Off-street parking spaces when located below
living quarters shall be provided in garages.



      3.   Driveways and parking aisles.



         a.   Driveway approaches (curb cuts).



            (1)   Residential.



               (a)   One way - sixteen (16) feet minimum,
twenty-four (24) feet maximum.



               (b)   Two way - twenty-four (24) feet
minimum, forty (40) feet maximum.



            (2)   Commercial/Office/Industrial. Refer to City
of Brea Public Works Standards 210-A.



         b.   Access driveways.  Access driveways shall have a
minimum width of twenty-eight (28) feet.  Access driveways are defined as
those that provide access into and through a parking area from a street
access point providing access to the parking aisles, and those driveways
providing interior circulation between parking areas. (Please see Diagram
“C” in the Appendix following this chapter.)



         c.   Parking aisles.  Parking aisles are defined as
driveways which have parking spaces taking access from either or both sides
and which are intended primarily to provide direct access to parking
spaces.  Parking aisles shall be designed in accordance with Diagrams
“A” and “B” in the Appendix following this chapter.



      4.   Screening.  Open parking spaces and parking structures
shall be screened with a solid wall, mounded landscaping or evergreen shrubs
of not less than three (3) feet nor more than three and one-half (3½) feet
in height whenever such parking is adjacent to a street right-of-way.  Walls
shall be located adjacent to the inside edge of any required boundary
landscaping and to the outside edge of the paved parking area when there is
no landscaping.  When evergreen shrubs are used as a screen they shall be
planted in quantity and location so as to form a screen which is a minimum of
seventy-five percent (75%) opaque within eighteen (18) months after
installation.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain such
shrubbery so that it does not exceed three and one-half (3½) feet in height,
nor encroach into limited use areas outlined in § 20.08.060 of this chapter.



      5.   Lighting.



         a.   All off-street parking areas within commercially
zoned projects shall be provided with exterior lighting meeting the following
minimums:



            (1)   The equivalent of one (1) foot candle of
illumination shall be maintained on the average throughout the parking area.



            (2)   All lighting shall be on a time-clock or
photo-sensor system.



            (3)   All lighting shall be designed to confine
direct rays to the premises.  No spillover beyond the property line shall be
permitted.



            (4)   Parking lot luminaries shall be high
pressure sodium vapor with ninety degree (90°) horizontal cut-off flat
lenses.



         b.   All off-street parking areas within industrially
zoned areas shall meet all standards in paragraph C.5.a. of this section,
except that the equivalent of three fourths (0.75) foot candle of
illumination shall be maintained on the average throughout the parking area.



   D.   Parking space requirements.  All land uses shall provide
off-street parking in conformity with the following requirements, unless
otherwise modified by the provisions contained herein.



 

Use
 
Minimum Parking  Stalls Required




Commercial
 
 


Automobile service stations
 
A minimum of five (5) parking spaces per use plus an additional space for
each service bay.


Automobile washing and cleaning establishments (not self-service)
 
Minimum twenty (20) queuing spaces; minimum ten (10) parking stalls; plus two
(2) stalls per detail bay; minimum seventeen (17) drying stalls (drying
stalls shall be a minimum ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot clear area).


Banks, savings and loans, other financial institutions and related offices
 
One (1) per two hundred (200) square feet (may include stacking credit for
drive-through window on the basis of one (1) car for every twenty-three (23)
lineal feet of striped stacking lanes).  A maximum credit not to exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the total required parking for the site or no more
than twenty (20) spaces for stacked credit, whichever is less.  Drive
through lanes shall provide a minimum of one hundred fifteen (115) feet per
lane for required stacking space.


Barbershops and beauty parlors
 
One (1) per two hundred fifty (250) square feet.


Coin-operated laundromats
Coin-operated dry cleaning
 
One (1) per two hundred (200) square feet.


Contractor’s storage yards and other storage and salvage yards
 
One (1) per three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area


General retail, except as otherwise specified herein
 
One (1) per two hundred (200) square feet.


Lumberyards and building materials
 
One (1) per five hundred (500) square feet of retail area and one (1) per
one-thousand (1,000) square feet of storage area.


Mortuaries, crematories, and funeral homes
 
One (1) per three (3) fixed seats or one (1) per twenty-five (25) square feet
of assembly area, where there are no fixed seats.


Motels and hotels
 
One (1) per guest unit.


Motor vehicle sales
 
One (1) per four hundred (400) square feet.


Motor vehicle repair
 
One (1) per two hundred fifty (250) square feet.


Offices, except as otherwise specified herein
 
One (1) per two hundred fifty (250) square feet.


Self-service car wash
 
Two (2) per wash bay.


Stores, solely for the sale of furniture and appliances
 
One (1) per five hundred (500) square feet.


Shopping centers
 
Five and one-half (5½) for each one thousand (1,000) square feet.


Trade schools, business colleges, and commercial schools
 
One (1) per thirty-five (35) square feet in instruction areas, one (1) per
two hundred fifty (250) square feet in office areas.


Commercial Recreation
 
 


Bowling alleys
 
Four (4) per alley plus spaces for uses in building.


Billiard and pool halls
 
Two (2) per table.


Commercial stables and riding clubs
 
Not less than one (1) space for every five (5) horses kept on the premises or
facilities therefore, plus required spaces for additional uses.


Golf driving ranges
 
One (1) per tee, plus spaces required for additional uses on-site.


Golf courses
 
Eight (8) per hole, plus spaces required for additional uses on-site.


Handball/racquetball facility
 
One and one-half (1½) for each court, plus spaces required for additional
uses on-site.


Pitch and putt and miniature golf courses
 
Three (3) per hole, plus spaces required for additional uses on-site.


Skating rinks/ice rinks or roller rinks
 
One (1) per one-hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, plus spaces
required for additional uses on-site.


Swimming pool (Commercial)
 
One (1) per five hundred (500) square feet of enclosed area, plus spaces
required for additional uses on-site.


Tennis facility
 
Three (3) per court, plus spaces required for additional uses on-site.


Health
 
 


Medical, dental, veterinary clinics or offices.
 
Five and one-half (5½) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet.


Hospitals (general medical)
 
One and three-quarter (1¾) per bed.


Sanitariums, asylums, residential care facilities, convalescent and nursing
homes, homes for the aged, rest homes
 
Five and one-half (5½) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet.


Health studios and spas
 
One (1) per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area
(including swimming pools and spas).


Manufacturing
 
 


Industrial uses of all types, except a building used exclusively for
warehouse or storage purposes
 
One (1) per five hundred (500) square feet.


Warehouse/storage buildings or structures exclusively for storage
 
One (1) per one thousand (1,000) square feet.


Wholesale establishments and warehouses not used exclusively for storage
 
One (1) per one thousand (1,000) square feet, plus one (1) per each two
hundred fifty (250) square feet of office or sales area.


Public Assembly
 
 


Cafes, “sit down” restaurants, “drive-in” restaurants, “drive-
through” restaurants, nightclubs, taverns, lounges or other establishments
for the sale and consumption on the premises of food or beverages
 
Minimum of ten (10) or one (1) for each seventy-five (75) square feet of
gross floor area, up to six thousand (6,000) square feet, plus one (1) for
each fifty-five (55) square feet over six thousand (6,000) square feet or one
(1) for every three (3) seats, whichever is greater. “Drive through” or
“Drive in” restaurants shall also provide a minimum of one hundred sixty
(160) feet of stacking space, as measured from the pick up window, for each
drive through lane.


Auditoriums, theaters, sports arenas, stadiums
 
One (1) per three (3) fixed seats or one (1) per thirty-five (35) square feet
where there are no fixed seats.


Dance floors, discotheques
 
One (1) per seven (7) square feet of dance floor area plus one (1) per
thirty-five (35) square feet of assembly area.


Emergency shelters
 
One (1) per four (4) beds or one-half (1/2) per bedroom designated for family
units with children plus one (1) per staff member.


Libraries
 
One (1) per three hundred (300) square feet.


Private clubs, lodge halls, union headquarters
 
One (1) per seventy-five (75) square feet.


Churches, religious institutions and similar places of assembly
 
One (1) per three (3) fixed seats or thirty-five (35) square feet where there
are no fixed seats; eighteen (18) inches of bench shall be considered a fixed
seat. For worship seating areas with three hundred (300) seats or above shall
require a parking study.

Any off-site parking shall be within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site it
serves, as measured from closest property line.


Day nurseries
 
One (1) per two hundred (200) square feet of office and classroom area.


Residential
 
 


Single family dwellings
 
Two (2) covered parking spaces for each unit.


Attached single family
 
Two (2) covered parking dwellings spaces for each unit, plus one-half (½)
uncovered parking spaces for each dwelling unit.


Two (2) or more dwelling units on one building site or lot:
 
 


Bachelor unit
 
One and one-half (1½) spaces per unit, of which one (1) space shall be
located within a garage or three (3) sided carport.


One (1) bedroom units
 
One and three-quarter (1¾) spaces per unit, of which one (1) space shall be
located within a garage or three (3) sided carport.


Two (2) bedroom units
 
Two (2) spaces per unit, of which one (1) space shall be located within a
garage or three (3) sided carport.


Three (3) bedroom or more dwelling units
 
Two and one-half (2½) off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit, of which
two (2) spaces must be covered for each dwelling unit, plus one-half (½)
off-street parking spaces must be provided for each bedroom in excess of
three (3).


All building sites or lots containing five (5) or more units
 
Two-tenths (0.2) guest parking space shall be provided for each dwelling
unit, in addition to the required number of parking spaces stated above.  A
maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the required uncovered parking spaces
may be of compact car size, provided such spaces are clearly and individually
marked.


Combination of uses
 
Sum of the requirements for the various uses, except shopping centers.




 



   E.   Truck loading and maneuvering area.



      1.   All industrial and commercially zoned developments shall
be designed so as to prevent truck back-up maneuvering within public
right-of-way.



      2.   a.   All industrial and commercially zoned
developments designed with dock high approaches and/or truck wells shall be
provided with at least one (1) back-up area to said dock or well in
accordance with the below schedule.  The driveway aisle between parking
stalls may be used for said approach provided the forty-eight (48) foot wheel
track turning radius is maintained, as outlined in Diagrams “E” and
“F” in the Appendix following this chapter.



Berth or Aisle Width (feet)            Dock Approach (feet)



      10                  120



      12                  117



      14                  113



         b.   The dock approach may not be encumbered by parking
stalls or physical obstructions and shall be measured perpendicular to the
dock or door as shown in accompanying Diagram “E” in the Appendix
following this chapter.  The minimum dock or door overhead clearance
(excluding pipes, lights, etc.) is twelve (12) feet.



      3.   Unless otherwise provided for in paragraph E.2. above,
all commercial and industrially zoned buildings must provide at least one (1)
identified loading area (twelve (12) feet by twenty (20) feet with ramp). 
Access to said loading area must be designed as a minimum to provide a
forty-eight (48) foot wheel track turning radius for a fifty-five (55) foot
long semitrailer truck maneuvering, in accordance with Diagram “F” in the
Appendix following this chapter.  Parking aisles and access driveways
adjacent to loading doors without dock high approaches or truck wells shall
have a minimum width of eight (8) feet plus the aisle width required in
Diagram “B” in the Appendix following this chapter, except for ninety
degree (90°) parking in which the parking aisle shall be thirty-two (32)
feet minimum.  Designated fire lanes shall provide fire ladder truck
maneuvering in accordance with Diagram “G” in the Appendix following this
chapter.



      4.   All developments zoned commercial and industrial shall be
designed with the following:



         a.   At least one (1) driveway approach capable of
accommodating a forty-eight (48) foot wheel track turning radius. (Please see
accompanying Diagram “D” in the Appendix following this chapter.)



         b.   At least one (1) on-site maneuvering area which
provides a forty-eight (48) foot turning radius wheel track through the
parking area. (Please see accompanying Diagram “E” in the Appendix
following this chapter.)



         c.   All loading doors shall not be visible from a
public street.



   F.   Exceptions or modifications to off-street parking
requirements.  The provisions of this section are intended to meet the
minimum design needs for off-street parking under most conditions.  Where,
because of the use involved or other relevant circumstances, the requirements
of this section are considered to be excessive, exceptions and modifications
to these provisions may be approved in accordance with the following
procedure provided such exceptions and modifications are consistent with the
purpose and intent of this section:



      1.   Any property owner, his or her authorized agent or the
city may apply for exceptions to, or modifications of, the off-street parking
regulations.



      2.   a.   Exceptions to, or modifications of the off-street
parking requirements as they relate to shared parking and/or the location of
off-street parking may be permitted subject to the approval of a conditional
use permit application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of
this title.



         b.   If parking space requirements for any specific use
are not contained herein, the Planning Commission, upon recommendation of the
city staff, shall determine the parking requirements for said use.  There
shall be no application fee for this procedure.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 707, passed 12-23-80; Am. Ord. 708,
passed 1-20-81; Am. Ord. 720, passed 10-6-81; Am. Ord. 741, passed 6-21-83;
Am. Ord. 782, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 916, passed 2-18-92; Am. Ord. 965,
passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. 1092, passed 5-16-06; Am. Ord. 1128, passed 10-20-09;
Am. Ord. 1154, passed 6-21-11; Am. Ord. 1203, passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.08.050  TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The provisions of this section are intended to meet the
requirements of Cal. Gov't Code § 65089(b)(3) which requires development of
a trip-reduction and travel-demand element to the Congestion Management Plan,
and Cal. Gov't Code § 65089.3(b) which requires adoption and implementation
of Trip-Reduction and Travel-Demand Ordinance.  New commercial, retail,
office, manufacturing, industrial, mixed-use development including employment
centers of fifty (50) persons or more may adversely impact existing
transportation and parking facilities, resulting in increased motor vehicles
emissions, deteriorating levels of service, and possibly significant
additional capital expenditures to augment and improve the existing
transportation system.  In order to more efficiently utilize the existing
and planned transportation system and to reduce vehicle emissions, it is the
policy of the city to:



      1.   Promote and encourage the use of alternative
transportation modes such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public bus,
rail transit, bicycles, and walking, as well as those facilities that support
such modes.



      2.   Promote coordinated implementation of strategies on a
countywide basis to reduce transportation demand.



      3.   Recommend and encourage membership in the North Orange
County Transportation Management Association.



   B.   Applicability.  For purposes of determining whether a new
development project is subject to this section, the total employment figure
will be determined as follows:



      1.   Employment projections developed by the project
applicant, subject to approval by the city; or



      2.   Employment projections developed by the city, using the
following employee generation factors by type of use.



 

Land Use Category
 
Gross Sq. Ft./Employee




Commercial
 


    Regional
 
500


    Community
 
500


    Neighborhood
 
500


Office/Professional
 
250


Industrial
 
525


Hotel
 
0.8-1.2/room




 



*   The employment projection for a development of mixed- or multiple-uses
shall be calculated on a case-by-case basis based upon the proportion of
development devoted to each type of use.



   C.   Facility standards.



      1.   All applicable developments shall be reviewed to
determine whether application of each of the facility standards specified in
this section is appropriate.  This determination, and any revisions to
requirements within each standard, shall be made by the Development Services
Director, or his or her designee, based upon review of the design
characteristics and other features of the project as proposed in the site
development plan.  Improvements needed to meet those standards shall be
incorporated into the site development plan.



      2.   Preferential parking for carpool/vanpool vehicles.



         a.   Using the specified percentages and dates below,
employee parking spaces shall be reserved and designated for carpool or
vanpool vehicles by marking such spaces “carpool only” or “vanpool
only.”



      Eight percent (8%) until 1992



      Ten percent (10%) until 1994



      Twelve percent (12%) after 1994



         b.   The total number of employee parking spaces shall
be determined using the following factors by type of use as specified in §
20.08.040.D. of this chapter.



 

Type of Use
 
Percent of Total Parking Devoted to Employee




Commercial
 


-    Regional
 
30%


-    Community
 
30%


-    Neighborhood
 
30%


Office/Professional
 
85%


Industrial
 
90%


Hotel
 
30%




 



         c.   Carpool spaces shall be used only by carpool
vehicles in which at least two (2) of the persons are employees or tenants of
the proposed project.



         d.   Vanpool spaces shall be used by vanpool vehicles
serving the employees or tenants of the proposed project.  The vanpool
parking space shall be a minimum of nine and one-half (9½) feet wide and
nineteen (19) feet long.



         e.   Where applicable, vanpool accessibility shall
include a minimum of eight-foot vertical clearance for those parking spaces
and ramps to be used by such vehicles.



         f.   Such carpool/vanpool spaces shall be located near
the building's employee entrance(s) or at other preferential locations within
the employee parking areas as approved by the Development Services Director,
or his or her designee.



      3.   Bicycle parking, shower, and locker facilities.



         a.   Bicycle parking shall be provided in a secure
location for use by employees or tenants who commute to the site by
bicycle.  The number of bicycle storage spaces shall be a minimum of five
(5) bicycle storage spaces.  Additional bicycle storage spaces shall be
provided as needed.



         b.   Locker facilities shall be provided for tenants or
employees who ride bicycles at the rate of at least two (2) lockers for every
two hundred fifty (250) employees. 



         c.   A minimum of two (2) shower facilities shall be
provided, one (1) each for men and women, after two hundred fifty (250)
employees.  These facilities shall be available to all building employees.



         d.   These locker, shower, and bicycle storage
facilities should be provided in a central location for use by the
employees/tenants of the building(s).



      4.   Rideshare vehicle loading areas.  The need for design
and location of passenger loading areas to embark and disembark passengers
from rideshare vehicles shall be reviewed by the Development Services
Director, or his or her designee.  Generally, the passenger loading areas
shall be located as close as possible to the building's employee entrance(s),
and should be designed in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation
in the parking area.



      5.   Bus stop improvements.



         a.   Bus stop improvements including bus pullouts, bus
pads, and right-of-way for bus shelters shall be required for all applicable
developments that are located along established bus routes.



         b.   Bus stop improvements shall be determined in
conformance with standard traffic engineering principles including, but not
limited to, the following:



            (1)   The frequency and relative impact of blocked
traffic due to stopped buses.



            (2)   The level of transit ridership at the
location.



      6.   Information on transportation alternatives.



         a.   A commuter information area shall be provided that
offers employees appropriate information on available transportation
alternatives to the single-occupancy vehicle.  This area shall be centrally
located and accessible to all employees or tenants.



         b.   Information in the area shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:



            (1)   Current maps, routes, and schedules for
public transit.



            (2)   Available employee incentives.



            (3)   Ridesharing promotional material.



   D.   Ordinance implementation and monitoring.  Plan review.



      1.   During the plan review process for all site plans,
compliance with facility standards as defined in this section shall be
reviewed.



      2.   All facility standards required by this section shall be
completed prior to issuance of building permits.



      3.   Periodic checks of the applicable developments shall be
made after completion of the projects to ensure continued compliance with
this section.



(Ord. 905, passed 5-21-91)



§ 20.08.060  CORNER CUT-OFF AREAS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all intersections of streets,
alleys, and private driveways in order to provide adequate visibility for
vehicular traffic.  There shall be no visual obstructions within the cut-off
areas established herein.



   A.   There shall be a corner cut-off area at all intersecting and
intercepting streets or highways.  The cut-off line shall be in a horizontal
plane, making an angle of forty-five degrees (45°) with the side, front, or
rear property line, as the case may be.  It shall pass through the points
located on both side and front (or rear) property lines at a distance of
thirty (30) feet from the intersection of such lines at the corner of a
street or highway.



   B.   There shall be a corner cut-off area on each side of any
private driveway intersecting a street or alley.  The cut-off lines shall be
in a horizontal plane, making an angle of forty-five degrees (45°) with the
side, front or rear property line, as the case may be.  They shall pass
through a point not less than ten (10) feet from the edges of the driveway
where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way.



   C.   There shall be a corner cut-off area on each side of any alley
intersecting a street or alley.  The cut-off lines shall be in a horizontal
plane, making an angle at forty-five degrees (45°) with the side, front, or
rear property line, as the case may be.  They shall pass through a point not
less than ten (10) feet from the edges of the alley where it intersects the
street or alley right-of-way.



   D.   Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a forty-five
degree (45°) angle does not provide for intersection visibility, said corner
cut-off shall be defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear)
property line that is not less than thirty (30) feet from the intersection of
the side and front (or rear) property lines and through a point on the side
property line that is not less than thirty (30) feet from said intersection
of the side and front (or rear) property lines.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.08.070  UTILITY SERVICE LINES — UNDERGROUND.



   In those areas zoned industrial, all utility service lines for any
utility service to any lot from the distribution line of the utility in any
street or easement area shall be underground, including, but not limited to,
electricity, gas, water, telephone and cable TV.  The provisions hereof
shall apply notwithstanding whether said distribution lines in the public
streets or other easements are or are not underground, but as to existing
developed properties already having the particular utility service, the
requirements of this section shall apply only when and as there is an
addition of building area of twenty-five percent (25%) or more, or the
requirement is otherwise imposed pursuant to other provisions of law or
ordinance.



(Ord. 531, passed 12-4-73)



APPENDIX:  PARKING STANDARDS;
DIAGRAMS A THROUGH F



DIAGRAM A




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the diagram




DIAGRAM B



 




For 9 Foot Wide Stalls



 
 

Angle



Dimension
 

On Diagram

 

30°

 

45°

 

60°

 

75°

 

90°



Stall width, parallel to aisle
 

a

 

18'

 

12.7'

 

10.4'

 

9.3'

 

9.0'



Stall depth to wall or abutment
 

b

 

17.3'

 

19.8'

 

21'

 

20.7'

 

19'



Aisle width between stall lines
 

c

 

11'*

 

13'*

 

18'*

 

23'*

 

26'



Stall depth interlock
 

d

 

13.4'

 

16.6'

 

18.7'

 

19.5'

 

—



Module, interlocking
 

e

 

37.8'

 

46.2'

 

55.4'

 

62'

 

—










 




For 9.5 Foot Wide Stalls



 
 

Angle



Dimension
 

On Diagram

 

30°

 

45°

 

60°

 

75°

 

90°



Stall width, parallel to aisle
 

a

 

19'

 

13.4'

 

11'

 

9.8'

 

9.5'



Stall depth to wall or abutment
 

b

 

17.7'

 

20.1'

 

21.2'

 

20.8'

 

19'



Aisle width between stall lines
 

c

 

11'*

 

13'*

 

18'*

 

20'*

 

25'



Stall depth interlock
 

d

 

13.6'

 

16.8'

 

18.8'

 

19.6'

 

—



Module, interlocking
 

e

 

38.2'

 

46.6'

 

55.7'

 

59.2'

 

—










*THE MINIMUM AISLE WIDTH FOR TWO-WAY TRAFFIC IS TWENTY FOUR (24) FEET.



DIAGRAM C




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the diagram




DIAGRAM D




Refer to § 20.08.040.E.





Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the diagram




DIAGRAM E




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the diagram




DIAGRAM F




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the diagram




CHAPTER 20.12:  RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS AND RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM
CONVERSIONS



Section



   20.12.010   Intent and purpose



   20.12.020   Permits required



   20.12.030   Development standards



   20.12.040   Plan review



   20.12.050   Application procedures



   20.12.060   General provisions



§ 20.12.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The residential condominium and residential condominium conversion
chapter is to establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple
family rental housing to condominiums.



(Ord. 664, passed 11-8-78)



§ 20.12.020  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   A.   Residential condominiums and residential condominium
conversions shall be permitted in appropriately zoned districts within the
city subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the
subdivision.



   B.   In addition to those notified of a public hearing in accordance
with § 20.408.030 of this title, all tenants, if any, then occupying the
proposed conversion site shall be notified in writing of the public
hearing.  A complete list of tenants shall be supplied by the applicant.



(Ord. 664, passed 11-8-78)



§ 20.12.030  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   All units constructed prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be in
substantial accordance with development standards as set forth herein and all
units constructed subsequent to the adoption of this  chapter shall be in
full compliance with said development standards.



   A.   Off-street parking requirements shall be as specified in the
applicable zoning district and § 20.08.040 of this title.



   B.   A single area having a minimum of two hundred (200) cubic feet
of private and secure dead storage space shall be provided for each unit. 
Said storage area may be located within the garage, provided it does not
interfere with garage use for automobile parking.  Customary closets and
cupboards within the dwelling unit shall not count toward meeting this
requirement.



   C.   No living units shall be permitted over garages unless one of
the following conditions exist:  the garage serves the unit above; or the
garage is an underground type parking garage.



   D.   An adjoining private patio or deck shall be provided for each
unit.  No dimension shall be less than eight (8) feet, nor have a minimum
area of less than one hundred (100) square feet.



   E.   One hundred (100) square feet of developed common recreation
space shall be provided per unit, but in no event less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet for the condominium project.



   F.   Separate laundry facilities of sufficient size to allow for the
installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided for each
condominium unit.  If provided for in the garage, said facility shall not
encroach into the required parking space.



   G.   The consumption of gas, water and electricity within each
dwelling unit shall have a separate shutoff device to disconnect each unit's
utilities, unless utilities are provided by the homeowners association.



   H.   All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic
appliances, which is determined by the Building Official to be a source or
potential source of vibration or noise, shall be shock-mounted, isolated from
the floor and ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the
Building Official to lessen the transmission vibration and noise.



   I.   The city shall require the developer to upgrade the project's
water delivery system to comply with the city's current fire flow
requirements.



   J.   All structures and buildings included as part of a condominium
project shall conform to the building and zoning requirements applicable to
the zone wherein the project is proposed to be located.  Designation of
individual condominium units shall not be deemed to reduce or eliminate any
of the building and zoning requirements applicable to any such buildings or
structures.



   K.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for any stacked or
attached residential unit, the applicant shall submit an acoustical analysis
or equivalent acceptable to the City Planner demonstrating interior noise
levels will conform to the standard of 45 dBA CNEL, or a level deemed equal
or better by the Building Official. All required noise reduction measures
shall be incorporated into building plans in a manner meeting the approval
and satisfaction of the Building Official and the City Planner.



(Ord. 664, passed 11-8-78; Am. Ord. 669, passed 1-2-79; Am. Ord. 1184, passed
9-20-16)



§ 20.12.040  PLAN REVIEW.



   All physical changes, alterations, and or improvements to the project
site that require issuance of a building permit shall be subject to the
provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title.



(Ord. 664, passed 11-8-78; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



§ 20.12.050  APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   A conditional use permit application signed by the property owner(s) or
the authorized agent shall be submitted to the Development Services
Department.  Said application shall be accompanied by twenty (20) copies of
a precise development plan showing the following details:



   A.   The estimated square footage of each unit and number of rooms
in each unit.



   B.   The layout of all common areas.



   C.   The layout and location of all storage space outside of each
unit.



   D.   The layout and location of all facilities and amenities
provided within the common area for the enjoyment and use of the unit owners.



   E.   The layout of all parking spaces to be used in conjunction with
each condominium unit.



   F.   Proposed landscaping and irrigation.



   G.   Building elevations.



   H.   Location, height and type of all walls and fences.



   I.   Location and type of surfacing of all driveways, pedestrian
walk-ways, vehicular parking areas and curb cuts.



   J.   Trash enclosure details.



   K.   Define maintenance responsibility of all buildings and common
areas.



   L.   Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC & R's).



(Ord. 664, passed 11-8-78)



§ 20.12.060  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   A.   Payment of all development fees currently assessed for new
condominium projects shall be required for condominium conversions as well,
except any such fees which were paid upon construction of the project. 
Required development fees shall include, where applicable, but not be limited
to drainage assessment, parkway trees and park dedication in-lieu fees.



   B.   A proposed condominium or condominium conversion project may be
approved, disapproved or conditionally approved by the Planning Commission in
accordance with criteria as set forth in § 20.408.030 of this title.



(Ord. 664, passed 11-8-78)



CHAPTER 20.16:  RESIDENTIAL PLANNED
UNIT DEVELOPMENT



Section



   20.16.010   Intent and purpose



   20.16.020   Uses permitted



   20.16.030   Development regulations



   20.16.040   Procedures



§ 20.16.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The intent of this section is as follows:



   A.   To encourage within the density standards of the General Plan
and zoning code the development of a more desirable living environment by
application of modern site planning techniques and building groupings or
arrangements that are not permitted through strict application of the present
zoning and subdivision ordinances.



   B.   To encourage the reservation of greater open space for visual
enjoyment and recreational use.



   C.   To encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of
land.



   D.   To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of
the city.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.16.020  USES PERMITTED.



   Only those uses permitted in the zone shall be permitted under
conditions of this chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.16.030  DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.



   Any project developed pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the
following regulations and any permit issued shall be subject to such
provisions established as conditions of approval.



   A.   Area of project.  Planned Unit Development projects shall not
be less than five (5) acres in total area.



   B.   Maximum dwelling unit density.  The dwelling unit density
shall not exceed a number of units determined by dividing the total net area
of the project by the minimum lot area requirements of the zone.



   C.   Minimum area and dimensions of lots.  The area, width and
depth of individually owned parcels of land within the development shall be
established as a condition of approval.  The following conditions shall be
reviewed before approval of the project is recommended by the Commission:



      1.   Topography of the land.



      2.   The ground area covered by individual dwellings and
accessory structures.



      3.   Location of common open space and its relationship to the
dwelling to be served.



      4.   Aesthetic relationships between individual units and open
spaces.



   D.   Yards and setbacks.



      1.   Front, side, and rear yards shall be established as a
condition of approval.  Building lines shall be indicated on the approved
site plan map.



      2.   All buildings shall set back from all perimeter lines of
the project a distance not less than the height of the building.  Greater
perimeter setbacks may be required as a condition of approval.



   E.   Distance between buildings.  The distance between any two (2)
buildings within the project shall be established as a condition of approval,
but shall not be less than ten (10) feet between the edge of the eaves.



   F.   Maximum building height.  The maximum building height
permitted in the zone shall apply.



   G.   Required off-street parking.



      1.   The number of required parking spaces shall conform to
provisions of the zone.



      2.   The location and arrangement of parking shall be subject
to review by the Commission.



   H.   Walls, fences and landscaping.



      1.   The Commission may require appropriate walls, fencing and
landscaping around the perimeter of the project.



      2.   A landscaping plan for all common open areas shall be
submitted with the other plans.  Approval of the landscape element shall
include approval of an acceptable watering system, and assurance of continued
maintenance.



   I.   Signs.  The provisions of the zone in which the project is
located shall apply.



   J.   Access.



      1.   Vehicular access shall be subject to review and approval
of the Planning Commission.



      2.   Pedestrian access to common areas - all pedestrian access
to common recreation and open areas shall be subject to review and approval
of the Planning Commission.  Review shall include but not be limited to the
following:



         a.   Distance from common area to dwelling to be served
shall not exceed a reasonable walking distance, if possible, not crossing any
dedicated street or any privately owned property.



         b.   All pathways between private and common elements of
the project shall be maintained as a common element to whatever standards the
Commission may deem necessary to ensure adequate maintenance and privacy to
all abutting dwellings.



   K.   Minimum dwelling unit floor area.  The minimum floor area for
each dwelling unit shall not be less than the requirements established by the
zone.



   L.   Common open space elements.  The Planning Commission shall
review and approve the location, intent, landscape treatment and method of
maintaining each common open space or recreational elements proposed.  The
Commission may require as condition of approval such improvements, fencing,
walls, or landscaping necessary to protect abutting residential development.



   M.   Other conditions.  The Planning Commission may require other
conditions of approval in keeping with the intent and purpose of this
chapter, and the principles of Planned Unit Development.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.16.040  PROCEDURES.



   The provisions of the conditional use permit, § 20.408.030 of this
title, shall apply.  The applicant shall be required to pay appropriate fees
as determined by City Council resolution for processing an application for
Residential Planned Unit Development.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 662, passed 9-5-78)



CHAPTER 20.20:  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



Section



   20.20.010   Compliance required



   20.20.020   Fire and explosion hazards



   20.20.030   Radioactivity or electrical disturbance



   20.20.040   Vibration



   20.20.050   Emission of dust, smoke and odors



   20.20.060   Glare



   20.20.070   Non-commercial kennel conditional use permit; procedure;
grounds for refusal or revocation



§ 20.20.010  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   All uses established or placed into operation after the effective date
of this zoning code, shall comply at all times hereafter with the following
limitations or performance standards.  All uses actually established and in
operation on the effective date of this zoning code shall be made to comply
with the following limitations or performance standards.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



Cross-reference:



   Noise control, see Ch. 8.20



§ 20.20.020  FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS.



   The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquified petroleum
gases and explosives shall comply with the state rules and regulations and
ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.20.030  RADIOACTIVITY OR ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCE.



   Devices which radiate electromagnetic and/or atomic energy shall be so
operated to conform with all applicable Federal Communication Commission and
Atomic Energy Commission regulations.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.20.040  VIBRATION.



   Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and
recurrently generated does not cause a displacement of the earth greater than
.003 of one (1) inch as measured at the property line of the subject use.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.20.050  EMISSION OF DUST, SMOKE AND ODORS.



   The emission of dust, smoke and odors shall conform to standards
established by the Orange County Air Pollution Control District.  Every use
shall be so operated that it does not emit dust, or odor in such quantities
or degree as to be readily detectable on any boundary line of the lot on
which the use is located.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.20.060  GLARE.



   Glare from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes
shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the outside of
the property.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.20.070  NON-COMMERCIAL KENNEL CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; PROCEDURE;
GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION.



   Special permits required by this Division I shall be applied for to the
Planning Commission by uniform application filed with the Development
Services Department and the Planning Commission shall have a reasonable time
in which to cause an investigation to be made, and if it appears after
investigation that the keeping of such animals, fowl, birds or pigeons at the
location applied for under prevailing conditions will be a nuisance, a menace
to health or interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property,
then the permit shall be refused, and any permit granted is revocable for
cause.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 915, passed 11-5-91)



CHAPTER 20.24:  NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES AND USES



Section



   20.24.010   Intent and purpose



   20.24.020   Adding new uses and structures



   20.24.030   Change to another nonconforming use



   20.24.040   Development of nonconforming land



   20.24.050   Continuation of nonconforming use of land and structures



   20.24.060   Continuation of nonconforming structures



   20.24.070   Cost of replacement



   20.24.080   Completion of building



   20.24.090   Additions and alterations to nonconforming public use



   20.24.100   Nonconforming off-street parking and loading facilities



   20.24.110   Uses under variance or conditional use permit



   20.24.120   Conduct terminating nonconforming use



   20.24.130   Termination of nonconforming use and structures



   20.24.140   Termination of certain nonconforming uses and annexed
structures



   20.24.150   Revocation of nonconforming use or structure



   20.24.160   Public utility uses; exemption



   20.24.170   Nonconforming uses



§ 20.24.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Within the zones established by this zoning code or amendments that may
later be adopted, there exist or will exist lots, structures, and uses of
land and structures which were lawful before the adoption or amendment of
this zoning code, but which no longer comply.  The intent of this chapter is
to permit those nonconformities to continue until they are removed or
required to be terminated, but not to encourage their survival.  Such uses
and structures are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses,
structures and standards in the zones involved, and it is intended that they
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone, except
as may be expressly permitted in this chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.020  ADDING NEW USES AND STRUCTURES.



   When a nonconforming use or structure exists on any lot or parcel of
land, no new use or structure may be established or built on such land unless
the required lot area, dimensions, yards and open spaces are provided for
each existing and proposed use, structure and improvement.  These uses shall
be so located that the lot or parcel of land, if divided into smaller lots or
parcels, each of said parcels will contain the area, dimensions, yards and
open space required and the number and location of structures on each will
comply with the requirements of this title when considered as a separate lot
or parcel.  In instances where there is the intent to divide or subdivide,
additional conforming structures shall not be permitted until after the
parcel has been divided or subdivided in accordance with law.  Access
acceptable to the city shall be provided to all lots where such division is
permitted.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.030  CHANGE TO ANOTHER NONCONFORMING USE.



   The nonconforming use of a structure or land shall not be changed to
another nonconforming use except as expressly permitted in this chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.040  DEVELOPMENT OF NONCONFORMING LAND.



   Lots of record in residential zone.  In any residential zone a
dwelling and accessory buildings of the type permitted in such zone may be
erected on any single lot lawfully created and of record on the effective
date of the adoption or amendment of this zoning code, notwithstanding
limitations on lot area, width or depth imposed by other provisions of the
zoning code.  Yard and outdoor living and open space requirements shall be
complied with unless waived by variance.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.050  CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES.



   A.   Continuation of nonconforming use of land.  A lawful use of
land made no longer permissible under the terms of this zoning code as
adopted or amended may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:



      1.   Such use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the effective date of
this zoning code or applicable amendment.



      2.   Such use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such use on the effective
date of this zoning code or applicable amendment.



      3.   If such use ceases for any reason for a period of more
than six (6) consecutive calendar months, any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the requirements of this title for the zone in which it is
located.



      4.   If provision is made for the termination of such use, any
use of such land after termination shall conform to the requirements of this
title for the zone in which it is located.



   B.   Continuation of nonconforming use of structure.  A lawful use
of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination, under the terms of
this zoning code as adopted or amended may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:



      1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by
this title in the zone in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zone in which it is
located and except as specifically provided for in this title.



      2.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any
parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use
at the time of adoption or amendment of this zoning code, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.



      3.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming
use of a structure, or structure and land, may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided that the Planning Commission, either by general
rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed
use is no more detrimental to the zone than the existing nonconforming use. 
In permitting such change, the Commission may require appropriate conditions
and safeguards.



      4.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in
or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which such structure is
located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.



      5.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive
calendar months, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall
not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the zone
in which it is located.



      6.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall thereafter
compel the discontinuance of the nonconforming use of the land.  Destruction
for the purpose of this paragraph means damage to an extent of more than
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the structure immediately
prior to destruction.



      7.   When a nonconforming use of a structure is replaced by a
more restrictive nonconforming use, the occupancy may not thereafter revert
to a less restrictive use.



      8.   If provision is made for the termination date of such
use, any use of such land after termination shall conform to the requirements
of this title for the zone in which it is located.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.060  CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   A.   Any structure made nonconforming by this title as adopted or
amended may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:



      1.   Such structure may not be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity, except as specifically provided for by
this title.



      2.   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost immediately
prior to destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this title.



      3.   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
zone in which it is located.



      4.   Such structure may be repaired provided:  the work
consists only of the repair and replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing; and where the aggregate costs do not exceed the current
assessed value of the improvements; and where the cubic space within the
structure as it existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this zoning
code is not increased.



      5.   If provision is made for the termination of such
structure or its nonconforming characteristics, any use of such land after
the termination date shall conform to the requirements of this title for the
zone in which it is located.



   B.   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this section
or any other section of this chapter, a nonconforming structure shall not be
changed in its utilization to another use in any land use zone until the said
structure meets all applicable requirements for new construction for said use
under the various ordinances and code provisions of this city then in effect,
including but not limited to Building and Fire Code provisions and property
development standards for the particular zone.



   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by any city or state official charged with
protecting the public health or safety, upon order of such official.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 444, passed 7-14-69)



§ 20.24.070  COST OF REPLACEMENT.



   In the absence of proof to the contrary, replacement cost as used in
this chapter shall mean four (4) times the assessed value of the structure at
the time of the destruction.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.080  COMPLETION OF BUILDING.



   A.   Any structure for which a valid building permit has been
granted prior to the adoption of this zoning code or amendment thereto, as
the case may be, and the actual construction of which has been started prior
to the effective date of this zoning code or amendment, may be completed in
accordance with the plans and specifications on file in the Building
Department, even though not conforming with the provisions of this title or
amendments thereto, as the case may be, provided:



      1.   The construction of proposed use of the structure is not
in violation of any other ordinance or law; and



      2.   Work on construction of the structure is diligently
carried on and completed within a reasonable time.



   B.   Actual construction shall be deemed to have started when
construction materials have been placed in permanent position and have been
permanently fastened.  Excavation which has been substantially begun
preparatory to rebuilding shall be deemed to be actual construction if
carried on diligently to and including rebuilding.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.090  ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO NONCONFORMING PUBLIC USE.



   Additions, extensions and alterations may be made to any nonconforming
public use, including but not limited to schools, parks, libraries and fire
stations, if the addition, extension or alteration:



   A.   Does not extend beyond the boundaries of the site in existence
when the use became nonconforming; and



   B.   Does not infringe upon any off-street parking required by this
chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.100  NONCONFORMING OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.



   Existing conforming buildings whose off-street parking and loading
facilities do not conform to the provisions of this title may be expanded or
facilities added, provided the requirements for off-street parking and
loading space shall have been complied with for those facilities which are
added and enlarged.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.110  USES UNDER VARIANCE OR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   Uses and buildings which are existing under a variance or a conditional
use permit granted under this title or any previous ordinance shall not be
considered as nonconforming and shall be permitted to continue under the
conditions and regulations imposed in said permit or variance and may be
expanded or enlarged upon first obtaining a conditional use permit under the
provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.120  CONDUCT TERMINATING NONCONFORMING USE.



   The right to continue a nonconforming use shall terminate as follows:



   A.   Changing such use to another use not permitted in the zone,
except as expressly permitted in this chapter.



   B.   Increasing or enlarging the area, space or volume occupied or
devoted to such use, except as expressly permitted in this chapter.



   C.   Adding a conforming or nonconforming use, except as permitted
in this chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.130  TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USE AND STRUCTURES.



   Nonconforming uses and structures shall be discontinued and removed
from their sites as follows:



   A.   Where the property is unimproved, two (2) years from the
effective date of this zoning code or amendment thereto creating the
nonconforming status.



   B.   Where the property is unimproved except for structures of a
type for which the Building Code does not require a building permit, three
(3) years from the effective date of this zoning code or amendment thereto
creating the nonconforming status.



   C.   Where the property is unimproved except for structures which
contain less than one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, three
(3) years from the effective date of this zoning code or amendment thereto
creating the nonconforming status.



   D.   Nonconforming signs.  Signs that do not conform to provisions
of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall be permitted to continue until the
expiration of presently approved variances and conditional use permits.  If
such nonconforming signs were previously nonconforming or were permitted with
no time limits, such signs shall also be permitted to continue for the period
as follows:



Wood Framed Signs   One (1) year from date of approval of this title



Steel Framed Signs   Two (2) years from date of approval of this title



   E.   In other cases, the nonconforming structures shall be removed
within ten (10) years from the effective date of this zoning code or within
such longer time as set forth below for types of construction defined by the
Building Code.



      1.   Type IV and Type V buildings (light combustible frame and
wood frame) used as:



         a.   One (1) family dwellings, two (2) family dwellings,
three (3) family dwellings, apartment houses and other buildings used for
residential occupancy, thirty-five (35) years;



         b.   Stores and factories, twenty-five (25) years;



         c.   Any other building not herein enumerated,
twenty-five (25) years.



      2.   Type III buildings (heavy timber construction and
ordinary masonry) used as:



         a.   One (1) family dwellings, two (2) family dwellings,
three (3) family dwellings, apartment houses, offices and hotels, forty (40)
years;



         b.   Structures with stores below and residences,
offices or a hotel above, forty (40) years;



         c.   Warehouses, stores and garages, forty (40) years;



         d.   Factories and industrial buildings, forty (40)
years.



      3.   Type I and Type II buildings (fire resistive) used as:



         a.   One (1) family dwellings, two (2) family dwellings,
three (3) family dwellings, apartment houses, offices and hotels, fifty (50)
years;



         b.   Theaters, warehouses, stores and garages, fifty
(50) years;



         c.   Factories and industrial buildings, fifty (50)
years.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.140  TERMINATION OF CERTAIN NONCONFORMING USES AND ANNEXED
STRUCTURES.



   A.   For any nonconforming building annexed to the city after
October 14, 1968, the time periods as established in this chapter, shall
become operative and date of removal shall be computed from the date the
building became part of the city.



   B.   For any nonconforming use or structure as set forth in this
chapter which was annexed to the city after the effective date of this zoning
code or amendment thereto, the time periods as established shall become
operative and computed from the date the use or structure became part of the
city.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.150  REVOCATION OF NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE.



   The Council may, after notice and public hearing, revoke the right to
continue a nonconforming use or structure, as follows:



   A.   Notice.  Notice shall be mailed to the recorded owner of the
property not less than twenty (20) days before the date of the public
hearing.  The notice shall state the facts concerning the impending action
and shall request appearance by said owner at the time and place specified
for the hearing, to show cause why the permit should not be revoked.



   B.   Council action.  Within fifteen (15) days after the public
hearing, the Council may by resolution revoke or modify the nonconforming
status of the use or structure.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.160  PUBLIC UTILITY USES; EXEMPTION.



   Nothing in this title pertaining to nonconforming structures and uses
shall be construed or applied so as to require the termination,
discontinuance or removal or so as to prevent the expansion, modernization,
replacement, repair, maintenance, alteration, reconstruction or rebuilding
and continued use of public utility buildings, structures, equipment and
facilities, provided that there be no change of use nor enlargement of those
areas so used.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.24.170  NONCONFORMING USES.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this zoning code, any
nonconforming uses shall be maintained in accordance with the property
development standards and requirements established for said use, including
any and all specific plans heretofore or hereafter adopted.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



CHAPTER 20.28:  SIGNS



Section



   20.28.010   Purpose of chapter



   20.28.020   Classification of signs and definitions



   20.28.030   Administration and enforcement



   20.28.040   Permits required



   20.28.050   Application for permits



   20.28.060   Review of sign permit application



   20.28.070   Fees



   20.28.080   Signs not requiring a permit



   20.28.090   Temporary sign permits



   20.28.100   Temporary searchlight permit



   20.28.110   Signs permitted in all zones



   20.28.120   Temporary off-site real estate for sale signs



   20.28.130   Temporary on-site real estate for sale signs and
advertising devices



   20.28.140   Other off-site directional signs



   20.28.150   Announcement or bulletin board signs



   20.28.160   Window signs



   20.28.170   Political signs



   20.28.180   Signs not designed to be viewed from the street



   20.28.190   Location and height of signs — general



   20.28.200   Sign identification



   20.28.210   Sign maintenance



   20.28.220   Sign material



   20.28.230   Sign illumination



   20.28.240   Prohibited signs



   20.28.250   Signs constituting safety hazards



   20.28.260   Parking of advertising vehicles or trailers



   20.28.270   Variances



   20.28.280   Violations and nuisance abatement: enforcement official,
enforcement and penalties



   20.28.290   Nonconformance



   20.28.300   Billboards



   20.28.310   Freeway oriented signs



   20.28.320   R-1 Single Family Residential Zone



   20.28.330   R-2, R-3, and R-3-I Multiple Family Residential Zones



   20.28.340   Commercial and Industrial Zones



§ 20.28.010  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.



   The regulation and control of the location, size, type, content, and
number of signs permitted shall be governed by the provisions of this
chapter.  The purposes of this chapter shall be to protect public and
private investments in buildings and open spaces; to preserve and improve the
appearance of the city as a desirable environment in which to live and work;
to create an attractive and pleasing atmosphere for nonresidents who come to
visit or to trade; to further encourage sound signing practices as an aid to
business; to provide better information to the public; to prevent excessive,
conflicting, and confusing sign displays; to reduce hazards to motorists and
pedestrians; and to promote to the maximum extent possible, the public
health, safety, and general welfare of citizens of the city by regulating and
controlling all matters relating to signs.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.020  CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS AND DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, signs within the city shall be
classified in accordance with one or more of the following definitions:



   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE.  A structure of any kind or character erected
or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes upon which any poster, bill,
printing, painting, or other advertising device must be placed.  For
purposes of this definition, a wall of a building may be considered an
advertising structure if it is used for sign purposes.



   ANIMATED SIGN or MOVING or ROTATING SIGNS.  Any sign designed to
attract attention through movement or the semblance of movement of the whole
or any part, including, but not limited to, signs which swing, twirl,
revolve, move back and forth or up and down; or signs which change color or
shades of color; or any other method or device which suggests movement, but
not including flags, banners, or time or temperature signs.



   ANNOUNCEMENT or BULLETIN BOARD SIGN.  Any sign permanent in character
designed to accept changeable copy, handbills, posters, or matters of a
similar nature.



   BANNER SIGNS, FLAGS, STREAMERS, and PENNANTS.  Any publicly visible
advertising display made of cloth, paper, plastic, cardboard, metal, or any
other usually flexible material, affixed to a freestanding pole or attached
to an advertising structure which may indicate the identity of or give or ask
information about or convey a message, either directly or indirectly, about a
person, entity, business, commodity, service, or idea, and which may move or
appear to move with air currents.



   BILLBOARD SIGN.  Any sign which advertises or displays in any manner
information about any business, industry, service, product, event, or pursuit
not conducted on the parcel or lot on which the sign is erected or
maintained. 



   BUSINESS SIGN.  Any sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered, or
conducted on the lot or parcel upon which sign is located, or to which it is
affixed.  Nothing contained in this definition shall be construed to permit
the erection or construction of a billboard unless said billboard is
otherwise permitted.



   CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  Any freestanding sign which advertises or
directs attention to a shopping center or area having three (3) or more
separate businesses located on a single parcel or lot but which does not
identify individual businesses or activities therein.



   CHANGEABLE COPY.  Copy for temporary use which copy is changed at
periodic intervals which may be utilized on freestanding, wall, bulletin
board, or announcement signs.



   COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PROGRAM.  A complete set of site specific sign
criteria for a multi-tenant development which demonstrates compatibility
between building and signage in terms of architectural treatment, design,
materials, and color.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  Any sign stating the names of those individuals or
businesses, such as architects, engineers, contractors, or owners, directly
connected with a construction project and/or the name of the project, the
address of the business, and emergency telephone numbers.



   COPY.  The text material of a sign including, but not limited to,
letters, words, logos, and emblems.



   COPY HEIGHT.  The vertical measurement of the sign copy.



   COPY LENGTH.  The horizontal measurement of the sign copy.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  Any sign erected for the purpose of informing the
viewer of the approximate route, direction or location of a given activity
but shall not include signs used specifically for advertising on-site
activities.



   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN.  Any sign with two faces only, with each face
oriented ninety to one hundred eighty degrees (90°—180°) from the other,
to include “V” shaped and “Ball” type signs.



   FACE OF BUILDING.  The wall of a building fronting on a street,
excluding any appurtenances, such as projecting fins, columns, pilasters,
canopies, marquees, showcases, or other architectural decorations but not
including any parapet wall required by building or other similar locally
adopted codes.



   FLASHING SIGN.  Any sign which contains or is illuminated by lights or
devices which are intermittently on and off, change in intensity, or which
creates the illusion of flashing in any manner.



   FREE STANDING SIGN.  Any self-supporting sign standing on the ground
and in no way attached to any building or building extension.  Freestanding
signs include, but are not limited to:



      1.   Directory signs.  Multi-tenant directory signs
advertising two or more businesses or tenants within small and midsize
development projects.  On large projects, a maximum of one (1) directory
sign shall be permitted.  No more than six (6) businesses or tenants shall
be advertised on a multi-tenant directory sign.



      2.   Monument signs.  Monument signs are low-profile
freestanding signs not exceeding six (6) feet in height.  Such signs may
include, but are not limited to:



         a.   Major tenant identification signs are street
oriented monument signs identifying a single major tenant in a development on
a midsize lot, such as a supermarket, bank, or department store.



         b.   Commercial and industrial center identification
signs are street orientated monument signs identifying the project
(development) name only.



         c.   Marquee signs are characterized by changeable copy.



      3.   Ground signs.  Ground signs are freestanding signs from
six (6) to twelve (12) feet in height.  The base structure-to-sign area
proportion shall be a minimum of one-half (½) the length of the sign area. 
These signs may advertise a combination of major tenant(s) and center
identification.



      4.   Directional signs.  Directional signs are signs which
inform the viewer of the approximate route, direction or location of a given
activity.



   FRONTAGE.  As utilized in this chapter, shall mean the length of a lot
along each street or other public thoroughfare, but not including such length
along an alley, railroad, or freeway.



   HEIGHT OF SIGNS.  The vertical distance from the uppermost point of
the sign including any proposed or existing ornamentation to the ground or
grade level immediately below such point or to the level of the upper surface
of the nearest curb of a street or alley, whichever measurement permits the
greater elevation of the sign.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign upon which a source of light is used in
order to make readable the message.  This definition shall include
internally and externally illuminated signs and reflectorized, glowing, or
radiating signs.



   LANDSCAPE PLANTER.  An area specifically designated for plant
materials which may be at, below, or above grade.



   LARGE PROJECT.  A development located on a lot or parcel with greater
than two hundred fifty (250) lineal feet of street frontage.



   LOCATION.  A lot site or premise, building, wall or any place
whatsoever upon which a sign is erected, constructed or maintained.



   LUMINOUS. That which emits light.



   MAJOR TENANT.  A business occupying a substantial percentage of the
total leasable square footage in a commercial and/or industrial
development.  The major tenant determination is made by the City Planner. 
Signage for no more than three (3) major tenants shall be permitted within a
single development.



   MARQUEE (CHANGEABLE COPY) SIGN.  Any sign which is characterized by
changeable copy whether said sign is a freestanding or a wall sign or whether
said sign projects from or is supported by a building.



   MIDSIZE PROJECT.  A development located on a lot or parcel with one
hundred (100) to two hundred fifty (250) lineal feet of street frontage.



   NAMEPLATE.  Any sign naming the occupant of the premises, his business
and/or address.



   OFF-SITE SIGN.  Any sign which advertises or informs persons in any
manner concerning businesses, services, goods, persons, or events at some
location other than the legal lot or parcel upon which the sign is located.



   PAINTED SIGN.  Any sign painted directly on the exterior surface of a
building or structure which has no raised borders, letters, characters,
decorations, or illuminating appliances.



   PARCEL or LOT.  As utilized in this chapter, shall mean:



      1.   A parcel of real property which is shown as a single lot
in a lawfully recorded subdivision approved pursuant to the provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 11500, et seq.); or



      2.   A parcel of real property, the dimensions and boundaries
of which are defined as a single lot by a lawfully recorded Record of Survey
map; or



      3.   A parcel of real property shown on a parcel map as a
single lot lawfully recorded pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision
Map Act (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, § 11500, et seq.); or



      4.   Two (2) or more parcels of real property which are
combined by an appropriately recorded written instrument or by common fee
ownership and usage.



   POLE SIGN.  A freestanding sign where the sign area is supported by
one (1) or more braces.



   POLITICAL SIGN.  Any sign advocating the election of a specific
candidate or candidates for political office or advocating a position with
respect to a ballot issue or issues.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  Any sign not designed to be attached to a building or
anchored to the ground, including “A” boards, sandwich signs, fence
signs, and vehicle mounted signs.



   POSTER SIGN.  Any portable sign or advertising device, temporary or
otherwise, which is attached to or placed on the ground in any manner and may
be visible from adjacent streets, highways, or neighboring property.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  Any sign which is suspended from or supported by a
building or wall and which projects more than twelve (12) inches from the
building or wall.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  Any sign and/or sign structure relating to the
sale, lease, or other disposition of the real property on which the sign is
located and which is temporary in nature.



   ROOF SIGN.  Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon, or
connected to, the roof of any building.



   SIGN.  Any visible display of illumination or material which, either
directly or indirectly, advertises, informs, or identifies persons,
businesses, commodities, services, or ideas, including all forms of flags,
streamers, pennants, banners, and all window signing.



   SIGN AREA.  The area in square feet of the smallest rectangle
enclosing the total exterior surface of a sign having but one (1) exposed
exterior surface; should the sign have more than one (1) surface, the sign
area shall be the aggregate area of all sign surfaces measured as above.



   SIGN STRUCTURE.  Any supports, uprights, bracings, guy rods, cables,
and frame work of a sign.



   SMALL PROJECT.  A development located on a lot or parcel with less
than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage.



   SNIPING.  Posting, sticking, tacking, affixing or placing of cloth,
paper or cardboard bills, cards or posters of metal, plastic or other
material to or upon fences, posts, trees, buildings or other structures or
surfaces, other than approved advertising structures with or without the
written consent of the owner, holder lessee, agent or trustee thereof on
which such sniping is performed.  SNIPING shall not include any sign or
notice issued by any court or public office or postings by a public officer
in the normal performance of a public duty nor a private person serving legal
notice.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  Any non-illuminated sign constructed of paper, cloth,
canvas, or other similar lightweight material, with or without frames,
including painted windows, flags, streamers, pennants, banners and other
signs not designed to be attached to a building or anchored to the ground,
intended to be displayed for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days.



   TENANT.  A business which occupies a commercial and/or industrial
building.  The tenant may own, lease, or rent the space which it occupies or
intends to occupy within an existing or new development.



   UNDER CANOPY SIGN.  Any illuminated or non-illuminated sign attached
to the underside of a projecting canopy or a separate freestanding canopy
which is attached perpendicular to the building frontage.



   WALL-AFFIXED SIGN.  A sign which is attached to an exterior wall of
any building or which is attached to any structure attached to the
building.  Wall-affixed signs include, but are not limited to:



      1.   Awning signs.  Signs attached to, painted on, or applied
to an awning or awning canopy.



      2.   Marquee signs.  Signs characterized by changeable copy.



      3.   Parapet signs.  Signs attached to a parapet, which is a
low wall used to protect the edge of a roof from view.



      4.   Projecting signs.  Signs which are suspended from or
supported by a building or wall and which projects more than twelve (12)
inches from the building or wall.



      5.   Wall signs.  Signs which have one (1) display surface
placed on or parallel to and in front of any exterior wall of the building,
and which projects not more than twelve (12) inches from the wall or
structure to which it is attached.



   WINDOW SIGN.  Any sign painted, attached, glued, or otherwise affixed
to a window or otherwise easily visible from the exterior of the building.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.030  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Development Services Director or his or her
authorized designee to enforce all the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 510.A. and 510.B. of this zoning code,
the city's municipal code and the currently adopted Uniform Building Code.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.040  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   A.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, no
sign shall hereafter be erected, reerected, constructed or altered until a
sign permit for the same has been issued by the person or body having final
authority to do so or until a conditional use permit with respect to such
sign has been finally granted by either the Planning Commission or the City
Council in instances in which a conditional use permit is required.



   B.   Where proposed signs are to be illuminated, a separate
electrical permit shall be obtained.  Where a permanent freestanding sign is
proposed which exceeds one thousand ($1,000) dollars in valuation, is in
excess of six (6) feet in height or, in the case of a permanent wall sign, is
over twenty (20) square feet in area, a plan check fee in accordance with §
20.28.070.C. shall be required.  This provision shall be applied to all
signs classified as nonconforming after the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.050  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   Applications for sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by the
Development Services Director or his or her designee and shall contain, or
have attached thereto, the following information and material:



   A.   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
property.



   B.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant (owner
of the sign).



   C.   The name, address, and telephone number of the sign contractor,
if any.



   D.   The location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon
which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected.



   E.   Three (3) copies of a plan and elevations showing the:



      1.   Sign height, size, proposed colors, type style, elevation
above final grade level, proposed location on the premises of the sign
structure, its relationship to adjacent buildings or structures, and the
method of illumination and materials proposed to be used.



      2.   Location, size, and height of all signs and structures
existing on or within one hundred (100) feet of the premises at the time of
making such application.



      3.   Structural details and calculations signed by a person
competent and qualified to prepare such information if required by the
Development Services Director or his or her designee.



   F.   Photographs showing the premises and adjacent property at the
time of making the application.



   G.   Such other information as the Development Services Director or
his or her designee shall deem reasonable and necessary to ensure safety of
construction and compliance with this and all other ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.060  REVIEW OF SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION.



   A.   General.  In the issuance of a sign permit, the factors noted
below shall be utilized by the Development Services staff as guidelines for
determining that a submitted sign proposal furthers the intent and purpose
established by this chapter.



   B.   Appeals.  An appeal from a decision of the Development
Services staff relative to the application of the review guidelines contained
herein shall be made to the Planning Commission.  Such appeal shall be filed
with the Secretary of the Commission in writing within ten (10) days after
mailing of notification to the applicant by the Development Services Director
or his or her designee that any submitted sign proposal has been denied or
modifications required in an effort to effect conformance with the noted
guidelines.  An appeal from the Planning Commission decision may be made to
the City Council if such appeal is filed in writing with the City Clerk
within ten (10) days after mailing of notification of the Planning Commission
action.



   C.   Guidelines.



      1.   In determining the consistency of each proposed sign with
the purposes of this chapter, the following guidelines shall be considered:



         a.   That the proposed sign will be legible under normal
viewing conditions, based on its location and the design of its visual
element.



         b.   That the proposed sign will not obscure from view
or detract from existing sign, based on its location, shape, color and other
similar considerations.



         c.   That the proposed sign will be in harmony with
adjacent properties and surroundings, based on the size, shape, height,
color, placement, and the proximity of such proposed sign to adjacent
properties and surroundings.



         d.   That the proposed structure, sign, or display will
be so constructed that it will not constitute a hazard to the public.



         e.   That the proposed sign is not designed to have the
advertising thereon maintained primarily to be viewed from a freeway.



         f.   Exceptions to these provisions.  The provisions of
this chapter, as the same relate to the constructions, erection, and
maintenance of signs along freeways, shall not apply to any structure, sign,
or display constructed, painted, or maintained when the advertising is
limited to:



            (1)   The name of the building whereon the sign is
located; or



            (2)   The name of the person, firm or corporation
occupying the building and the type of business conducted by such person,
firm, or corporation; or



            (3)   The name of the product manufactured on the
premises; or



            (4)   Signs, structures, or displays which are
limited to the advertising of the services or goods sold on the premises, but
no such advertising structures, signs, or displays shall exceed thirty (30)
square feet in area or have mechanical or moving parts; or



            (5)   Directional warning or informational
structures required or authorized by law; or



            (6)   Official notices issued by any court or
public body or officer.



      2.   A sign permit shall be issued only for those signs which
comply with the above guidelines.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.070  FEES.



   A.   Every applicant, before the granting of a building permit,
shall pay the city building permit fees based upon the valuation of the
proposed sign as established by City Council resolution, as may be amended
from time to time.



   B.   Every applicant, before the granting of an electrical permit,
shall pay the city electrical permit fees as established by City Council
resolution, as may be amended from time to time.



   C.   Signs exceeding one thousand ($1,000) dollars valuation shall
require a plan checking fee payable at the time of plan submittal and equal
to fifty percent (50%) of the sign permit fee.



   D.   In addition to the other charges, a two ($2) dollar fee shall
be paid for all signs requiring a permit to defray the cost of a metal tag to
be placed on each such sign.  Such tag shall be furnished by the city and
shall include the sign permit number, approval date and/or expiration date
for any sign constructed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.080  SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.



   A.   The following signs, if non-illuminated, are allowed in all
zones with no permit required:



      1.   a.   Nameplates not exceeding one (1) square foot;



         b.   Interior signs;



         c.   Window signing not exceeding twenty-five percent
(25%) of total window space.



      2.   Charitable or educational signs not exceeding four (4)
square feet in area, which are temporary in nature in accordance with time
limitations permitted in § 20.28.090 of this chapter.



      3.   Governmental or other legally required posters, notices,
or signs.



      4.   Real estate for sale or rent signs, provided that:



         a.   One such sign is displayed per lot or parcel;



         b.   Each sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
area;



         c.   Each such sign shall be placed a minimum of five
(5) feet inside the property line.



      5.   Governmental flags.



      6.   Traffic, directional, warning, or informational signs
required or authorized by any public body.



      7.   Names of buildings and date of erection when cut into a
masonry surface, or made of incombustible material and not larger than eight
(8) square feet, and similar memorial signs and markers.



      8.   Signs erected in or near the city boundary which sign
contains the name of the city and the name of, or any other information
regarding civic, fraternal, or religious organizations located therein.



   B.   In addition, permits shall not be required in the following
situations:



      1.   The changing of advertising copy or messages on bulletin
boards and similar signs specifically designed for the use of replaceable or
changeable copy, unless electrical alterations are made.



      2.   Repainting and cleaning of a sign or advertising
structure, unless a change in structure size, height, or location is made.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.090  TEMPORARY SIGN PERMITS.



   A.   A temporary sign permit may be issued by the Development
Services Director or his or her designee subject to the application
requirements for the following uses:



      1.   Temporary thirty (30) day signs.  A temporary sign
permit may be issued for special signs and advertising devices such as flags,
streamers, banners, and spinners, and business or commodity identification
signs for businesses of a seasonal nature for a period of time not to exceed
thirty (30) days from the installation of the device.  Sign copy and/or text
may be changed within the permit period.  Such permits may not be granted to
the same business or location more than two (2) times during any one (1) year
and further, the thirty (30) day time period shall be concurrent with and not
in addition to, any forty-five (45) day permit.  The two (2) permitted time
periods may not be granted consecutively, but shall be separated by a time
period of at least sixty (60) days.



      2.   Temporary forty-five (45) day signs.  A temporary
forty-five (45) day sign permit may be issued for the following special
signs, such temporary signs shall be allowed for a period of time not
exceeding forty-five (45) days from the date of installation of the device. 
Sign copy and/or text may be changed within the permit period. Such permits
shall not be granted to the same business or location more than two (2) times
during any one (1) year.  The two (2) permitted time periods may not be
granted consecutively, but shall be separated by a time period of at least
sixty (60) days. Such signs shall be limited to:



         a.   Special displays of goods, merchandise, or prizes
that may be offered in connection with area wide, regional, and/or national
sales campaigns or seasonal promotions.



         b.   Special signs or banners mounted on the exterior
wall of a building or structure which do not occupy more than ten percent
(10%) of the total outside wall area upon which the sign is located,
exclusive of windows or door openings, such signs shall be limited to one
hundred (100) square feet on any street frontage.  One (1) temporary,
portable type sign, not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet, which
advertises special goods, services, or products offered on the site.



         c.   Signs within city right-of-way areas. All temporary
signs within city right-of-way areas that pertain to a specific activity or
event may be placed not earlier than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to
such event. Said signs shall be designed and displayed in a manner not to
create conflicts with pedestrian or vehicular safety to the satisfaction of
the Development Services Director.



      3.   Temporary once-per-week, eight (8) hour signs.  A
temporary sign permit may be issued for a six (6) month period for the
once-per-week display of signs generally defined by the preceding §
20.28.090.A.1.  Such signs shall observe the additional following
requirements:



         a.   Permit frequency.  No more than one approval of a
once-per-week temporary sign permit shall be granted to any business or
location during a six (6) month time frame.



         b.   Forfeiture of 30/45 day permit.  Any business or
location approved for a once-per-week temporary sign permit shall forfeit its
eligibility for the 30 and 45 day temporary sign permits prescribed by §§
20.28.090.A.1. and 2. for the duration of the approval.  A minimum of sixty
(60) days shall be observed between the expiration of a once-per-week permit
and any subsequent 30/45 day permit approval.



         c.   Display period.  Once-per-week display period
shall be limited to a maximum of eight (8) hours commencing at the time of
sign installation.



         d.   Size of signs.  Signs shall be limited to a
maximum of six (6) square feet per side or face.  No signs shall exceed a
maximum of two (2) sides or faces.



         e.   Number of signs.  A maximum of two (2) signs shall
be allowed.



         f.   Height of signs.  A maximum overall height of five
(5) feet shall be allowed.



         g.   Regular scheduled placement of signs.  The
applicant shall identify a specific, weekly, eight (8) hour display period
which shall remain consistent through the permit period.



         h.   Location of signs.



            (1)   Sign placement shall be allowed on private
property and within city right-of-way areas.  Signs proposed for
right-of-way placement shall be designed and displayed in a manner not to
create conflicts with pedestrian or vehicular safety to the satisfaction of
the Development Services Director.



            (2)   Where signs are located on private property
other than the subject of the sign



(i.e. off-site directional sign) that private property shall forfeit its
eligibility for the display of any temporary sign during the eight (8) hour
period of display by the off-site applicant.



            (3)   Where two or more tenants of a
multiple-tenant property (i.e. shopping center) request overlapping display
periods for once-per-week temporary signs, placement of said signs shall be
coordinated to maintain an attractive, uncluttered, quality streetscape
appearance.  Compliance shall be subject to the final review and approval of
the Development Services Director, with any appeal of the decision to the
Planning Commission.



         i.   Construction of signs.



            (1)   Signs shall be constructed of durable,
permanent materials including, but not limited to, steel, aluminum, wood,
and/or composites (i.e. fiberglass).



            (2)   Non-permanent materials, including, but not
limited to paper, cardboard, posterboard, balloons, streamers, spinners,
plastic laminates and similar materials shall not be used.



            (3)   Construction shall be designed to
structurally withstand regular weekly placement and removal of the sign.



            (4)   Design aesthetics shall be compatible with
surrounding architecture, colors, and street amenities, with a goal to
complement, rather than detract form the streetscape.



         j.   Plan submittal.  Detailed site and public
right-of-way plans, photographs, and any other materials as deemed necessary
by the City Planner, to illustrate compliance with this section shall be
provided at the time of temporary sign permit application.



   B.   Any person applying for temporary sign shall file a request
indicating size and type of sign and the proposed location thereof with the
Development Services Director or his or her



designee.  The applicant shall be required to pay appropriate fees as
determined by City Council resolution for processing said application.



   C.   Any applicant found to be in violation of this section shall,
at a minimum, forfeit their ability to receive approval of a temporary sign
permit for a period of sixty (60) days following any observed violation of
this section.



(Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89; Am. Ord. 929, passed 10-20-92; Am. Ord. 986,
passed 4-16-96; Am. Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 12-7-99)



§ 20.28.100  TEMPORARY SEARCHLIGHT PERMIT.



   A.   A temporary searchlight permit may be used for special events
such as, but not limited to, grand openings and premiere showings.  Such
permits may be granted for a maximum period of ten (10) days.  The ten (10)
days may be consecutive or may occur within a thirty (30) day period.  Such
a temporary searchlight permit shall be granted one (1) time for any
particular business or location.



   B.   Any person applying for a temporary searchlight permit shall
file a request indicating purpose, location, period of operation, time of
operation, and any necessary information as determined by the Development
Services Director or his designee, of said searchlight, with the Development
Services Director or designee.  The applicant shall be required to pay
appropriate fees as determined by City Council resolution for processing said
application.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-7-81)



§ 20.28.110  SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONES.



   All of the signs listed hereinafter in this section shall be permitted
in all zones subject to the following stated conditions:



   A.   One (1) non-illuminated temporary construction or contractor's
sign may be displayed for each residential, manufacturing or commercial
development, provided that:



      1.   Such sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in overall
height.



      2.   Such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area.



      3.   Such sign shall be placed a minimum of five (5) feet
inside the property line.



      4.   Such sign shall be displayed after the issuance of a
building permit until final inspection of the development or for a period of
one (1) year, whichever is less.



      5.   Such sign shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with a City Planning Commission approved design intended to be used
consistently throughout the city for purposes of identifying projects or
construction activities within the city.



      6.   A one hundred ($100) dollar cash bond shall be posted
with the City Treasurer or designee to guarantee removal of said sign.  A
right of entry permit shall also be included with said bond.



   B.   One non-illuminated sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in
area, pertaining only to the sale, lease, or rental of the particular
building, property, or premises upon which such sign is displayed.



   C.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the
following signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City
Planning Commission approved design intended to be used consistently
throughout the city for purposes of identifying such facilities as noted in
paragraph C.7. below.



      1.   Official notices issued by any court, public body, or
public officer.



      2.   Notices posted by any public officer in the performance
of a public duty or for any person in giving legal notice.



      3.   Traffic, directional, warning, or informational signs
required or authorized by any public body.



      4.   Official signs used for emergency only.



      5.   Permanent memorial or historical signs, plaques, or
markers.



      6.   A sign erected in or near the city boundary which sign
contains the name of the city and the names of, or any other information
regarding civic, fraternal, or religious organizations located therein.



      7.   Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet erected for the
convenience of the public such as signs identifying rest rooms, public
telephone, walkways, and similar features or facilities.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.120  TEMPORARY OFF-SITE REAL ESTATE FOR SALE SIGNS.



   Temporary real estate directional signs, directing prospective
purchasers to a subdivision having lots or houses for sale may be erected and
maintained provided that such signs do not create a hazardous traffic
condition or conditions and subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission pursuant to those procedures set forth in this zoning code,
governing the issuance of conditional use permits.  An application for a
permit for such a sign or signs shall comply with § 20.28.050 above and the
criteria prescribed for the review of such signs shall include those criteria
contained in § 20.28.060.C. and the criteria set forth.



   A.   Location.  Directional signs shall be permitted in all zones,
on vacant property only, within one hundred (100) feet of a major or
secondary highway subject to all of the following conditions:



      1.   Each subdivision or land development within the city
shall be permitted a maximum of four (4) directional signs within the city. 
Each land development outside of the city shall be permitted a maximum of two
(2) directional signs which may be located within the city.



      2.   The maximum number of directional signs permitted between
two (2) intersections of arterial highways shall not exceed four (4).  Where
the distance between said intersection is less than three-eighths (€) of a
mile, no more than two (2) signs shall be permitted.



      3.   The minimum distance between directional signs shall not
be less than five hundred (500) feet.



      4.   Directional signs shall not be located within five
hundred (500) feet of any existing freeway right-of-way.



      5.   Directional signs shall be prohibited on Brea Boulevard
between the city limits on the south, and State College Boulevard/Central
Avenue on the north, and on Imperial Highway between the A-O4 Flood Channel
on the west, and Castlegate Lane on the east.



      6.   Directional signs shall not be located on any building,
fence or wall.



      7.   The following setbacks shall be maintained:



         a.   One hundred (100) feet from any residence, school
or park.



         b.   Twenty-five (25) feet from an existing right-of-way
of any arterial highway.



         c.   One hundred (100) feet from an existing
right-of-way of any intersection of a street with an arterial highway.



   B.   Size.



      1.   The area of each face of a directional sign shall not
exceed fifty (50) square feet.



      2.   Maximum width permitted, eight (8) feet.



      3.   Maximum length permitted, ten (10) feet.



      4.   Maximum height permitted, sixteen (16) feet.



      5.   Ground clearance shall not be more than eight (8) feet or
less than five (5) feet.



   C.   Bonds.  A cash bond shall be posted in the amount of one
hundred (100) dollars for each sign to guarantee removal of the sign upon
expiration of the permit.



   D.   Time limit.  Each directional sign shall have a time limit of
one (1) year from the date of authorization; provided, however, said limit
may be extended by the Development Services Director or designee not to
exceed two (2) successive periods of six (6) months each.  Upon written
request, the Planning Commission may authorize additional time extensions as
deemed necessary.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.130  TEMPORARY ON-SITE REAL ESTATE FOR SALE SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
DEVICES.



   Temporary real estate signs advertising real property which has been
subdivided for the purposes of sale or lease shall be permitted in all zones
without a permit fee, subject to the following conditions:



   A.   The construction of any such sign shall be in strict compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and all other laws of the city.



   B.   The sign shall remain only as long as some portion of the
property advertised for sale remains unsold, or for a period of two (2) years
from the recordation of the final map, whichever period is shorter.  Subject
to review and approval by the Planning Commission, such time may be extended
for additional one (1) year periods provided there is still a bona fide
offering of lots in the subdivision for sale.



   C.   The signs shall be located on the premises which they advertise.



   D.   No sign shall exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.



   E.   Not more than two (2) such signs shall be permitted in any
subdivision under twenty (20) acres in size.  On subdivisions involving more
than twenty (20) acres, one (1) additional sign shall be permitted for each
additional five (5) acres, but not exceeding a total of four (4) signs
totaling not more than eight hundred (800) square feet.



   F.   In addition to any other signs permitted under this section,
identification signs containing the tract name shall be permitted provided
there shall not be more than one (1) such sign for each three (3) lots. 
Each such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area.



   G.   Four (4) signs not exceeding a cumulative total of twelve (12)
square feet in area shall be permitted on each lot in a subdivision
containing model homes in addition to any other signs permitted in this
section.  Such signs shall be removed after the developer concludes the
initial sale of all lots or homes in the development to their initial owners.



   H.   The use of flags, streamers, pennants, banners, and spinners
shall be subject to the approval of the Development Services Director or
designee.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.140  OTHER OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.



   A.   1.   Other off-site signs utilized to direct pedestrians or
motorists to a particular location may be permitted in any zone subject to
the approval of the Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures set forth
in this zoning code, governing the issuance of conditional use permits.



      2.   The application for such a permit shall conform to those
requirements set forth in § 20.28.050 above, and the criteria set forth in
§ 20.28.060.C. as well as the following criteria shall be applied by the
Planning Commission in considering such an application.



         a.   Each such sign shall not exceed four (4) square
feet in area.



         b.   Illuminated signs may be permitted if located not
closer than one hundred (100) feet from an occupied residence.



         c.   Such signs may be permitted in any zone.



         d.   No such directional sign shall be placed on public
right-of-way without approval by the City Council after a recommendation from
the Planning Commission.



   B.   Signs directing persons to such activities as garage sales or
residential open houses may be permitted in all zones subject to approval of
the Development Services Director or his or her designee.



   C.   The use of flags, streamers, pennants, banners, and spinners
shall be subject to the approval of the Development Services Director or
designee.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.150  ANNOUNCEMENT OR BULLETIN BOARD SIGNS.



   Churches, schools, or other public bodies or institutions may maintain
a freestanding announcement sign or bulletin board not to exceed eight (8)
square feet in height or six (6) feet in length, inclusive of supporting
structures, on any lot or parcel owned by such church, school, or other
public body or institution.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.160  WINDOW SIGNS.



   No sign placed in or upon the window of any structure utilized for
commercial or industrial purposes shall be so placed as to obscure more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total transparent area of any window.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.170  POLITICAL SIGNS.



   Political signs shall be permitted on private property in any zone
subject to property owner approval, for each local, special district, state,
or national election.  Each such sign shall be removed within ten (10) days
following the election to which it relates.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89; Am. Ord. 1184,
passed 9-20-16)



§ 20.28.180  SIGNS NOT DESIGNED TO BE VIEWED FROM THE STREET.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the erection, location
or construction of signs on private property when such signs satisfy each of
the following conditions:



   A.   Such signs are not designed to be viewed from any dedicated
street or highway; and



   B.   Such signs are designed to direct and guide pedestrian and
vehicular traffic while such traffic is on the parcel of real property on
which such signs are located.



§ 20.28.190  LOCATION AND HEIGHT OF SIGNS — GENERAL.



   A.   All signs, except directional or temporary signs, shall be
erected upon the premises occupied by the person or business sought to be
identified by such signs.



   B.   No sign shall be located upon or project over a public
right-of-way, except for signs announcing civic and charitable organizations
from within the city, subject to approval by the Development Services
Director or his or her designee.



   C.   No sign shall be attached in any way to a public utility pole
or public property, except non-advertising signs of public utility companies
as may be required in their operations which provide service for the health
and welfare of the general public, or as required by any law or regulations
of the State of California, or any agency thereof.



   D.   No sign shall be placed in such a manner that visibility of
signs on adjacent properties is obscured.



   E.   No sign shall extend above the eave line or parapet of the
building on which it is located, except where such sign forms an integral and
structurally necessary part of the building.



   F.   No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner
that any portion of its surface or supports shall be closer than six (6) feet
horizontal of, or twelve (12) feet vertically of, overhead electric
conductors which are energized in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) volts.



   G.   No sign shall interfere with free use of any fire escape, exit,
or any public right-of-way.



   H.   Maximum height of freestanding signs shall be twelve (12) feet,
except as otherwise prescribed in § 20.28.340 of this chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.200  SIGN IDENTIFICATION.



   Every sign requiring a permit shall have the permit number and a date
of approval and/or expiration date placed on the exterior surface of the sign
body in a location where such information will be legible in conformance with
§ 20.28.070, Fees.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.210  SIGN MAINTENANCE.



   All signs and sign structures shall be kept in good repair including
replacement of defective parts and illuminating fixtures, repainting,
cleaning, and otherwise in a presentable condition such that they do not
detract from the appearance of the surrounding area.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.220  SIGN MATERIAL.



   All signs and sign structures requiring a permit shall be constructed
of wood, metal, or comparable weatherproof material, shall be so enclosed as
to provide against their infestation by birds and vermin, and shall be
structurally safe.  No material more combustible than wood shall be used in
the construction of any permanent exterior sign.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.230  SIGN ILLUMINATION.



   The approval of any illuminated sign shall not be final until thirty
(30) days after installation, during which period the Development Services
Director or his or her designee may order the dimming of any illumination
found to be excessively brilliant.  No sign permit shall be valid until such
order has been carried out to an extent satisfactory to the Development
Services Director or his or her designee.  Illumination shall be considered
excessive when it prevents normal perception of objects or buildings beyond
or in the vicinity of the sign, or when it shines directly onto residential
zones.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.240  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   Except as otherwise expressly permitted in this chapter, all signs are
expressly prohibited, including, but not limited to, the following:



   A.   Flashing signs.



   B.   Moving or rotating signs.



   C.   Projecting signs.



   D.   Roof signs.



   E.   Portable signs.



   F.   Billboards.



   G.   No sign shall be allowed which contains obscene, indecent, or
immoral matter.



   H.   Flags, streamers, pennants, or banners.



   I.   Signs not otherwise in conformance with this title.



   J.   Painted signs.



   K.   Pole signs.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.250  SIGNS CONSTITUTING SAFETY HAZARDS.



   A.   Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, movement,
content, coloring, or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or
a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or
detracting from the visibility of any official traffic control device, or by
diverting or tending to divert the attention of drivers of moving vehicles
from the traffic movement on the public streets and highways shall be
prohibited.



   B.   All signs shall be located in a manner to assure that sight
distance is not impaired at all locations for vehicular traffic to and from
the premises.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.260  PARKING OF ADVERTISING VEHICLES OR TRAILERS.



   No person shall park any vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way or
in a location on private property which is obviously intended to be viewed
primarily from such right-of-way which has attached thereto, or suspended
therefrom, any advertising or directional sign except a sign decoratively
painted directly upon, or regularly affixed to, the body or other integral
part of the vehicle and subject to the approval of the Development Services
Director or his or her designee.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



§ 20.28.270  VARIANCES.



   A.   Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results
inconsistent with the general purposes of this chapter would occur from its
strict literal interpretation and enforcement, the Planning Commission may
grant a variance therefrom upon such terms and conditions as it deems
necessary.  Such variances shall be in harmony with the general purposes and
intent of this chapter so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.



   B.   Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as
will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a
grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other
properties.



   C.   The provisions of this zoning code, pertaining to variances,
shall apply to the consideration of any sign variance request.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.280  VIOLATIONS AND NUISANCE ABATEMENT: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL,
ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES.



   The provisions contained in § 510 of this zoning code, shall be
applicable with respect to the provisions of and penalties for violation of
this chapter.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.290  NONCONFORMANCE.



   Signs which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to § 20.24.130.D. of this zoning code.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.300  BILLBOARDS.



   No billboard shall be erected or constructed in the city on or after
the effective date of this zoning code.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.310  FREEWAY ORIENTED SIGNS.



   A.   The provisions of this section are adopted in accordance with
the rights and powers held by the city in accordance with the rights and
powers granted to the city under the constitution and the laws of the state
in order to:



      1.   Provide for the proper development and improvement of
property along the freeways within the city.



      2.   Facilitate the free and rapid flow of traffic on streets,
highways, and freeways within the city.



      3.   Prevent and eliminate hazards to the safety of travel on
streets, highways, and freeways within the city.



      4.   Promote the public health, safety, and welfare.



   B.   Unlawful signs and structures.  No advertising structure,
accessory sign, post sign, or other advertising sign shall be erected,
constructed, located, or maintained regardless of the district or zone in
which it is located; other than as otherwise permitted pursuant to §
20.28.060.C.1.f. of this chapter.



      1.   If such structure is designed to have or has the
advertising thereon maintained primarily to be viewed from a freeway; or



      2.   If such structure or sign, because of its location, size,
nature, or type, constitutes, or tends to constitute, a hazard to the safe
and efficient operation of vehicles upon a freeway or create a condition
which endangers the safety of persons or property thereon.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.320  R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE.



   Permitted signs.



   A.   One (1) illuminated or non-illuminated nameplate not exceeding
one (1) square foot indicating the name and/or address of the occupant.



   B.   One (1) non-illuminated sign not exceeding six (6) square feet
in area to advertise the lease, rent, or sale of the premises.  Such sign
shall be located not closer to the front property line than five (5) feet nor
closer to any side property line than ten (10) feet.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.330  R-2, R-3 AND R-3-I  MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   A.   Permitted signs.



      1.   One (1) illuminated on non-illuminated wall sign per
parcel or lot for the purpose of identification which contains the name
and/or address of the apartment development only.



      2.   One (1) illuminated or non-illuminated freestanding sign
for each parcel or lot for the purpose of identification which contains the
name and/or address of the development only.  All freestanding signs,
exclusive of those defined in paragraph A.4. of this section, shall be
located within a landscaped area having dimensions at least one-half (½) the
area of the sign.  Freestanding signs shall be located at least fifteen (15)
feet from the curb face.



      3.   One (1) non-illuminated sign, not to exceed six (6)
square feet in area, pertaining only to the sale, lease or rental of the
particular building, property or premises upon which such sign is displayed.



      4.   One (1) non-illuminated or illuminated nameplate not
exceeding thirty-two (32) square inches in area for each dwelling unit,
indicating the name and/or address of the occupant. 



      5.   Apartments with frontage on more than one (1) street
shall be permitted one (1) additional wall sign and/or one (1) additional
freestanding sign within the allowable sign area based on the applicable lot
frontage.  In establishing the size of each such sign in accordance with the
formula set forth in paragraph B. of this section, only the lineal frontage
of the street upon which each of such sign faces shall be used in the
computation, and that sign area shall be the maximum permitted on that street
frontage.



   B.   Aggregate area of signs permitted.  The maximum combined area
of the signs defined in paragraphs A.1. and 2. of this section shall not
exceed the following:



      1.   Less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage — twenty
(20) square feet.



      2.   One hundred (100) to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
of frontage — twenty-five (25) square feet.



      3.   Over one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of frontage —
thirty (30) square feet.



   C.   Permitted height.  Freestanding signs shall have a maximum
height of six (6) feet inclusive of supporting structures.  When any
freestanding sign is located within twenty (20) feet of the ultimate street
right-of-way, said sign shall have a maximum height of four (4) feet.



   D.   Prohibited signs.  All signs not expressly permitted shall be
prohibited, including but not limited to:



      1.   Roof signs.



      2.   Flashing signs.



      3.   Animated signs.



      4.   Moving or rotating signs.



      5.   Projecting signs.



      6.   Portable signs.



      7.   “Sniping” signs.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.28.340  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES.



   A.   Signs permitted subject to a sign permit.



      1.   Wall-affixed signs per paragraph C.1. of this section.



      2.   Freestanding signs per paragraph C.2. of this section.



      3.   Address-plate:  one (1) per parcel, lot, business, or
tenant, not to exceed one and one-half (1½) square feet in sign area.



      4.   Real estate signs:  one (1) per parcel, lot, business,
or tenant, per §§ 20.28.120 and 20.28.130 of this chapter.



      5.   Window signs per paragraph C.3. of this section.



      6.   Comprehensive sign program per paragraph C.4. of this
section.



   B.   All signs not expressly permitted shall be prohibited, per §
20.28.240 of this chapter.



   C.   Sign development standards.



      1.   Wall-affixed signs.



         a.   Development standards.



            (1)   Maximum sign area - One (1) square foot of
sign area per each lineal foot of building frontage.



            (2)   Maximum sign length - Seventy-five percent
(75%) of building frontage or seventy-five  percent (75%) of tenant space
frontage.



            (3)   Maximum letter height - Twenty-four (24)
inches, except for major tenants which letter height shall not exceed five
(5) feet.



            (4)   Maximum number - One (1) sign per building
face or tenant space, not to exceed three (3) signs per tenant.



         b.   Design standards.



            (1)   All conduits, raceways, transformers,
junction boxed, and openings in the building surface shall be concealed.  If
canopy architecture prohibits concealing hardware, it shall be enclosed in a
manner consistent with quality fabrication practices, and painted to match
the adjacent wall color.  The method of installation shall be approved by
the City Planner.



            (2)   All exterior signs exposed to the weather
shall be mounted directly onto the building face and shall be completely
sealed in a watertight enclosure.  All bolts, fastenings, and clips used
shall be of hot-dipped galvanized iron, stainless steel, or other
non-corrosive material.



            (3)   Internal illumination shall be thirty (30)
milli-amp neon gas system or fluorescent tube(s), labeled in accordance with
the “National Board of Fire Underwriters Specifications.”



            (4)   No labels or other identification will be
permitted on the exposed surface of the sign except those required by local
ordinance.



            (5)   Cabinet signs shall incorporate opaque
background fields with only sign copy to be illuminated.  Sign background
shall be of a non-reflective material.



            (6)   Individual channel or reverse channel
letters are encouraged for use in all retail commercial projects for their
legibility and visual effect.



      2.   Free-standing signs.



         a.   Development standards.



            (1)   Maximum sign area.



               Small project - Twenty-four (24) square feet.



               Midsize project - 0.2 x f, where f equals the
lineal feet of street frontage.



               Midsize project with less than 120 lineal feet
of street frontage - Twenty-four (24) square feet.



               Large project - 0.2 x f, where f equals the
lineal feet of street frontage, provided no one (1) sign copy per face shall
exceed eighty (80) square feet.



            (2)   Maximum sign height.



               Small project - Four (4) feet.



               Midsize project - Six (6) feet.



               Large project - .03 x f, where f equals the
lineal feet along the street frontage in the aggregate, with no one (1) sign
to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.



            (3)   Maximum letter height. Twenty-four (24)
inches, except for major tenant which letter height shall not exceed five (5)
feet.



            (4)   Maximum number.



               Small project - One (1) freestanding sign per
street frontage.



               Midsize project - One (1) freestanding sign per
street frontage.



               Large project - Three (3) freestanding signs
per street frontage.  Signs shall be placed a minimum of three hundred (300)
feet apart.



            (5)   Maximum sign length.  No maximum except as
determined by other requirements.



         b.   Design standards.  Freestanding signs shall be
compatible with the architectural style, design, color, and material of the
building(s) within the development.



      3.   Window signs.  No window signs shall obscure more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total transparent area of any window.



      4.   Comprehensive sign programs.  Comprehensive sign
programs shall be subject to a conditional use permit approved by the Planing
Commission.



         a.   Performance standards.  A comprehensive sign
program shall describe the proposed type, number, size, location, design, and
colors and materials for each sign within a development project. 
Comprehensive sign programs will be reviewed for consistency with the
following performance standards:



            (1)   The sign program incorporates the sign
development standards for individual sign types.



            (2)   The sign program shall enhance the overall
development through coordinated and compatible architectural style, design,
color, and material.



            (3)   The sign program combines various types of
signs, such as freestanding and wall-affixed signs, to effect the optimum
blend of business advertising and community design.



            (4)   The sign program should utilize the
standards described in § 20.28.340.C.  Differences in those standards will
be reviewed on a case by case basis.  Individual channel letter signs are
encouraged.



   D.   General provisions.



      1.   Architectural style.



         a.   Each sign shall complement the architectural
design, color, and materials of the main building or buildings upon the site,
and shall be compatible with the character of existing improvements.



         b.   Signs located upon a lot with only one (1) main
building shall be compatible with the style and character of that building
and shall be designed to incorporate at least one (1) of the predominantly
visual design elements of the main building.



      2.   Sign copy.  Sign copy shall include minimal
information.  Information such as telephone numbers, list of products and
pictures is not permitted.  The name of the business or use shall be the
dominant message on the sign.



      3.   Illumination.  Illumination, if any, shall be maintained
by artificial light which shall be stationary and constant in intensity and
color at all times.



      4.   Landscaping.  Freestanding signs should be placed within
landscaped areas equal in size to the square footage of the sign area.



      5.   Location.  In addition to the provisions of § 20.28.190
of this chapter, no sign shall be located within the public right-of-way and
closer than five (5) feet to the property line.



(Ord. 877, passed 11-21-89)



CHAPTER 20.32:  STREET AND HIGHWAY DEDICATION IMPROVEMENTS



Section



   20.32.010   Purpose



   20.32.020   General provisions



§ 20.32.010  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the General Plan
objectives are carried out with respect to the ultimate arterial highway
needs for the city.



(Ord. 442, passed 4-28-69)



§ 20.32.020  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   A.   When required.  No building or structure shall be erected or
enlarged and no building permit shall be issued therefore, on any lot in any
zone other than R-1 and R-H, if such lot abuts a highway or street, unless
the one-half (½) of the highway or street which is located on the same side
of the center of the highway or street as such lot has been dedicated and
improved for the full width of the lot including any required diagonal corner
cut-off so as to meet the required standards for such highway or street or
such dedication and improvement has been assured to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer.  “Improvement” shall include:  roadway, curb, gutter,
and sidewalk to city standards; and drainage improvements, traffic control
devices, and street lighting.  As used in this section: the center of the
highway shall mean the established centerlines of those highways as such
highways are shown on the Master Plan of Streets and Highways approved by the
Council and on file in the office of the City Engineer, as amended or newly
adopted and amended from time to time, or otherwise officially determined by
action of any governmental body having jurisdiction; and the established
centerline of any street shall be determined in accordance with the then
centerline of existing pavement.



      1.   The maximum area of land required to be so dedicated
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of any such lot which
was of record on the effective date of this chapter in the Orange County
Recorder's Office.  In no event shall such dedication reduce the lot below a
width of fifty (50) feet or an area of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
This resulting lot shall be deemed as meeting the minimum lot size
requirements under the this zoning code, as amended from time to time.



      2.   No such dedication shall be required with respect to
those portions of such a lot occupied by a main building existing on the
effective date of this chapter unless an encroachment permit is granted.



      3.   No additional improvements shall be required on the area
required to be dedicated per the current Master Plan of Arterial Highways
where complete roadway, curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements, and adequate
street lighting and drainage improvements exist within the then previous
dedication contiguous thereto.



      4.   No building or structure shall be erected on any such lot
after the effective date of this chapter, within the area required to be
dedicated pursuant to this section.



   B.   Exceptions.



      1.   The provisions of paragraph A. of this section shall not
apply to the following construction:



         a.   Additions and accessory buildings incidental to a
residential building legally existing on the lot, provided no additional
dwelling units or guest rooms are created.



         b.   Additions and accessory buildings incidental to
other than a residential building existing on the lot on the effective date
of this chapter, provided that the total cumulative floor area of all such
additions and accessory buildings subsequent to such effective date do not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet.



         c.   Nothing in this section contained shall authorize
construction of any buildings within the area which would otherwise be
required to be dedicated but for the provisions of this section, and no such
buildings shall be so constructed.



   C.   Dedication procedure.



      1.   Dedication of easements required by any person under the
provisions of this section shall be offered in an irrevocable offer of
dedication properly executed by all parties of interest including
beneficiaries and trustees.  A current preliminary title report prepared by
a title company may be required by the City Engineer at the expense of the
applicant.  Such offer shall be in such terms as to be binding on the owner,
his heirs, assigns or successors in interest; and shall continue until the
City Council accepts or rejects such offer or until one (1) year from the
date such offer is filed with the City Engineer for processing, whichever
occurs first.  The offer shall provide that the dedication will be complete
upon acceptance by the City Council and that the offer shall be irrevocable
until rejected by the City Engineer or the City Council, or until said one
(1) year period expires, whichever is the later.  The offer shall be
recorded by the City Clerk in the Office of the Orange County Recorder upon
its acceptance by the City Council.  The City Engineer shall initially
accept or reject the offer within thirty (30) days after it is filed with the
Development Services Department, subject to subsequent action by the City
Council.  The offer shall thereafter be promptly processed by the city
departments concerned and submitted to the City Council, in order to complete
the dedication within one year.  If the offer is rejected by the City
Council or not processed within one year, the City Engineer shall issue a
release from such offer unless the parties making the offer wish to have the
time extended.



      2.   For purposes of this section, dedication shall be
considered as satisfactorily assured when the City Engineer initially accepts
the offer to dedicate provided for herein.  When said City Engineer accepts
the offer to dedicate he or she shall notify the Building Inspection Division
and the Planning Division.



   D.   Improvement procedure.



      1.   Any person required to make improvements by the
provisions of this section shall either:  make and complete the same to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer prior to issuance of a building permit; or,
shall file with the City Engineer an agreement and a bond, both in form and
content approved by the City Attorney, providing for and guaranteeing
completion of the improvements to be constructed under the permit, prior to
occupancy or within ninety (90) days after acceptance of any required
dedication by the City Council, whichever is later.  Said bond shall be in
such an amount as the City Engineer shall estimate and determine to be
necessary to complete all of the improvements required.



      2.   Such agreement, in addition to such other terms not
inconsistent with this chapter as may be required by the Attorney, shall
provide for reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs to the city in the
event action is brought thereon to enforce its provisions, and shall contain
alternate remedies sufficient in the opinion of the Attorney, to provide the
broadest possible protection to the city.



      3.   Such bond may be either a cash bond or a bond executed by
the lot owner as principal and by a company authorized to act as a surety in
this state, as surety.  The bond shall be payable to the city and be
conditioned upon the faithful and timely performance of any and all work
required to be done under the agreement.



      4.   When a substantial portion of the required improvement
has been completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and the
completion of the remaining improvements is delayed due to conditions beyond
the owner's control, the City Engineer may accept the completed portion and
consent to a proportionate reduction of the surety or cash bond in an amount
estimated and determined by the City Engineer to be adequate to assure the
completion of the required improvements remaining to be made.



      5.   Whenever the owner elects to deposit a cash bond, the
city is authorized in the event of any default on his part, to use any or all
of the deposit money to cause all of the required work to be done or
completed, and for payment of all costs and expenses therefore, including
reasonable city overhead.  Any money remaining shall be refunded to the
owner, and the owner shall be liable for any deficiency.  Whenever a surety
bond has been filed in compliance with this section, the city is authorized,
in the event of any default on the part of the principal, to enforce
collection, under such bond, for any and all damages sustained by the city by
reason of any failure on the part of the principal faithfully and properly to
do or complete the required improvements.



      6.   The term of the bond shall begin on the date of the
deposit of cash or the filing of the surety bond and shall end upon the date
of the completion to the satisfaction of the City Engineer of all
improvements required to be made.  The fact of such completion shall be
endorsed by a statement thereof signed by the City Engineer, and the deposit
shall be returned to the owner, or the surety bond may be exonerated at any
time thereafter.



      7.   For purposes of this section, improvement shall be
considered as satisfactorily assured when the City Engineer accepts the cash
or surety bond provided for herein or the improvements required to be made
have been completed to his satisfaction so expressed in writing.  When the
City Engineer accepts the bond or the work has been completed to his
satisfaction he shall notify the Building Inspection Division thereof.



   E.   Issuance of building permits after certification of dedication
and improvement.  When all dedication and improvements required by this
section have been completed or satisfactorily assured, a building permit may
be issued.



   F.   Fees waived.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
section to the contrary, no fee shall be charged for the rendering of any
service by the city in connection with any dedication required by the
provisions of this section and not a part of a subdivision or parcel map
proceeding.



(See page 10).



   G.   Lots affected by street widening.



      1.   On a lot which is affected by street widening required by
the provisions of this section, all required yards, setbacks, parking area,
loading space and building locations for new buildings or structures or
additions to buildings or structures shall be measured and calculated from
the new lot lines being created by said widening; provided, however, that for
the purpose of establishing the required front yard depth on a frontage where
the ultimate street line has been determined under the provisions of this
section, the depths of all existing front yards may be measured from such
ultimate street line instead of the front lot line.



      2.   In applying all other provisions of this section, the
area of such lot shall be considered as that which existed immediately prior
to such required street widening.



   H.   Dedication and improvement standards.



      1.   All highways and streets shall be dedicated, constructed,
and improved in accordance with the following requirements insofar as such is
practical and will not create an undue hardship.  All improvements required
to be made by the provisions of this paragraph H. shall be done in accordance
with the applicable standards of the City of Brea Public Works Standard Plans
and Specifications and current Master Plan of Arterial Highways.



      2.   In addition, each intersection of streets and highways
shall be dedicated so as to provide a diagonal corner cutoff located such
that the distance between the right-of-way line and the ultimate curb return,
measured at the center of the curb return, is fourteen (14) feet at the
intersection of such highway and any other street or highway, which shall be
improved in accordance with the standards for such highway set forth in this
section and in the aforesaid Standards Plans and Specifications.  The City
Engineer may require that the fourteen (14) foot distance be increased as
necessary to provide for wheelchair ramps and/or other special conditions.



      3.   Street improvements as used in this section shall be
deemed to include drainage structures and improvements in the public
right-of-way (after required dedication) determined by the City Engineer to
be necessary to eliminate increased water flow resulting from the proposed
improvement on the lot, traffic control devices, traffic signal interconnect,
and street lighting in accordance with requirements from time to time being
imposed in connection with subdivisions.



      4.   The City Engineer may approve and allow such variations
and deviations from the aforesaid requirements as he determines are made
necessary by the conditions of the terrain and the existing improvements
contiguous to the property involved.



   I.   Appeal.



      1.   Any person required to dedicate land or make improvements
under the provisions of this section may appeal any determination made by the
Engineer in the enforcement or administration of the provisions of this
section to the City Council.



      2.   Such an appeal shall be in writing; shall state in clear
and concise language the grounds therefor; and shall be filed with the City
Council within ten (10) days of the date of the Engineer's action which is
appealed from.  Within twenty (20) days from the date of the filing of such
an appeal the City Engineer shall transmit the appeal together with all
relevant information in its files and its report and recommendation thereon
to the City Council.



      3.   The City Council may make such modifications in the
requirements of this section or may grant such waivers or modifications of
the determinations which are appealed to them as they shall determine are
required to prevent any unreasonable hardship under the facts of each case or
to obviate any required improvement unrelated to any increased traffic flow
or obstructions to traffic flow occasioned by the new construction so long as
each such modification or waiver is in conformity with the general spirit and
intent of the requirements of this section, which is to provide for
dedication and improvements where new construction on any lot will increase
traffic flow or presents an obstruction to traffic flow on highways and
streets.  All such new construction shall presumptively be in this category,
and it shall be the burden of the appealing property owner to show otherwise.



   J.   City may share the cost of making unusual improvements.  Upon
proper application to the City Council and upon recommendation of the
Engineer, the city may accept and provide for contribution toward the cost of
making any improvement required by the provisions of this section which the
Engineer determines will cost an amount greatly in excess of the cost to
other property owners who are required to make improvements under the
provisions of this section in the immediate vicinity of the said improvement.



      K.   City Engineer to determine street alignment.  Whenever
uncertainty exists as to the proper application of the provisions of this
section in the matter of street alignment, the Engineer shall determine their
application in conformity with the spirit and intent of this section.



      L.   Notification to permit applicants required.  When the
City Engineer determines that the provisions of this section are applicable
to any building permit application, he or she shall inform the permit
applicant of his or her determination, of the specific requirements of this
section which he or she determines to be applicable thereto and of the
availability and procedure for appeal of his or her determination to the City
Council.



      M.   Permit, inspection and plan check fees for streets,
alleys, or public roads.  The City Council shall adopt by resolution all
permit fees related to street and highway improvements.



(Ord. 442, passed 4-28-69; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95)



CHAPTER 20.36:  HOME OCCUPATIONS



Section



   20.36.010   Criteria.



§ 20.36.010  CRITERIA.



   Home occupations shall comply with all of the following criteria:



   A.   There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home
occupation, including but not limited to noise or odor caused thereby.



   B.   A home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed
living area of the dwelling unit or the garage.



   C.   Electrical or mechanical equipment which creates visible or
audible interference in radio or television receivers or causes fluctuations
in line voltage outside the dwelling unit or which creates noise not normally
associated with residential uses is prohibited.



   D.   Only the residents of the dwelling unit may engage in the home
occupation.



   E.   To the extent that there is any sale of any item related to a
home occupation, no delivery of that item to the buyer shall occur on or
adjacent to the premises.



   F.   The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not
change the principal character or use of the dwelling unit involved.



   G.   There shall be no signs other than those permitted by the zone
regulations.



   H.   The conduct of any home occupation including but not limited to
the storage of goods and equipment, shall not reduce or render unusable areas
provided for required off-street parking.



   I.   There shall be no traffic to or from the premises by salesmen,
service vehicles, delivery persons, messengers or others beyond the amount of
such traffic incidental to residential uses.  Parking of such vehicles on
the site or in the vicinity of the home occupation not substantially utilized
by residents for personal purposes, but rather used in connection with the
home occupation is prohibited.



   J.   No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or
equipment related to the operation of a home occupation shall be visible from
the outside of any structure located on the premises.



   K.   There shall be no media advertising in connection with the home
occupation which gives the address of the property from which the home
occupation is conducted.



(Ord. 516, passed 7-7-73; Am. Ord. 576, passed 6-17-75; Am. Ord. 622, passed
4-5-77; Am. Ord. 662, passed 9-5-78; Am. Ord. 1025, passed 7-20-99)



CHAPTER 20.40:  AFFORDABLE HOUSING



Section



   20.40.010   Affordable housing requirements



   20.40.020   State density bonuses and other incentives



   20.40.030   Applicability



   20.40.040   Incentives to develop affordable housing



   20.40.050   Standards



   20.40.060   In lieu fees



   20.40.070   Low-to-moderate income housing fund



   20.40.080   Guidelines



§ 20.40.010  AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS.



   The purpose of the Affordable Housing Program is to expand the
affordable housing stock in proportion with the overall increase in
residential units by establishing standards and procedures that encourage the
development of low to moderate income housing.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



§ 20.40.020  STATE DENSITY BONUSES AND OTHER INCENTIVES.



   The incentives to be considered under Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65915 et
seq. are listed in § 20.40.040 of this chapter.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



§ 20.40.030  APPLICABILITY.



   A.   Residential developments of twenty (20) or more units shall
provide ten percent (10%) of the total number of units for affordable housing
provided the city determines the development of the affordable units does not
place an economic burden on the developer or the future homeowners.



   B.   In order to determine the economic feasibility of the
affordable units in the residential projects, the developer shall be required
to submit an impact analysis in a format determined by the Development
Services Director detailing the anticipated costs and revenues of the
project.  This impact analysis will be reviewed and approved by the city.



   C.   A residential developer may elect to follow the density bonus
program pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 65915 et seq. in place of Brea's
Affordable Housing Program.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



§ 20.40.040  INCENTIVES TO DEVELOP AFFORDABLE HOUSING.



   A.   In order to off-set the costs of the development of affordable
units pursuant to this chapter, the city/Agency will approve any or all of
the following incentives:



      1.   A density bonus;



      2.   Flexible development standards, such as, a reduction in
unit square footage, on-site requirements, and off-site improvements;



      3.   Deferral of development impact fees;



      4.   Use of Building Code alternatives;



      5.   Assistance in application for public funds, such as rent
subsidies, bond financing, community development block grants;



      6.   Redevelopment set-aside funds;



      7.   Any other lawful means of offering the costs of providing
affordable units.



   B.   Should the appropriate incentives not offset the cost of the
required affordable units as shown in the impact analysis, then the number of
required affordable units shall be reduced until the city determines a break
even point has been met.



   C.   The Planning Commission shall approve all incentives offered
under this program and shall evaluate each program on a project specific
basis.  Any use of Redevelopment Agency set-aside funds shall require the
approval of the Agency Board.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



§ 20.40.050  STANDARDS.



   A.   All affordable units in a project or phases of a project shall
be constructed concurrently with or prior to the construction of market rate
units.



   B.   All affordable units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout
the project unless approval for an off-site location has been granted.  The
affordable units shall contain on the average the same number of bedrooms as
the market rate units in the project.  The materials and finished quality of
the affordable units shall be comparable with the market rate units.



   C.   Affordable units required under this chapter shall be retained
as affordable units for forty-five (45) years or until sold or transferred
with an equity share for owner-occupied units and fifty-five (55) years as to
rental units.  The affordability period begins upon the initial sale or
rental of the unit.



(Am. Ord. 1075, passed 9-7-04)



§ 20.40.060  IN LIEU FEES.



   Consideration of in lieu fees instead of providing the required
affordable unit(s) may be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the Planning
Commission.  Factors to be considered include economic profile of the
development, site conditions, the number of units in the development, and
feasibility of the fees to generate the in lieu units.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



§ 20.40.070  LOW-TO-MODERATE INCOME HOUSING FUND.



   The in lieu fees and any equity share payment collected as a result of
requirements of this chapter shall be deposited in an Affordable Housing
Trust Fund to be used exclusively to develop and retain the supply of housing
affordable to low-to-moderate income households.  The city or Redevelopment
Agency shall provide ongoing implementation programs utilizing funds
deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund for the benefit of
low-to-moderate income households.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93; Am. Ord. 1075, passed 9-7-04)



§ 20.40.080  GUIDELINES.



   The City Council shall adopt by resolution the guidelines for the
implementation of this chapter.  It is the intent of the City Council that
the guidelines shall have the full force and effect of the law and shall be
adhered to in full.



(Ord. 934, passed 3-2-93)



CHAPTER 20.44:  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES



Section



   20.44.010   Purpose



   20.44.020   Definitions



   20.44.030   Zones for adult entertainment establishments —
development standards



   20.44.040   Minimum proximity requirements



   20.44.050   Measurement of distance between uses



   20.44.060   Closed viewing areas



   20.44.070   Adult entertainment zoning permit required



   20.44.080   Permit application



   20.44.090   Grounds for permit denial application/revocation



   20.44.100   Permit conditions



   20.44.110   Sale or transfer of business



   20.44.120   New permit required



   20.44.130   Display of permit



   20.44.140   Violations and penalties



§ 20.44.010  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of these regulations to prevent problems of blight and
deterioration which can be brought about by the concentration of adult
entertainment businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to
other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, public parks and
residentially zoned districts.  The City Council finds that it has been
demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult
entertainment businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in
the area, and increase in crime, and can cause other businesses and residents
to move elsewhere.  It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of
adult establishments or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while
permitting the location of adult businesses in certain areas.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.020  DEFINITIONS.



   A.   It is the intent of this section that the definitions set forth
in this zoning code shall apply but only where they do not conflict with any
definition set forth in this section.



   B.   Establishment of an adult entertainment business.  As used
herein, to ESTABLISH an adult entertainment business shall mean and include
any of the following:



      1.   The opening or commencement of operation of any such
business as a new business.



      2.   The conversion of any existing business, whether or not
an adult entertainment business, to any adult entertainment business as
described herein.



      3.   The addition of any adult entertainment business as
defined herein to any existing adult entertainment business if the addition
results in enlargement of the place of business.  For purposes of this
paragraph, ENLARGEMENT shall mean an increase in size of the building within
which the business is conducted by either construction or use of an adjacent
building or any portion thereof, whether located on the same or an adjacent
lot or parcel of land.



   C.   Specified anatomical areas.  As used herein SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS shall mean and include any of the following:



      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately
above the tops of the areolae; or



      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   D.   Specified sexual activities.  As used herein, SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS shall mean and include any of the following:



      1.   The fondling or other erotic touching, actual or
simulated, of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast;



      2.   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including acts of sexual
intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, or bestiality; or



      3.   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or



      4.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in paragraphs D.1. through 3. above.



   E.   An ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT is any place of business
in which one or more of the following activities are conducted:



      1.    ADULT BOOK STORE.  A commercial establishment which, as
a regular and substantial part of its business, devotes inventory or product
lines or display, shelf, rack, table, stand, or floor area used for the
display and sale of the following:



         a.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
tapes, records, and other form of visual or audio representation which are
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or



         b.   Instruments, artificial devices or paraphernalia
which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
The term PRODUCT LINE refers to items which are all identical, such as
numerous copies of the same book or periodical.



      2.    ADULT MOTION PICTURE ESTABLISHMENT.  A commercial
establishment with a capacity of more than fifty (50) persons, used for the
presentation, exhibition or display of films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions projected on a
screen, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.  For purposes of this paragraph and paragraphs
E.3. through 8., and E.12., SUBSTANTIAL PORTION OF THE TOTAL PRESENTATION
TIME shall mean a regular and substantial course of conduct.



      3.    ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial
establishment with a capacity of more that five (5) but less than fifty (50)
persons, used for the presentation, exhibition or display of films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographs reproductions
projected on a screen, and in which a substantial portion of the presentation
time is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      4.    ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained
to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, in
which a substantial portion of the total presentation time of the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      5.    ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER.  An open lot or part thereof,
with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion
pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual
productions, for any form of consideration to persons in motor vehicles or on
outdoor seats, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time
of the material being presented is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.



      6.    ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or
similar establishment during which a substantial portion of the total
presentation time features live performances which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified anatomical areas and/or feature
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons.



      7.    ADULT MOTEL or HOTEL.  A hotel or motel or similar
commercial establishment offering public accommodations for any form of
consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of the total presentation
time of which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons.



      8.    ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium or
similar commercial establishment either indoor or outdoor in nature which,
for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances, a
substantial portion of the total presentation time of which is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons.



      9.    ADULT MODEL STUDIO.



         a.   Any establishment open to the public where, for any
form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified
anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons, other than the
proprietor, paying such consideration or gratuity.



         b.   This provision shall not apply to any school of art
which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or institution which meets the requirements established in the
Education Code of the State of California for the issuance or conferring of,
and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma.



      10.    SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.



         a.   A commercial establishment, other than a hotel,
motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations which, for any
form or consideration, provides a place where two (2) or more persons may
congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual
activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.



         b.   This definition does not include an establishment
where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar
professional person licensed by the State of California engages in sexual
therapy.



      11.    BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  Any establishment or business
which provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether
transparent or nontransparent to or on human body when such body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.



      12.    OTHER ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. Any other business
or commercial establishment not herein described:



         a.   Wherein for any form of consideration the
establishment provides entertainment to patrons in which a substantial
portion of the total presentation time is characterized by an emphasis on
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or



         b.   Which devotes more than fifty percent (50%) of the
total area used for display of its stock in trade to items, instruments and
paraphernalia which are characterized by an emphasis on depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.030  ZONES FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS — DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS.



   Adult entertainment establishments are permitted only in those areas of
the city zoned M-P, M-1 and M-2 (as defined in this zoning code) and as set
forth herein.  The development standards applicable to the establishment of
an adult entertainment business shall be as set forth in this zoning code for
a zone and use most comparable to the proposed adult entertainment business,
as determined by the Development Services Director, provided, however, that a
certificate of use of land shall not be required to establish an adult
entertainment business within the Precise Development (PD) overlay zone.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 1014, passed 6-2-98)



§ 20.44.040  MINIMUM PROXIMITY REQUIREMENTS.



   No adult entertainment establishment shall be established within
specified distances of certain specified land uses as set forth below:



   A.   No such establishment shall be establishment within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any other adult entertainment establishment.



   B.   No such establishment shall be established within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any school, church, park, hospital, public operated facility,
existing residential dwelling, or residentially zoned property.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.050  MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE BETWEEN USES.



   The distance between any two adult entertainment establishments shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures,
from the closest exterior structural wall of each business.  The distance
between any adult entertainment establishment and any school, public park or
residential zone, etc. shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of the
adult entertainment business to the closest property line of the school,
public park or residential zone.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.060  CLOSED VIEWING AREAS.



   No adult use or adult entertainment business shall maintain closed
areas, booths, cubicles, rooms or other areas within its place of business
that are used designed or furnished for private sexual activity.  No nudity
or sexual activities by customers shall be allowed on the premises.  All
portions of the premises shall be available by access and visual inspection
at all times by any city inspectors standing at the front door (not to
include existing and approved restroom facilities).



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.070  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause or permit to be
operated, any adult entertainment establishment without first obtaining an
adult entertainment zoning permit from the Development Services Director.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.080  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   A.   Any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other
entity desiring to obtain an adult entertainment zoning permit shall file an
application with the Director on a form provided by the Director.  The
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application processing
fee in the amount established by City Council resolution.



   B.   The application for a permit shall contain the following
information.



      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the
applicant.  If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall set forth
the name of the corporation exactly as shown in its article of incorporation,
the date and place of incorporation, the names and addresses of the officers,
directors, and each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the
stock of the corporation.  If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant
shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners,
including limited partners.  If one or more of the partners is a
corporation, the provision of this section pertaining to a corporate
applicant shall apply.  The applicant corporation or partnership shall
designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible
managing officer.



      2.   Name, address and telephone number of the person who
shall manage and operate the establishment for which the permit is
requested.  The name and address of a person authorized to accept service of
legal notices.



      3.   The proposed business name of the adult entertainment
establishment and description of the type of adult establishment.



      4.   Street address of the proposed adult entertainment
establishment and the parcel number of the property.



      5.   A plot plan for the property depicting the location of
the building housing the adult entertainment establishment on the property.



      6.   If the adult entertainment establishment was in existence
as of the effective date of these regulations the date the establishment
first commenced operation.



      7.   Any other information reasonably necessary to accomplish
the purposes of these regulations.



   C.   Referral to other city departments.  The Director may refer
the application to other city departments to determine whether the premises
where the adult entertainment establishment is located, or will be located,
complies with the city's building, health, zoning and fire ordinances or
other applicable ordinances or laws.  City departments may conduct an
inspection of the premises to determine compliance with the ordinances and
laws they administer.



   D.   Action and application.  The Director shall determine whether
to grant or deny the permit within thirty (30) working days after receipt of
a complete application.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.090  GROUNDS FOR PERMIT DENIAL APPLICATION/ REVOCATION.



   A.   The Director shall approve the permit unless he or she
determines from a consideration of the application, city inspection of the
premises or other pertinent information that:



      1.   That information contained in the application or
supplemental information requested from the applicant is false in any
material detail.



      2.   The proposed location of the adult entertainment business
would not comply with the requirements of §§ 20.44.030 or 20.44.040 of this
chapter.



      3.   The operation of the adult entertainment business is or
would be in violation of one or more provisions of these regulations.



      4.   The premises where adult entertainment business is or
will be located does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not
limited to the city's building, health, zoning, and fire ordinances.



      5.   That a permit to operate the adult entertainment
establishment has been issued to the applicant, a partner of the applicant,
or a stockholder or the applicant which the stockholder owns more than ten
percent (10%) of the applicant's corporate stock, which permit has been
suspended and the period of suspension has not yet ended.



   B.   Notice of permit denial shall be in writing and shall state the
grounds therefore.  Notice shall be personally served on the permit
applicant or mailed to the address listed on the application form.



   C.   An adult entertainment permit may be suspended for up to one
year or revoked for any of the reasons specified as grounds for permit denial
in paragraph A.1. through 5. above.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.100  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   The Director may condition the issuance of an adult entertainment
zoning permit by imposing reasonable conditions to insure compliance with
these provisions and other sections of the Brea City Code.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.110  SALE OR TRANSFER OF BUSINESS.



   A.   No permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be assigned or
transferred without the prior written approval of the Director.  The
applicant shall apply for a transfer on a form provided by the Director, and
shall pay a nonrefundable application processing fee in the amount
established by City Council resolution.



   B.   Transfer of partnership or corporate ownership.  An
application for approval of a transfer of a permit shall be required prior to
any change in an interest in a partnership or ownership of ten percent (10%)
or more of the stock of a corporation to any person not listed on the
application filed by said application.



   C.   An application for transfer of a permit may be denied for any
of the grounds specified for denial of an original permit application in §
20.44.090 of this chapter.  Procedures for notice of denial of a transfer
and appeal thereof shall be identical to those procedures for denial of a
permit application specified in § 20.44.090 of this chapter.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.120  NEW PERMIT REQUIRED.



   The permittee must apply for a new adult entertainment permit as
follows:



   A.   Prior to any change in the location of the adult entertainment
establishment.



   B.   Prior to the conversion of any existing adult entertainment
establishment to any other type of adult entertainment establishment as
described herein.



   C.   Prior to any change in the business name of the adult
entertainment establishment.



   D.   Prior to the enlargement of an existing adult entertainment
establishment.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.130  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   Each person to whom or for whom a permit has been granted shall display
said permit in a conspicuous place within the adult entertainment
establishment so the same may be readily seen by persons entering the
premises.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



§ 20.44.140  VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.



   Any person who knowingly violates any of the provisions shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.  Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable
by fine not exceeding five hundred ($500) dollars or by imprisonment for a
period not exceeding six (6) months or by both.  Violations of these
regulations may also be addresses in a civil action.



(Ord. 938, passed 7-6-93)



CHAPTER 20.48:  OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS
WASTE FACILITIES



Section



   20.48.010   Off-site hazardous waste facility requirements



   20.48.020   Applicability



   20.48.030   Procedures



   20.48.040   Local Assessment Committee (LAC)



   20.48.050   Public hearings



   20.48.060   Findings



   20.48.070   Commission action and appeals



   20.48.080   Use of permit



   20.48.090   Facility siting criteria



   20.48.100   Safety and security



   20.48.110   Contingency plan



   20.48.120   Monitoring



   20.48.130   Closure plan



   20.48.140   Financial responsibility



§ 20.48.010  OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.



   The provisions of this chapter are intended to meet the requirements of
AB 2948 (Tanner, 1986) which requires the County of Orange to adopt a
Countywide Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the city to adopt, by
ordinance or general plan amendment, hazardous waste controls by establishing
uniform standards, land use regulations, and a permit process for controlling
the location, design, maintenance, and safety of off-site hazardous waste
facilities.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.020  APPLICABILITY.



   A.   The specific requirements of this chapter are applicable to the
siting and development of off-site hazardous waste facilities as defined in
§ 20.00.070.B. of this title, as amended.



   B.   The off-site hazardous waste facility definition does not apply
to:  Transportable Treatment Units (TTU), which are designed to be moved
intact or in modules and which are intended to be operated at a given
location for a limited period of time, or permanent on-site hazardous waste
facilities at locations where hazardous waste is produced, and which are
owned by, leased to, or under the control of the producer of the waste.  All
such facilities (i.e., off-site, on-site, TTU) shall be subject to the
applicable federal, state, and local licensing to construct and operate.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.030  PROCEDURES.



   The following procedures are intended to identify the steps for
processing an application for off-site hazardous waste facilities, in
addition to the requirements of § 20.408.030.C. of this title, as amended. 
These procedures include steps to be taken by the applicant, state, and city.



   A.   At least ninety (90) days before filing a conditional use
permit application with the Development Services Department for a project,
the applicant shall file with the Office of Permit Assistance (OPA) and the
city, a Notice of Intent (NOI) to make an application.  The NOI shall
contain a complete description of the nature, function, and scope of the
project.  The OPA shall immediately notify the affected state agencies of
the NOI.  The city shall publish a notice in the newspaper of general
circulation in the area and shall notify, by a direct mailing, the owners of
real property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the project boundary, as
shown on the Orange County latest equalized assessment roll.  The city shall
impose a fee upon the project applicant equal to the cost of notification
required by this section.



   B.   Within ninety (90) days after a Notice of Intent is filed with
OPA, the OPA shall convene a public meeting within the city to inform the
public on the nature, function, and scope of the proposed project and the
procedures that are required for approving applications for the project. 
The city shall contact OPA regarding the location and time of the meeting and
shall have the representative(s) attend.



   C.   Within ninety (90) days after receiving a notification of the
filing of the NOI, the City Council shall appoint a Local Assessment
Committee (LAC) comprised of at least seven (7) members.  The city shall
charge the applicant a fee to cover the city's costs of establishing and
convening the LAC.



   D.   The city shall notify OPA, in writing, within ten (10) days
after it has determined that the application for the project is complete. 
Within sixty (60) days after receiving this notice, the OPA shall convene a
meeting with the lead and responsible agencies for the project, the
applicant, the LAC, and the interested public for the purpose of determining
the issues which concern the public.  The meeting shall take place in the
city.



   E.   Following the meeting as specified in paragraph D. of this
section, the applicant and the LAC of the city shall meet and confer on the
project proposal for the purpose of establishing the terms and conditions
under which the project may be acceptable to the community.



   F.   If the LAC finds that it requires assistance and independent
advice to adequately review a proposed project, it may request technical
assistance grants from the city to enable the LAC to hire a consultant to
assist and/or advise the LAC.  The LAC may use the technical assistance
grant funds to hire a consultant to do either, or both, of the following:



      1.   To assist the Committee in reviewing and evaluating the
application for the project, the environmental documents prepared for the
project pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, and any other
documents, materials, and information that are required by a public agency in
connection with the application for a land use decision or a permit.



      2.   To advise the LAC in meetings and discussion with the
facility proponent when seeking an agreement on the terms and conditions
under which the project may be acceptable to the community.



   G.   The project applicant shall pay a fee equal to the amount of
any technical assistance grants provided to the LAC and the cost of staff
time to review the project.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.040  LOCAL ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE (LAC).



   A.   Pursuant to § 20.48.030.C. of this chapter, the City Council
shall appoint an LAC comprised of at least seven (7) members.  The
membership of the LAC shall be broadly constituted to reflect the make up of
the community and shall include three (3) representatives of the community at
large, two (2) representatives of environmental or public interest groups,
and two (2) representatives of affected business and industries.  Members of
the LAC shall have no direct financial interest, as defined in Cal. Gov't
Code § 87103, in the proposed specified hazardous waste facility project
(requirement of Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25199.7(d)(1)).



   B.   The LAC shall elect a Chairperson from among its members for a
term of one year, and subject to other provisions of law may create and fill
such other offices as it may determine.



   C.   Pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25199.7(d)(2), the LAC
duties shall include the following:



      1.   Negotiate with the applicant for the proposed hazardous
waste facility project on the detailed terms of, provisions of, and
conditions for project approval which would protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, and the environment of the city and its surroundings and
would promote the fiscal welfare, and the environment of the city and its
surroundings and would promote the fiscal welfare of the city through special
benefits and compensation.



      2.   Represent generally, in negotiation with the applicant,
the interests of residents in the city and interests of adjacent communities.



      3.   Receive and expend the technical assistance grants made
available as specified in § 20.48.030.F. of this chapter.



      4.   Adopt rules and procedures which are necessary to perform
its duties as outlined herein and shall keep a record of its meetings,
transactions, findings, determinations, which record shall, during all
regular business office hours be open for public inspection.



      5.   Advise the city of the terms, provisions, and conditions
for project approval which have been agreed upon by LAC and the applicant and
of any additional information which the LAC deems appropriate.  The approval
body and/or legislative body of the city may use this advice for their
independent consideration of the project.



      6.   Cease to exist after final administrative action which
has been taken by the state and local agencies on the permit applications for
the project for which the LAC was formed.



   D.   The Development Services Staff shall provide staff resources to
assist the LAC in performing its duties.



   E.   If the LAC and the applicant cannot resolve any differences
through the meetings specified in § 20.48.030.E. of this chapter, the OPA
may assist in this resolution pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code §
25199.4.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.050  PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   The proposed off-site hazardous waste facility shall require a public
hearing before the City Planning Commission and is therefore subject to the
notification and processing requirements for a conditional use permit in
accordance with §§ 20.48.030 and 20.408.030.C. of this title, except that
the notice of public hearing shall be mailed to all owners of property within
a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of the exterior boundaries of the
property under consideration.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.060  FINDINGS.



   The Planning Commission shall make the following findings in addition
to the findings and conditions in § 20.408.030.D. of this title:



   A.   The project will be consistent with the Regional Fair Share
Facility Needs Assessment and Siting Policies in accordance with Part V as
established in the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan; and



   B.   The project will comply with the development standards and
facility siting criteria as established in this chapter.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.070  COMMISSION ACTION AND APPEALS.



   A.   Any decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the
City Council in accordance with Chapter 20.424 of this title.



   B.   An applicant or an interested person may file an appeal of a
land use decision made by the City Council to the Governor's Appeal Board
within thirty (30) calendar days after the date the City Council takes final
action on the land use decision.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.080  USE OF PERMIT.



   A.   A hazardous waste facility permit shall be granted for only
those substances and quantities identified in the conditions of approval. 
No additional types of wastes or increases in the quantity of wastes shall be
allowed beyond those specified in the approved facility permit, unless a
separate application is made therefore which shall satisfy the same
procedures and contents as those required in an initial application.



   B.   Any use authorized under the provisions of this facility must
be exercised within the time limit pursuant to § 20.408.030.F. of this title.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.090  FACILITY SITING CRITERIA.



   All off-site hazardous waste facility projects shall be consistent with
the siting criteria as described in Table V-3, Part V of the Orange County
Hazardous Waste Management Plan.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.100  SAFETY AND SECURITY.



   A.   The owner or operator shall prevent the unknowing entry, and
minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry, of persons or livestock
onto any portion of the facility.



   B.   The operator shall provide a twenty-four (24) hour surveillance
system (i.e., television monitoring or surveillance by guards or facility
personnel) which continuously monitors and controls entry onto the facility.



   C.   An artificial or natural barrier (e.g., a fence in good
condition or a fence combined with a berm) shall be constructed which
completely surrounds the facility.



   D.   All gates or other entrances into the facility shall be
provided with adequate means to control entry at all times.  Signs with the
legend, “DANGER - HAZARDOUS WASTE AREA - UNAUTHORIZED PERSONNEL KEEP
OUT,” shall be posted at each entrance to the facility, and at other
locations, in sufficient numbers to be seen from any approach.  The legend
shall be written in English, Spanish, and any other language predominate in
the area surrounding the facility, and shall be legible from a distance of at
least twenty-five (25) feet.  Existing signs with a legend other than
“DANGER - UNAUTHORIZED PERSONNEL - KEEP OUT” may be used if the legend on
the sign indicates that only authorized personnel are allowed to enter the
active portion, and that entry onto the active portion can be dangerous.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.110  CONTINGENCY PLAN.



   The owner/operator for an off-site hazardous waste facility shall
provide a contingency plan to the City Fire Department in accordance with the
Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25504.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.120  MONITORING.



   A.   Upon reasonable notice, the city, its designated
representatives, or other affected regulatory agencies may enter a parcel for
which a conditional use permit for hazardous waste facility has been granted
for the purpose of monitoring the operation of the facility.



   B.   The holder of a conditional use permit shall report quarterly
to the City Fire Department the amount, type, and disposition of all wastes
processed by the facility.  Included in this report shall be copies of all
manifests showing the delivery and types of hazardous waste materials.  The
report should also include a map showing the exact location (coordinates and
elevation) by quantity and types of material placed in repositories or
otherwise stored or disposed on site.



   C.   All structures shall remain accessible for inspection purposes
by the city, its designated representatives or other affected regulatory
agencies.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.130  CLOSURE PLAN.



   The owner or operator of a hazardous waste management facility shall
submit a written closure plan pursuant to Art. 80, § 780.107 of the City
Fire Code.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.48.140  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit to begin the use identified in
this permit, the applicant shall submit a proof of liability insurance to the
city as follows:



   A.   The types, amounts, periods of coverage, and provisions for
periodic review as to adequacy of coverage shall be specified in the
conditions of approval.  Required insurance shall include, but is not
limited to: general liability insurance, automotive liability insurance,
environmental impairment liability insurance, and architect's and engineer's
professional liability insurance.  All such insurance shall name the city as
an additional insured and shall be maintained for the life of the site and
such additional periods as shall be specified in the conditions of approval.



   B.   Additionally, coverage shall be provided for workers
compensation insurance and such other insurance as may be required.  Said
insurance shall name the city as the additional loss payee.  Certificates of
insurance shall be submitted to the city annually.



   C.   An irrevocable trust shall be established to provide funds for
closure of site and its long term post-closure, monitoring and maintenance. 
Quarterly funds for this trust would be provided by the owner of the facility
based on quantity and types of hazardous waste received and processed or
percentage of gross income.  The terms of the trust shall be as agreed upon
by the project owner and the city.  The terms shall be reviewed annually in
regard to the amount of funds in the trust and anticipated closure,
monitoring, and maintenance costs.  The applicant shall provide a bond in an
amount to be determined by the city for purposes of closure of site.



   D.   The applicant shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the
city, its officers, agents, servants, and employees from all claims, actions,
liabilities arising out of issuance of this permit, operations at the
facility and transportation of wastes to and from the facility.



(Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



CHAPTER 20.52:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 20.56:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 20.60:  HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section



   20.60.010   Purpose and intent



   20.60.020   Applicability



   20.60.030   Criteria for designation of individual historic resources



   20.60.040   Historic Resources Register — establishment and
maintenance



   20.60.050   Procedures for designation and/or removal of individual
historic resources



   20.60.060   Plan review



   20.60.070   Preservation incentives



   20.60.080   Appeals



   20.60.090   Maintenance and repair



   20.60.100   Enforcement



   20.60.110   Recordation



§ 20.60.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the historic, cultural,
educational, economic, and general welfare of the community by:



   A.   Assuring that appropriate development is consistent with Land
Use, Housing, and Historic Resource Elements of the Brea General Plan.



   B.   Establishing a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinct
historic and architectural characteristics of Brea which represent elements
of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural
history;



   C.   Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments
of the past as represented in Brea's historic resources;



   D.   Encouraging preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of
structures, areas, and neighborhoods, and thereby preventing future blight.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.020  APPLICABILITY.



   This section shall apply to all objects and/or improvements listed in
the Brea Historic Resources Register, as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.030  CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF INDIVIDUAL HISTORIC RESOURCES.



   Any object and/or improvement may be identified as a historic resource
upon approval by the Planning Commission, if it meets any of the following
criteria:



   A.   It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city's
cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, architectural,
or natural history;



   B.   It is identified with persons or events significant in local,
state, or national history;



   C.   It embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type,
period, or method of construction, or is a valuable example of the use of
indigenous materials or craftsmanship;



   D.   It is representative of the work of a notable builder,
designer, or architect;



   E.   It contributes to the significance of a historic area, being a
geographically definable area possessing a concentration of historic or
scenic properties or thematically related grouping of properties which
contribute to each other and are unified aesthetically by plan or physical
development;



   F.   It embodies elements of architectural design, detail,
materials, or craftsmanship that represent a significant structural or
architectural achievement or innovation;



   G.   It reflects significant geographical patterns, including those
associated with different eras of settlement and growth, particular
transportation modes, or distinctive examples of park or community planning;



   H.   It is one of the few remaining examples in the city, region,
state, or nation possessing distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural or historical type or specimen.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.040  HISTORIC RESOURCES REGISTER — ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE.



   Any object/or improvement which has been approved in accordance with
the procedures detailed in § 20.60.050 of this chapter shall be listed in
the Brea Historic Resources Register.  The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for establishing and maintaining this Register.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.050  PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION AND/OR REMOVAL OF INDIVIDUAL
HISTORIC RESOURCES.



   A.   Any person(s) or group(s) may request, with the owner's
consent, to designate an improvement as a historic resource by submitting a
written request (“nomination”) to the Planning Commission.  The
nomination shall contain sufficient documentation and information indicating
how the nominated resource meets the criteria for designation as established
in § 20.60.030 of this chapter.



   B.   On the other hand, any person(s) or group(s) may request, with
the owner's consent, to remove a historic resource from the Brea Historic
Resources Register by submitting a written request to the Planning
Commission.  The request shall contain sufficient information indicating why
the historic resource should be removed from the Register.



   C.   The Planning Commission shall consider the request at a public
hearing in accordance with the procedures as established in § 20.408.030.E.
and Chapter 20.416 of this title.



   D.   No discretionary or ministerial permit shall be issued which
may affect a resource under consideration for listing in the Historic
Resources Register or for which may be removed from the Register while the
designation or removal process is pending.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.060  PLAN REVIEW.



   A.   Exterior alterations, including but not limited to restoration,
rehabilitation, remodeling, additions, demolition, relocation, or subdivision
of a designated historic resource shall require a plan review in accordance
with § 20.408.040 of this title.



   B.   In evaluating a project involving alteration to an identified
historic resource, the plan review shall consider the existing and proposed
architectural style, design, arrangement, texture, materials, and any other
factors with regard to the original distinguishing architectural
characteristics of the historic resource.  The “Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings” shall be used as a guide.  In addition to these
guidelines, the plan review shall comment on project consistency with the
following performance guidelines.



      1.   With regard to an identified historic structure, the
proposed work should neither adversely affect the significant architectural
features of the resource no adversely affect the character of the historical,
architectural, or aesthetic interest or value of the resource.



      2.   With regard to construction of a new improvement,
addition, building, or structure upon the site of an identified historic
structure, the use and exterior of such improvements would not adversely
affect and would be compatible with the use and exterior of existing historic
resource.



   C.   The Planning Commission shall review any major alteration to a
historic resource in a public hearing in accordance with the procedures
established in § 20.60.050.C.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.070  PRESERVATION INCENTIVES.



   The city shall promote the use of appropriate preservation incentives
to encourage owner(s) to designate, maintain, preserve, and improve historic
resources.  These incentives may include but are not limited to the
following:



   A.   Use of the State Historic Building Code (SHBC) which provides
alternative and less costly building regulations for the rehabilitation,
preservation, restoration, or relocation of structures designated as historic
structures.



   B.   Facade easements of historic buildings to enable property
owners to receive property tax deductions.



   C.   Reduced or no processing fees for appropriate rehabilitation of
designated historic structures.



   D.   Technical assistance through the city's Development Services
Department and preservation professionals.



   E.   Grants and loans for appropriate rehabilitation of designated
historic structures.



   F.   Awards and other symbols of recognition of exemplary
rehabilitation and maintenance of historic structures.



   G.   Investigation of the feasibility of other incentives such as
transfer of development rights and similar mechanisms for designated historic
resources subject to the approval of the City Council.



   H.   Mill Acts/historic preservation contracts which can lower
property taxes of designated historic structures subject to the approval of
the City Council.



   I.   Assistance in processing applications for federal investment
tax credits for certified rehabilitation of historic structures listed in the
National Register of Historic Places.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.080  APPEALS.



   The procedural provisions of Chapter 20.424 of this title shall apply
to any designation, removal, or plan review process.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.090  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   A.   The owner(s) of a designated historic structure shall keep in
good repair the buildings, walls, landscaping, and other portions of the
historic structure named as part of the designation.  Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of
any exterior architectural features in any or property covered by §
20.60.040 of this chapter.



   B.   Maintenance and repair shall not involve a change in design,
and to the extent possible, material, or external appearance thereof. 
However, this chapter does not prevent the alteration or removal of a
historic structure and/or its related architectural features when the
Development Services Director finds and certifies that alteration or removal
is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition
which cannot be rectified through the use of the California State Historic
Building Code.  Such architectural features shall be replaced according to
the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.100  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any person who constructs, alters, removes, or demolishes a historic
resource in violation of this zoning code shall be required to restore the
building, object, site, or structure to its appearance or setting prior to
violation.  Any action to reinforce this provision may be brought by the
city.  This civil remedy shall be, in addition to, and not in lieu of, any
criminal penalty or any other remedy provided by law.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



§ 20.60.110  RECORDATION.



   Any person whose property is designated as a historic resource shall
cause to be recorded an instrument disclosing that designation in order to
qualify for any incentive or incentives referred to in § 20.60.070 of this
chapter.



(Ord. 953, passed 6-21-94)



CHAPTER 20.64:  COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS



Section



   20.64.010   Purpose



   20.64.020   Permit criteria



   20.64.030   General provisions



   20.64.040   Placement of communication antennas



   20.64.050   Communication antenna permit application



   20.64.060   Director's action and appeal procedures



§ 20.64.010  PURPOSE.



   Consistent with the federal mandates, this chapter is designed to
provide local regulation of communication antennas in order to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city by preventing
significant visual impacts resulting from, and reducing safety hazards
associated with, the size, height and location of such antenna devices. 
These standards are designed to foster the city's safety and aesthetic
interest without imposing unreasonable limitations on communication antennas,
or preventing the reception of transmitting signals, or imposing unreasonable
costs on applicants seeking to install such communication antennas.



(Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95)



§ 20.64.020  PERMIT CRITERIA.



   A.   This chapter and the regulations contained within shall not
apply to communication antennas to the extent that such antennas are
preempted from local authority by FCC regulations, or to "wireless
communications facilities" regulated by Chapter 20.68 of this Code..



   B.   Any communication antenna weighing less than thirty (30)
pounds, or under eight (8) feet in height may be installed without a permit,
subject to the requirements of the City Building and Electrical Codes,
providing the general provisions contained in § 20.64.030 of this chapter
are met.



   C.   For communication antennas exceeding the above specified weight
or height, a permit must first be obtained from the Development Services
Director, or his or her designee, in accordance with the provisions of §
20.64.050 of this chapter.  Once issued, such permit shall remain valid
unless and until the subject antenna is removed from the permitted location,
or otherwise is in violation of any provision of this zoning code.



(Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95)



§ 20.64.030  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment,
installation, and operation of communication antennas in all zones:



   A.   A communication antenna shall be installed and maintained in
compliance with the requirements of the City Building Code, City Electrical
Code, etc.



   B.   No advertising material shall be allowed on any communication
antenna or its supporting structure.



   C.   All communication antennas must be screened from public view to
the greatest extent possible with landscaping, fencing, walls, parapets,
architectural features, rooflines or screening materials that are
architecturally compatible with the site in color and style.  The provisions
of this chapter as related to screening supersede conflicting provisions of
this zoning code.



   D.   All ground mounted communication antennas must be secured from
public access by appropriate fencing and/or wall.  The enclosure must be
architecturally compatible with the site in color and style, and must comply
with all other provisions of this zoning code.



   E.   All electrical wiring associated with any communication antenna
shall be buried underground or hidden from public view.



   F.   All communication antennas must be adequately grounded, for
protection against a direct strike of lightning.  Ground wires shall be of
the type approved by the latest edition of the Uniform Electrical Code for
grounding masts and lightning arresters.



   G.   Unless totally screened from public view, all satellite dishes
and their supporting structures shall be earth-tone or black in color and
shall be constructed of a “see-through” mesh or open grid design.



   H.   Nothing herein shall excuse any person from obtaining all
permits otherwise required or from complying with any and all applicable
local and state codes, laws and regulations pertaining to the installation of
communication antennas and/or supporting structures.



   I.   All transmitting communication antenna applicants must obtain
the necessary Federal Communications Commission (FCC) permits.



(Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95)



§ 20.64.040  PLACEMENT OF COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS.



   A.   Placement of communication antennas requiring a permit in
residential zones.



      1.   All communication antennas requiring a permit may be
mounted subject to preferred order of placement and all conditions
hereinafter provided:



         a.   The preferred order of placement is:



            (1)   The rear yard area;



            (2)   The interior side yard area; and



            (3)   The street side yard area.



         b.   No portion of any communication antenna or its
supporting structure shall be located in a required side yard or within five
(5) feet of the rear property line.



         c.   For corner lots, communication antennas may not be
placed in the required street side yard area.



         d.   No communication antenna, or its supporting
structure, shall be installed in any location which would impede emergency
access to any portion of the subject property.



         e.   No receive-only ground mounted communication
antenna shall exceed ten (10) feet, six (6) inches in diameter.



         f.   No receive-only ground-mounted communication
antenna shall exceed twelve (12) feet, six (6) inches in mounted height as
measured from grade.



      2.   a.   The standards set forth hereinabove may be
modified upon a showing by the applicant that their strict application would
operate to impose unreasonable limitations on, or prevent, reception of
transmitting signals, or would impose costs on the applicant that are
excessive in light of the purchase and installation cost of the communication
antenna.  Any such modification shall preserve such screening of the
communication antenna as is compatible with usable antenna reception and
transmission at a reasonable cost.



         b.   If no clear reception window can be found in the
rear, side or street side yard areas, then the communication antenna may be
mounted in the front yard or the roof, whichever is less visible from the
public right-of-way.



            (1)   For communication antennas mounted in the
front yard, screening shall be accomplished through the use of appropriate
fencing, plants, trees or shrubs or other material compatible with the
residence or other structures.  A combination of trees and shrubs, shall be
utilized for screening purposes.  Each tree shall be, at minimum, a
twenty-four (24) inch box-size specimen.  All shrubs shall have a minimum
container volume of five (5) gallons at the time of planting.  All such
screening shall be on three (3) sides and shall be sufficiently high so as to
substantially screen the antenna from public view.  All screening must meet
the criteria established in this chapter to the satisfaction of the City
Planner or his or her designee.



            (2)   If the communication antenna requires roof
mounting, then the use of existing roof lines to screen the antenna is
required.  In addition, screening shall be accomplished with the use of
materials compatible with the structure upon which such antenna is mounted. 
Such screening shall be on at least three (3) sides and shall be sufficiently
high so as to substantially screen the antenna from public view.  All
screening must meet the criteria established in this chapter to the
satisfaction of the City Planner or his or her designee.



               (a)   No roof mounted communication antenna
shall exceed ten (10) feet in height above the roof line of the structure
upon which the antenna is mounted.



               (b)   No roof mounted communication antenna
shall exceed ten (10) feet, six (6) inches in diameter.



      3.   All transmitting communication antennas shall be
prohibited in residential zones, except those operated by federally licensed
amateur radio operators.



         a.   All types of transmitting communication antennas
that are larger than permitted receive-only communication antennas (per above
paragraphs A.1.e. and A.1.f. of this section) are prohibited on the roof and
in the front yard.  Transmitting communication antennas may be placed in the
rear or side yards providing all applicable setbacks are maintained.



         b.   Screening requirements for transmitting
communication antennas are the same as for receiving communication antennas
as described herein except that fencing and/or a block wall shall be
installed in such a manner as to prohibit entry by children or animals.  The
fencing and/or block wall shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height, and
shall be installed within ten (10) feet of the antenna and its supporting
structure.  The fencing and/or block wall shall encompass the entire
perimeter of the antenna with a gate that shall be locked at all times.  An
existing fence or block wall may be used as a portion of the screening
providing it meets the height and placement standards contained in this
zoning code.  The fencing or wall materials shall be architecturally
compatible with the surrounding structures, and shall comply with all
provisions of this zoning code.



      4.   No more than two communication antennas are permitted for
each housing unit on any residential property.



   B.   Placement of communication antennas requiring a permit in all
other zones.



      1.   All communication antennas requiring a permit may be
mounted subject to a preferred order of placement and all conditions
hereinafter provided:



         a.   The preferred order of placement for communication
antennas shall be:



            (1)   The roof, if completely screened by existing
building parapet walls or roof screen;



            (2)   The rear yard areas;



            (3)   The side yard areas; and



            (4)   The street side yard areas.



         b.   All communication antennas shall be screened from
public view to the greatest extent possible.



         c.   No portion of any communication antenna or its
supporting structure shall be located within five (5) feet of any property
line.



         d.   A communication antenna may be located within the
street side yard if:



            (1)   The antenna is not located within the
required street side yard setback;



            (2)   The antenna is substantially screened from
public view (all antennas must be substantially screened from visibility as
viewed from the abutting public property at grade level);



            (3)   The street side yard does not abut or
directly face a residential zone.



         e.   No communication antenna or its supporting
structure shall be located in the area between the front property line and
the facade of any building on the property.



         f.   No communication antenna shall be mounted on or
directly attached to the side of any building face.  Except for roof mounted
antennas, all antennas shall be placed at ground level.



         g.   No communication antenna, or its supporting
structure, shall be installed in any location which would impede emergency
access to any portion of the subject property.



      2.   The standards set forth hereinabove may be modified upon
a showing by the applicant that their strict application would impose an
unreasonable limitation on, or prevent, reception of transmitting signals, or
would impose costs on the applicant that are excessive in light of the
purchase and installation cost of the communication antenna.  Any such
modification shall preserve such screening of the antenna as is compatible
with usable antenna reception and transmission at reasonable cost.



         a.   In the event overall quality of reception in the
above preferred order of placement is interfered with, or other circumstances
preclude such installation, a permit may be obtained, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, authorizing the communication antenna to be
located in the front yard area or in other areas visible from the public
right-of-way, subject to screening requirements as specified herein.



         b.   Screening shall be accomplished through the use of
appropriate fencing, plants, trees, or shrubs or other material compatible
with surrounding structures and landscape.  A combination of trees and
shrubs shall be utilized for screening purposes.  Each tree shall be, at
minimum, a twenty-four (24) inch box-size specimen.  All shrubs shall have a
minimum container volume of five (5) gallons at the time of planting.  All
such screening shall be on three (3) sides and shall be sufficiently high so
as to substantially screen the communication antenna from public view.  All
screening must be to the satisfaction of the City Planner or his or her
designee.



      3.   All transmitting communication antennas shall be screened
in the same manner as receiving communication antennas as described herein. 
For ground mounted transmitting antennas, a fence or a block wall shall be
installed in such a manner as to prohibit entry by persons other than those
who are required to operate the antenna.  The fencing and/or block wall
shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height, and shall be installed within
ten (10) feet of the antenna and its supporting structure.  The fencing
and/or block wall shall encompass the entire perimeter of the dish and have a
gate that shall be locked at all times.  An existing fence or block wall may
be used as a portion of the screening providing it meets the height and
placement standards contained in this zoning code.  The fencing or block
wall materials shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding
structures, fencing and walls, and shall comply with all provisions of this
zoning code.



(Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95)



§ 20.64.050  COMMUNICATION ANTENNA PERMIT APPLICATION.



   A.   The applicant shall submit a completed “Uniform
Application,” which form of application shall be provided by the Planning
Division.  In addition to the completed uniform application, the applicant
shall also submit the following:



      1.   Three (3) sets of plans and specifications as follows:



         a.   An overall site plan showing the proposed location
of the communication antenna, and any supporting structure proposed to be
utilized.  Buildings, property lines, public streets, driveways, parking
areas, traffic aisles, and any other topographical features shall be shown;



         b.   If the proposed communication antenna is to be
roof-mounted, then a roof plan which is fully dimensioned, and which
indicates the location of the antenna and any existing roof-mounted equipment
or structures shall be provided.  Furthermore, elevations of the building
with the proposed location and mounted height of the antenna shown
“beyond” the roof parapet or wall, depending upon where the antenna is to
be mounted, shall also be provided.  Illustrative cross sections shall be
provided for all dishes in non-residential zones;



         c.   If the proposed communication antenna is to be
ground-mounted an enlarged site plan detail, which is fully dimensioned,
indicating the mounted height of the antenna from grade, the location of the
antenna in relationship to existing buildings, landscaping, parking areas,
loading areas, property lines and any fences or walls shall be provided.



      2.   The applicant shall also provide a catalog sheet and
specifications from the manufacturer of the proposed communication antenna
which illustrates the proposed antenna, the model number, color, material and
all dimensions.



   B.   If no clear reception window can be found in accordance with
the preferred order of placement described in § 20.64.040, paragraphs A.1.a.
and B.1.a., of this chapter, then the following additional information shall
be required:



         a.   Specific reasons as to why the communication
antenna proposed to be installed should not be mounted in accordance with the
preferred order of placement, as herein prescribed.



         b.   Facts showing that circumstances preclude
installation in a preferred area, or that reception quality in the preferred
area or areas is insufficient.



   C.   The application shall be submitted together with the
appropriate fee therefore, as set by resolution of the City Council, to cover
the administrative costs of processing the application.



   D.   Adjacent property owners shall be notified of the request to
install a communication antenna five (5) calendar days prior to a decision
approving, denying or conditionally approving the communication antenna
application.



(Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95)



§ 20.64.060  DIRECTOR'S ACTION AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.



   A.   The Development Services Director shall provide the applicant
with a written decision approving, denying or conditionally approving a
proposed communication antenna permit within fifteen (15) working days
following submission of a complete application pursuant to this chapter. 
The Director's decision shall contain findings for his or her decision as
necessary.  The Director shall maintain a copy of the decision on file in
the Development Services Department.



   B.   The Director's written decision shall be final and shall become
effective within ten (10) days following the date of said decision.  Unless,
however, that if within such ten (10) day period an aggrieved party files an
appeal, pursuant to Chapter 20.424 of this title, as amended.



(Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95)



CHAPTER 20.68:  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES



Section



   20.68.010   Purpose



   20.68.020   Exemptions



   20.68.030   Definitions



   20.68.040   Prohibited uses



   20.68.050   Development criteria



   20.68.060   Performance standards



   20.68.070   Submittal requirements



   20.68.080   Approval of minor wireless communication facilities



   20.68.090   Approval of major wireless communication facilities



   20.68.100   Scope of approval



   20.68.110   Variance



   20.68.120   Revocation



§ 20.68.10  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide placement, design and
screening criteria for wireless communication facilities in order to protect
the public health, safety, general welfare, and quality of life in Brea while
preserving the rights of wireless communication providers. The  City Council
has found and determined that these regulations and guidelines for wireless
communication facilities are necessary to attain these goals. These
regulations are intended to supersede applicable provisions of the  Zoning
Ordinance pertaining to wireless communication facilities, and to establish
flexible guidelines for the governance of wireless communications facilities
which recognize the unique land use distribution, topography, and aesthetic
characteristics of the City of Brea. Wireless communication facilities are
prohibited in the City of Brea except as otherwise provided herein.



Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.020  EXEMPTIONS.



   In the event an emergency or disaster is declared for the area, the
Development Services Director may exempt wireless communication facilities
from the requirements of this chapter during the duration of such emergency
or disaster.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.030  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless otherwise stated, the following definitions pertain to this
chapter.



   ANTENNA.  A device used in communications which radiates and/or
receives any radio or television signals for commercial purposes, including,
but not limited to, commercial cellular, personal communication service,
wireless modem signals, and/or data radio signals. ANTENNA shall not include
any noncommercial satellite dish antenna or any antenna utilized for amateur
radio, citizen band radio, television, AM/FM or shortwave radio reception
purposes.



   BUILDING-MOUNTED.  Mounted to the side of a building, to the facade of
a building or to the side of another structure such as a water tank, church
steeple, freestanding sign, or similar structure, but not to include the roof
of any structure.



   CELLULAR.  An analog or digital wireless communication technology that
is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites.



   CO-LOCATED.  The usage of a single support structure and/or site by
more than one wireless communications provider.



   GROUND-MOUNTED.  Mounted to a pole, monopole, lattice tower or other
freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting
an antenna.



   MAJOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY.  Except as provided in the
definition of MINOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY, a wireless communication
facility that is ground-mounted, and/or is mounted in any manner on property
or buildings owned by the city or in right-of-ways over which the city has
regulatory authority, shall be considered a MAJOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION
FACILITY.



   MINOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY.  A wireless communication
facility that is building-, facade-, or wall-mounted, and does not exceed the
height of the parapet wall or roof line of the building. A roof-mounted
facility which is concealed or is of a small diameter and does not exceed the
maximum height of the district, shall be considered a MINOR WIRELESS
COMMUNICATION FACILITY. A wireless communication facility that is mounted in
any manner on property or buildings owned by the city or in right-of-ways
over which the city has regulatory authority, pursuant to a master agreement
with the city, shall be considered a MINOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY.



   MONOPOLE.  A structure composed of a single spire used to support
antennas or related equipment.



   MOUNTED.  Attached or supported.



   PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES. Any form of commercial communications
service utilizing digital wireless radio communication technology, having the
capacity for multiple communications services and the routing of calls to
individuals, regardless of location. PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES shall
also mean and include PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES as defined in Section 704 of
the Telecommunications Act of 1996.



   ROOF-MOUNTED.  Mounted above the eave line of a building.



   STEALTH FACILITY.  Any wireless communication facility which is
designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is
architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure, and
shall include and mean any concealed antenna.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY.  A  facility  consisting  of 
any  commercial  antenna, monopole, microwave dish and/or other related
equipment, or combination thereof, necessary to the transmission and/or
reception of any radio or television signals for commercial purposes,
including but not limited to, commercial cellular, personal communication
service, wireless modem, and/or data radio communications, and which has been
granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity, or a wireless
registration number by the California Public Utilities Commission, or
otherwise provides commercial wireless communications services to the public.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY does not include any radio or television
facility which is exempt from local regulation pursuant to state or federal
law.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97; Am. Ord. 1204, passed 9-4-18)



§ 20.68.040  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses are prohibited within the City of Brea:



   A.   Ground-mounted antenna structures on prominent ridge lines as
defined in § 20.56.020 of the Brea Zoning Code.



   B.   Any facility located in residential zones.



   C.   Any facility in the open space areas unless located on an
existing pole or structure and the applicant has shown to the City Planner
that there is no reasonable alternative.



   D.   Any facility in the open space areas unless located on an
existing pole or structure and the applicant has shown to the City Planner
that there is no reasonable alternative.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97; Am. Ord. 1139, passed 5-18-10)



§ 20.68.050  DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA.



   A.   Placement of wireless communication facilities.



      1.   Wireless communication facilities shall be located in the
following order of preference:



         a.   Co-located with other wireless communication
facilities.



         b.   On existing structures such as buildings,
communication towers, and utility facilities.



         c.   In industrially zoned districts.



         d.   In commercially zoned districts.



      2.   Wireless communications facilities shall be located where
the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide
the greatest amount of screening.



      3.   Ground-mounted wireless communication facilities shall be
located in close proximity to existing above ground utilities, such as
electrical towers or utility poles (which are not scheduled for removal or
undergrounding in the next eighteen (18) months), light poles, trees of
comparable heights, and in areas where they are otherwise visually compatible
and will not detract from the appearance of the city.



      4.   For all ground-mounted communication facilities, the
support structures shall be set back from all residential property lines a
distance equal to and no less than, the height of the highest point of the
wireless communication facility.



      5.   Wireless communication facilities shall not be located
within 1,000 feet of any communication facility except when located on an
existing building, structure or wireless facility. For the purpose of this
section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures, from the nearest point of the proposed major wireless
communication facility to the nearest property line of any residential land
use, or to the nearest point of another major wireless communication facility.



   B.   Design standards.



      1.   Wireless communication facilities shall not bear any
signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other
legally required seals or signage.



      2.   Accessory equipment shall meet the following standards:



         a.   All accessory equipment associated with the
operation of the wireless communication facility shall be located within a
building, enclosure, or underground vault that complies with the development
standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located,
subject to City approval.



         b.   Accessory equipment permitted to be located above
ground shall be visually compatible with the surrounding buildings and
include sufficient landscaping to screen the structure from view.



         c.   Accessory equipment enclosures shall be limited to
the housing of radio, electronic and related power equipment, and shall not
be used for any other purpose, including storage.



      3.   Wireless communication facilities shall have subdued
colors and non-reflective materials which blend with surrounding materials
and colors.



      4.   All screening for building-mounted facilities shall be
compatible with the existing architecture, color, texture and or materials of
the building.



      5.   The monopole foundation and structures upon which antenna
are to be mounted, shall be no greater in diameter or cross sectional
dimension than is necessary for the proper functioning of the wireless
communication facility. However, such facility shall be designed to
accommodate at least two antennas.



      6.   In considering an application for any wireless
communication facility, the Planning Commission and the City Planner shall
consider the cumulative visual effects of existing wireless communication
facilities in determining the location of an additional facility and in
imposing conditions on the facility, all as necessary to minimize negative
visual impacts of the applied for facility.



      7.   Security fencing, if permitted or required, shall conform
to the following:



         a.   No fence shall exceed six feet in height.



         b.   The fence material shall be compatible with the
underlying zoning requirements.



         c.   Security fencing shall be screened from view
through the use of appropriate landscaping material.



   C.   Height standards.



      1.   Wireless communication facilities utilizing a
free-standing support structure shall be limited to the maximum building
height for the applicable zoning district.



      2.   In zoning districts with no maximum height limits, the
wireless communication facility shall not exceed 35 feet in height above the
ground.



      3.   The Planning Commission may consider approval of
facilities proposed to exceed the maximum height limit subject to the review
and approval of a variance application consistent with § 20.412.020 of the
Brea Zoning Ordinance.



   D.   Noise.  A noise generating equipment shall meet the
requirements of the Brea Noise Ordinance as set forth in Chapter 8.20 of the
Brea City Code.



   E.   Co-location.



      1.   All applicants shall cooperate in good faith with
existing wireless communication facilities operators in co-locating
additional antennas on support structures and/or on existing buildings
provided the existing operator has received a permit for such use at said
site from the city.



      2.   All applicants shall exercise good faith in cooperating
in co-locating with other providers and sharing the permitted site, provided
such proposed shared use does not prevent or unreasonably interfere with the
existing use (i.e., significant interference in broadcast or reception
capabilities as opposed to competitive  conflict or financial burden). 
Such good faith cooperation shall include sharing technical information
necessary to evaluate the feasibility of co-location. In the event a dispute
arises as to whether a provider has exercised good faith in accommodating
other users, the city may require a third party technical study at the
expense of either or both the applicant and the existing operator as to the
feasibility of co-locating.



      3.   Failure to comply with the co-location requirements of
this chapter may result in the denial of a permit request or revocation of an
existing permit.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.060  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   A.   Lawfully erected public wireless communication facilities that
are no longer being used shall be removed promptly from the premises, and no
later than three (3) months after the discontinuation of use, except as
otherwise provided by law. A public wireless communication facility is
considered abandoned if it ceases to provide wireless communication services
for thirty (30) or more days. Such removal shall be in accordance with proper
health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules and regulations of
the city. The wireless communication provider shall send to the city a copy
of the discontinuation notice required by the CPUC or FCC at the time the
notice is sent to the regulatory agencies.



   B.   All facilities determined to be abandoned and not removed
within the required three (3) month period from the date of notice shall be
in violation of this chapter, and operators of the facility and the owners of
the property shall be subject to penalties for violations under the
enforcement and penalties provisions of this chapter. The city may remove all
abandoned facilities following the three (3) month removal period at the
operators' expense. Facilities removed by the city shall be stored for no
less than fifteen (15) days and thereafter be disposed of by public auction,
if deemed to be of value by the city, or otherwise as permitted by law.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.070  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   In addition to the information requested in the uniform
application, the following items shall be required for a wireless
communication facility application:



      1.   A statement providing the reasons for the location,
design and height of the proposed tower or antennas.



      2.   A map showing any existing, planned, and/or approved
wireless communication facilities within 1,500 feet of the proposed new
facilities site.



      3.   A current overall system plan for the city, showing
facilities presently constructed or approved and the overall system in its
fully completed state.



      4.   Evidence satisfactory to the City Planner demonstrating
location or co-location is unfeasible on existing buildings, structures,
light or utility poles, water towers, existing transmission towers, and
existing tower facility sites for reasons of structural support capabilities,
safety, available space, or failing to meet service coverage area needs.



      5.   A site/landscaping plan showing the specific placement of
existing structures, trees, and other significant site features; and
indicating type and locations of plant materials proposed to be used to
screen wireless communication facility components and the proposed color(s)
for the wireless communication facility.



      6.   A signed statement indicating:



         a.   The applicant agrees to allow for the co-location
of additional wireless communication facility equipment by other providers on
the applicant's structure or within the same site location.



         b.   That the applicant agrees to remove the facility
within three (3) months after that site's use is discontinued.



      7.   Plans showing how connections to utilities will occur,
the ownership of those utilities, and any proposed right-of-way cuts or
easements.



      8.   Documents demonstrating that necessary easements have
been obtained.



      9.   Plans showing how vehicle access will be provided.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.80  APPROVAL OF MINOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.



   A.   Minor wireless communication facilities shall be subject to
approval by the City Planner pursuant to § 20.408.040 of the Brea Zoning
Ordinance. In considering applications for minor wireless communication
facilities, the City Planner shall be guided by both the provisions of §
20.408.040 and this chapter. However, in the event of any inconsistency in
said standards, or of any conflict between this chapter and any other
provisions of the Brea Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.



   B.   The City Planner shall render a decision in writing, with
findings, and conditions, within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete
application. The City Planner's decision shall be final unless a written
appeal is filed with the City Planner within ten (10) business days of the
date of the decision, whereupon the City Planner shall schedule a public
hearing to be conducted before the Planning Commission. At the public
hearing, city staff and the applicant may present any relevant evidence. The
Planning Commission may affirm, reverse or modify, with or without
conditions, the City Planner's decision, and shall make written findings in
support thereof. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.090  APPROVAL OF MAJOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.



   Major wireless communications facilities shall be subject  to 
approval by the Planning Commission.  In considering applications for major
wireless communication facilities, the Planning Commission shall be guided by
the provisions of § 20.408.030 of the Brea Zoning Ordinance and this
chapter.  However, in the event of any inconsistencies in said standards or
any conflict between this chapter and any other provisions of the Brea Zoning
Ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. The decision of the
Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed in writing within ten (10)
business days pursuant to Chapter 20.424 of the Brea Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.100  SCOPE OF APPROVAL.



   A.   No operator of a wireless communication facility shall (1)
construct, operate and/or maintain any greater number or type of wireless
communication facilities than has been expressly approved pursuant to this
chapter; (2) increase the number of, or modify in any way, any antennas or
other above-ground equipment constituting any part of a wireless
communication facility, without the prior written consent of the City
Planner; (3) sublet or otherwise permit any part of any approved wireless
communication facility to be used for any purpose other than the use so
expressly approved pursuant to this chapter.



   B.   In addition to any other remedies available, a violation of
this section shall be deemed to be grounds for revocation of a wireless
communication facility approval, pursuant to § 20.68.120 of this chapter.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.110  VARIANCE.



   Any person may apply for a variance as to the requirements set forth
herein pursuant to § 20.412.010 of the Brea Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



§ 20.68.120  REVOCATION.



   Any approval granted pursuant to this chapter may, after notice and
hearing, be terminated for violation of any provisions of this chapter or any
other applicable laws, or for fraud or misrepresentation in the application
process.



(Ord. 996, passed 8-5-97)



CHAPTER 20.70:  COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USES AND CULTIVATION



Section:



   20.70.010   Definitions



   20.70.020   Prohibited uses



   20.70.030   Indoor cannabis cultivation



   20.70.040   Exceptions



   20.70.050   Violation and penalty



§ 20.70.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings set forth in the MAUCRSA and as set forth below:



   CANNABIS.  All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis
indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the
resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds, or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether
crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. CANNABIS includes cannabis that is
used for medical, non-medical, or other purposes. CANNABIS does not include
the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the
plant which is incapable of germination. CANNABIS also does not include
industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section
11018.5.



   CANNABIS PRODUCT.  Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not
limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing
cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.



   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY.  The cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing,
packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and
cannabis product for medical, non-medical, or any other purpose and includes
the activities of any business licensed by the State or other government
entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, or
any provision of State law that regulates the licensing of cannabis
businesses. COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY does not include the cultivation,
possession, storage, manufacturing, or transportation of cannabis by a
qualified patient for his or her personal medical use so long as the
qualified patient does not provide, donate, sell or distribute cannabis to
any other person. COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY also does not include the
cultivation, possession, storage, manufacturing, transportation, donation or
provision of cannabis by a primary caregiver, exclusively for the personal
medical purposes of no more than five specified qualified patients for whom
he or she is the primary caregiver, but who does not receive remuneration for
these activities except for compensation in full compliance with California
Health and Safety Code section 11362.765.



   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USE.  The use of any property for commercial
cannabis activity.



   COMPASSIONATE USE ACT.  The Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition
215), codified as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5.



   CONCENTRATED CANNABIS.  Manufactured cannabis that has undergone a
process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing
the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is
a concentrate.



   CULTIVATION.  Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.



   DELIVERY.  The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to
a customer. DELIVERY" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer.



   DISTRIBUTION.  The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and
cannabis products between entities licensed under Division 10 of the
California Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from
time to time.



   FULLY ENCLOSED AND SECURE STRUCTURE.  A space within a building,
greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported
by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure
against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is
accessible only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors.



   INDOOR.  Within a fully enclosed and secure structure.



   MANUFACTURE.  To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make
or prepare a cannabis product.



   MAUCRSA.  The Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety
Act as codified in Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, and any
successor provisions thereto, as the same may be amended from time to time.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROGRAM.  means California Health and Safety Code
Sections 11362.7 through 11362.83, as such statutes may be amended from time
to time.



   OUTDOORS.  Any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure
structure.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, firm, corporation, association, club,
society, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, sole
proprietorship, collective, cooperative, coop, non-profit, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other organization, group or entity or
combination of organizations or entities of any kind whatsoever, however
formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, and/or
assigns, and shall also include any owner, operator, manager, proprietor,
employee, agent, officer, volunteer, salesperson, trustees, heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns. The term PERSON shall also include all persons
who have an ownership or leasehold interest in any real property, premises
and/or structures in which commercial cannabis activity is occurring.



   PRIMARY CAREGIVER.  The individual, designated by a qualified patient
or by a person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed
responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient or person
pursuant to the requirements of the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical
Marijuana Program.



   PRIVATE RESIDENCE.  A house, an apartment unit, condominium, or other
similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence.



   QUALIFIED PATIENT.  A person who is entitled to the protections of
California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5, as the same may be amended
from time to time, but who does not have an identification card.



   PRIMARY CAREGIVER.  Shall have the same meaning as is defined in
California Health and Safety Code section 11362.7(d), as the same may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)



§ 20.70.020  PROHIBITED USES.



   A.   Commercial cannabis uses are expressly prohibited in all zones
and overlay districts in the city. No person shall establish, operate,
maintain, conduct or allow commercial cannabis uses anywhere within the city.
The city shall not approve any application for a building permit, conditional
use permit, variance, or any other entitlement authorizing the establishment,
operation, maintenance, development, or construction of any commercial
cannabis use.



   B.   Outdoor cannabis cultivation is expressly prohibited everywhere
in the city. No person owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge
or possession of any parcel shall cause or allow such parcel to be used for
cultivating cannabis outdoors.



   C.   Indoor cannabis cultivation, including cultivation by a
qualified patient and primary caregiver, is prohibited except in strict
compliance with Section 20.70.030.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty see § 20.70.050



§ 20.70.030  INDOOR CANNABIS CULTIVATION.



   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning,
leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any real property in
the city to cause or allow such real property to be used for the cultivation
of cannabis except in strict compliance with the requirements set forth
below. For purposes of this Section 20.70.030, PRIVATE RESIDENCE means a
house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling, or
otherwise as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(5), or any
successor provision thereto.



   A.   Cannabis cultivation shall only occur indoors at a private
residence, or inside an enclosed accessory structure located upon the grounds
of a private residence.



   B.   Only persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older may
cultivate cannabis. Any cannabis cultivation must comply with the
requirements set forth in California Health and Safety Code sections 11362.1
and 11362.2.



   C.   Cannabis cultivation is permitted only within fully enclosed
and secure structures capable of being locked.



   D.   Cannabis cultivation is limited to six (6) plants total being
planted, harvested cultivated, dried or processed at one time at or upon any
private residence, regardless of the number of residents, tenants, guests, or
other persons occupying such residence.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)  Penalty, see § 20.70.050



§ 20.70.040  EXCEPTIONS.



   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person from
transporting cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the city for
delivery or distribution to a person located outside the city, where such
transport does not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional
limits of the city.



   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person 21 years of age
or older from engaging in any activities authorized under California Health
and Safety Code section 11362.1.



   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any commercial cannabis
activity that the city is required by State law to permit within its
jurisdiction pursuant to Business and Profession Code section 26054(c) and
(d), as the same may be amended from time to time, or any other provision of
the MAUCRSA.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)



§ 20.70.050  VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this Chapter 20.70 of
the Brea Municipal Code, the city attorney or city prosecutor may bring a
civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or
entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to
this article, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable
attorneys' fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1.04 of the Brea Municipal Code, no provision
of this chapter authorizes a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty
inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code section 11362.71,
et seq., or section 11362.1, et seq., as the same may be amended from time to
time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under
Chapter 1.04 of the Brea Municipal Code and any penalties set forth in State
law, the maximum penalties allowable under State law shall govern.



(Ord. 1200, passed 12-5-17)



CHAPTER 20.71:  SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS



Section



   20.71.010   Intent and purpose



   20.71.020   Definitions



   20.71.030   Prohibition



 



   20.71.999   Penalty



§ 20.71.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Chapter is to prohibit the operation and/or
establishment of short-term residential rentals in all residential zones, the
Planned Community Zone, and all specific plan areas in the City of Brea.



(Ord. 1204, passed 9-4-18)



§ 20.71.020  DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall
be construed as defined in this section:



   ADVERTISEMENT.  Any printed or lettered announcement, whether in a
magazine, newspaper, handbill, notice, display, billboard, poster, email,
Internet website or application, or any other form.



(Ord. 1204, passed 9-4-18)



§ 20.71.030  PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or make available for rent
or to rent (by way of a rental agreement, lease, license or any other means,
whether oral or written), for compensation or any consideration, a
residential dwelling, a dwelling unit or a room in a dwelling for less than
thirty (30) consecutive days. No person or entity shall place or maintain any
advertisement for a short term residential rental prohibited by this Section.
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a residential dwelling, a
dwelling unit or a room in a dwelling for less than thirty (30) consecutive
days pursuant to a rental agreement, lease, license or any other means,
whether oral or written, for compensation or any consideration."



(Ord. 1204, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 20.71.999



§ 20.71.999  PENALTY.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.  Each and every day such a
violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1204, passed 9-4-18)



CHAPTER 20.72:  TEMPORARY USE PERMIT



Section



   20.72.010   Purpose and intent



   20.72.020   Definitions



   20.72.030   Permit required



   20.72.040   Uses permitted; time limits



   20.72.050   Application; contents; fees



   20.72.060   Compliance with governmental regulations



   20.72.070   Investigation and review



   20.72.080   Action by Development Services Director; findings



   20.72.090   Appeal to the Planning Commission



   20.72.100   Suspension



   20.72.110   Revocation



   20.72.120   Insurance deposit requirement



§ 20.72.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate those uses and
activities of a temporary nature which may affect the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare. The requirements provided herein shall be
separate and additional to those provisions of the municipal code regarding
business regulation and licensing. Any and all fees provided in this chapter
are intended to cover the cost of investigation and processing the permits
herein and shall be additional to all applicable licenses or permits provided
in the municipal code for a particular use or activity.



   B.   The regulations and privileges applicable to the uses permitted
in this chapter shall be alternative to the otherwise applicable sections
covering entertainment permits or zoning ordinance use entitlements when the
duration of such uses are no longer than as are permitted by this chapter.
Any such use which exceeds the temporary time limits or applicable
regulations of this chapter shall require the application for, and approval
of, an entertainment permit or other appropriate use approval as may be
applicable.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The city of Brea.



   CITY CLERK.  The City Clerk of the city.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the city or his or her designee.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Development Services Department or his or
her designee.



   PERSON.  Individuals, partnerships, joint ventures, societies,
associations, trustees, trusts, or any corporations, their officers, agents
or employees, and any representative thereof.



('61 Code, § 13B.2) (Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.030  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on,
in or upon any premises or real property within the city, any of the
temporary uses listed in this chapter without first having been granted a
valid temporary use permit pursuant to the terms and provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.040  USES PERMITTED; TIME LIMITS.



   A.   The following uses and activities, subject to the time limits
referenced herein, shall obtain a temporary use permit prior to conducting
the use or activity. The determination as to whether a specific use or
activity is included within the classifications of uses and activities listed
in this section shall be an administrative function of the Director.



   B.   The following uses and activities may be approved for a
specific length of time not to exceed four (4) calendar days within a ninety
(90) day period at any one (1) location for a given applicant:



      1.   Exhibits, demonstrations or sales of goods, equipment,
merchandise or services;



      2.   Aircraft, helicopter, hot air balloon and parachutist
demonstrations and landings;



      3.   Entertainment, dances and promotional events;



      4.   Halloween haunted houses;



      5.   Art and craft shows and exhibits; and



      6.   Health and safety services, testing, demonstration or
training.



   C.   Requests for outdoor display of limited merchandise in excess
of the time limitations of § 20.72.040.B may be considered by the Planning
Commission subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit, consistent with
the processing requirements of § 20.408.030. The intent of this section
shall be to provide for the outdoor display of merchandise, which shall be
typically limited to one product type (i.e. plants or books or etc.), where
it can be demonstrated that such display can be reasonably integrated into
the site and architectural designs at the location, and maintain the city's
goals to provide for quality, attractive, commercial development. The
following standards shall apply to any such proposed outdoor display:



      1.   Use of display area. The Planning Commission and/or City
Council shall retain the ability to condition the types of merchandise or
products on display. Display merchandise and products shall be limited to
those normally associated with the primary retail user making application,
shall typically be limited to one product type (i.e. plants or books, or
etc.), and no outdoor display area shall be subleased or otherwise afforded
use by other persons.



      2.   Location of display area. To be limited to those areas
generally adjacent to the front building elevation of the tenant space, which
will in no way interfere with automobile circulation and applicable
standards. Display areas shall be designed to primarily be viewed from
on-site rather than from the public right-of-way.



      3.   Delineation of display area. The design of the outdoor
display area and its physical delineation shall place an emphasis on
aesthetic and functional integration into the site and building design. The
physical limits of display areas shall be clearly delineated through
treatments such as decorative pavement, decorative bollards, landscaped
planters, or similar features.



      4.   Limitation of display fixtures. Any display fixtures
(i.e. display racks, tables, etc.) shall be temporary in nature and shall be
removed from outdoor display areas when not in use.



      5.   Maximum length of display area. Not to exceed 50% of
building/tenant space width (whichever is less) directly adjacent to the
display area. The Planning Commission and/or City Council shall retain the
ability to further limit display length on a case by case basis as deemed
appropriate.



      6.   Maximum depth of display area. Not to exceed 15'. The
Planning Commission and/or City Council shall retain the ability to further
limit display depth on a case by case basis as deemed appropriate.



      7.   Maximum height of merchandise. Not to exceed 6' from
adjacent finished grade. The Planning Commission and/or City Council shall
retain the ability to further limit display height on a case by case basis as
deemed appropriate.



      8.   Pedestrian accessibility. All outdoor display areas shall
be designed in a manner to allow free pedestrian movement within and around
their vicinity. All rules and regulations of the Americans with Disabilities
Act and any other applicable regulations shall be observed.



      9.   Permit revocation for non-compliance. Compliance with any
and all conditions placed by the Planning Commission and/or City Council
shall be observed. Any observed violation of conditions of approval shall
constitute grounds to initiate CUP revocation proceedings as provided for
within § 20.412.020 of the Municipal Code.



      10.   Plan submittal. Detailed site, building elevation,
floor, display fixtures (i.e. display racks, tables, etc.) and any other
plans and materials as deemed necessary by the City Planner, to illustrate
compliance with the outdoor display standards shall be provided at the time
of Conditional Use Permit application.



   D.   The following uses and activities may be approved for a period
of time not to exceed fifteen (15) days within any given ninety (90) day
period at any one (1) location for a given applicant: Patriotic, historic or
similar displays or exhibits adjacent to commercial buildings, parking areas,
or sidewalks.



   E.   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, rodeos, pony riding or similar
traveling amusement enterprises may be permitted for not more than seven (7)
days, or three (3) weekends of operation, in any one hundred eighty (180) day
period at any one (1) location for a given applicant.



   F.   Christmas tree sales (other than by established retail
businesses) may be approved during the period commencing November 15 and
terminating on December 31 of a given calendar year (these pro-visions shall
be in addition to those requirements for Christmas tree lots as provided in
Title 16 of the Municipal Code).



   G.   Pumpkin sales and displays (other than by established retail
businesses) may be approved for the period commencing October 1 and
terminating November 1 of a given calendar year.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.050  APPLICATION; CONTENTS; FEES.



   A.   An application for a temporary use permit, on forms available
from the Director, shall be submitted to the Director a minimum of forty-five
(45) days prior to the proposed date of the temporary use or activity. The
application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall contain,
at minimum, the information as set forth in this section.



   B.   Each application for a temporary use permit shall contain, at
minimum, the following information:



      1.   The name, permanent street address and signature of the
applicant;



      2.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name and principal
address of the applicant shall be as shown in the most recent statement of
investment group and shall be signed by a duly authorized representative of
the corporation;



      3.   The full name and address of the property owner where the
temporary use or activity is to take place and a signed affidavit from the
property owner granting permission for the proposed use on the property in
question and for the dates requested;



      4.   The name, address and twenty-four (24) hour phone number
of at least two (2) persons to be contacted in the event of emergency
conditions at the temporary use or activity;



      5.   The exact location, including street name, of the
property proposed to be used for the temporary use or activity;



      6.   A detailed description of the proposed temporary use or
activity;



      7.   The proposed dates and hours of operation; and



      8.   A site plan or drawing depicting the use or activity,
including the placement of all signs and banners, the location of all
temporary materials, generators, temporary sanitary facilities, lighting, etc.



   C.   The application shall be submitted together with the
appropriate fee, as set forth by resolution of the City Council, to cover the
administrative costs of processing the application. Such fees shall not be
required when the use or activity is conducted by any religious, charitable
or educational organization or association and any funds derived therefrom
are retained or disbursed for religious, charitable or educational purposes.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.060  COMPLIANCE WITH GOVERNMENTAL REGULATIONS.



   In addition to all of the requirements as set forth in this chapter,
every person requiring a temporary use permit pursuant to this chapter, which
additionally requires any federal, state or local regulatory license or
permit, shall present evidence to the Director of satisfactory compliance
with such regulations prior to the issuance of any temporary use permit.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.070  INVESTIGATION AND REVIEW.



   The Director shall, upon receipt of the completed application, forward
copies of the application, together with any and all attachments thereto, to
every city department which would or could be affected by such temporary use.
Each such department shall investigate and respond in writing to the Director
with recommendations as to the approval of the application, together with any
appropriate conditions for issuance.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.080  ACTION BY DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR; FINDINGS.



   A.   The Director, within ten (10) business days following receipt
of the completed application, shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny
the temporary use application.



   B.   No temporary permit shall be approved unless the Director finds
that the use or activity, together with any and all conditions imposed
thereon, meets all of the criteria as follows:



      1.   The temporary use or activity is in harmony with the
various elements and objectives of the general plan of the city;



      2.   The temporary use or activity complies with all
applicable standards of the city zoning ordinance with respect to the
location of the proposed activity; and



      3.   The temporary use or activity will not be injurious or
detrimental to persons or properties adjacent to or in vicinity of the
proposed location of the activity.



      4.   Provisions for adequate traffic circulation, off-street
parking and pedestrian safety have been provided and will be maintained
during the operation of the use or activity.



   C.   The Director may impose such terms, conditions and restrictions
upon the operation or conduct of the use or activity as may be deemed
necessary or expedient to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals or
welfare of the citizens of the city.



   D.   Upon the decision with respect to the application, the Director
shall mail to the applicant, by certified mail, notice as to whether the
permit has been granted or denied. The notice shall inform the applicant of
the right to appeal the decision of the Director to the Planning Commission
as provided in this chapter. Additionally, if the Director should deny the
application, the notice shall specify those reasons why the permit has been
denied.



   E.   The Director may, in those cases where it is deemed that the
public interest will be best served, refer the approval of the temporary use
permit directly to the Planning Commission for hearing thereon without taking
further action.



   F.   All decisions of the Director with respect to the temporary use
permit application shall be final unless appealed to the Planning Commission
as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.090  APPEAL TO THE PLANNING COMMISSION.



   A.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director with
respect to a temporary use permit may appeal such decision to the Planning
Commission within ten (10) days following notice of such decision.



   B.   A written request for such appeal shall be filed with the City
Planner, and all such requests shall contain the following information:



      1.   The name and address of the applicant;



      2.   The date of the decision in question;



      3.   The reason for the appeal;



      4.   The grounds relied upon for relief.



   C.   The appeal request shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
appeal fee in an amount to be set by resolution by the City Council. Upon
receipt of the appeals request, the Director shall set the matter for hearing
at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission no later than thirty (30)
days following the date the appeal request was filed. Notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, by certified mail, no
later than ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. Said notice may
also designate certain records that the applicant requires to produce at the
time of the hearing.



   D.   At the hearing as prescribed by this section, the applicant and
the city may submit any and all evidence as they believe to be relevant. The
Planning Commission may require the presentation of additional evidence from
either the applicant or the city, or from both, and may continue the hearing
from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional
evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission may, by
resolution with findings, approve, reverse, or modify the decision of the
Director. Any such decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless
appealed to the City Council.



   E.   Any person aggrieved by any appeal decision to the Planning
Commission with respect to a temporary use permit may appeal such decision to
the City Council within ten (10) days following notice of such decision. A
written request for such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk consistent
with the requirements outlined within § 20.72.090 of this ordinance. The
appeal request shall be accompanied by a non-refundable appeal fee in an
amount to be set by resolution by the City Council. The decision of the City
Council shall be final.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.100  SUSPENSION.



   Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be subject
to immediate suspension if it is found necessary for the protection of public
health, safety or welfare. Such suspension shall only be instituted upon the
recommendation of the city that immediate protective action is necessary. In
the event of such a suspension, the Director shall within twenty-four (24)
hours after the suspension:  (1) cause to be served upon the permit holder a
written statement containing the grounds for suspension and a notice of
hearing to show cause before the Director as to why the permit should not be
suspended pending revocation hearings and, (2) cause to be served upon the
permit holder a notice of revocation hearing before the Planning Commission
as provided in § 20.72.110. The hearing before the Director shall be held
not later than five (5) days following the service of the notice to the
permit holder.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.110  REVOCATION.



   A.   Any permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked after a public hearing before the Planning Commission.
A permit may be revoked under the following circumstances:



      1.   Where it has been determined that the permittee has
violated or has failed to comply with any of the terms or conditions of the
permit;



      2.   Where it has been determined that the permittee has
violated or has failed to comply with any of the ordinances, or resolutions,
or applicable regulations of the city;



      3.   Where it is has been determined that the permit has been
granted pursuant to the false or fraudulent information contained in the
application;



      4.   Where it has subsequently been deter-mined that the
temporary use or user will fail to meet the criteria enumerated in this
chapter for granting a temporary use permit; or



      5.   Where it has been determined that the preservation of the
public health, safety and welfare demand revocation of the permit.



   B.   A notice of revocation shall be mailed to the permittee, by
certified mail, stating the grounds for the revocation and providing a date
within thirty (30) days of the mailing of such notice for a public hearing
before the Planning Commission. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing the
Planning Commission may, by resolution with findings; revoke or modify the
permit and the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless
appealed to the City Council.



   C.   Any person aggrieved by any revocation decision of the Planning
Commission with respect to a temporary use permit may appeal such decision to
the City Council within ten (10) days following notice of such decision. A
written request for such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk consistent
with the requirements outlined within § 20.72.110 of this ordinance. The
appeal request shall be accompanied by a non-refundable appeal fee in an
amount to be set by resolution by the City Council. The decision of the City
Council shall be final.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



§ 20.72.120  INSURANCE DEPOSIT REQUIREMENT.



   A.   As a condition of approval of any temporary use permit, the
Director may require a reasonable cash deposit to be collected from an
applicant and/or that the applicant obtain and provide a policy of insurance
prior to the proposed activity.



   B.   Any cash deposit shall guarantee the clean-up of the temporary
use location and adjacent areas. The city may apply said cash deposit for the
payment of all costs, including overhead, in connection with the clean-up
even if the applicant should fail to provide said clean-up within seven (7)
days of the conclusion of the event. The Director may set the amount of said
cash deposit from within a range of amounts as set by the City Council.



   C.   Any policy or policies of liability insurance required as
condition of approval of the temporary use permit shall be filed with the
Director prior to the proposed dates of the temporary use. Said policy or
policies of liability insurance shall name the city, its officers, agents and
employees as insureds and/or additional insureds, in a policy which provides
coverage for comprehensive general liability against any and all claims and
suits for damages or injuries to persons or property resulting or arising out
of the operations of the temporary use or activity, its officers, agents or
employees in the performance of such use or activity.  Said policy or
policies shall also contain a provision that no termination, cancellation or
change of coverage of the insureds or additional insureds shall be effective
until notice thereof has been given in writing to the city.  All policy
limits on the required insurance may be set by the Director from a range of
limits as established by the City Council.



   D.   The requirements of insurance and/or cash deposits as a
condition of approval of the temporary use permit shall be mandatory if the
temporary use or activity is to be conducted on or within public streets,
sidewalks, parks or public buildings.



(Ord. 1012, passed 5-19-98)



DIVISION II — SPECIFIC ZONE REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 20.200:  SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
— HILLSIDE ZONE



Section



   20.200.010   Intent and purpose



   20.200.020   Uses permitted



   20.200.030   Prohibited uses



   20.200.040   Property development standards



   20.200.050   Plan review



§ 20.200.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the R1-H Single Family Residential Hillside Zone is to
provide for the proper completion of development of hillside areas already
substantially developed and the protection of the scenic background of the
city by the regulation of lot size and grading, and the careful review of all
proposals by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 713, passed 4-21-81)



§ 20.200.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No building or structure or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



      1.   Single family residential uses and any use permitted in
the R-1 (Single Family Residential) Zone as specified in § 20.208.020.A. of
this title and subject to all the requirements of said zone.



      2.   The drilling for, removal of, and storage of, oil and
hydrocarbons and subject to the provisions of Chapter 8.24 of the city code.



      3.   Temporary tract sales offices and temporary parking
compounds for contractor's equipment.



      4.   Agriculture uses limited to private and commercial berry,
bush, field and vine crops, flower and vegetable farms, and ranches; fruit
and nut tree orchards; private aviaries; and not more than twenty (20) fowl,
twenty (20) rabbits and/or twenty (20) chinchillas for private use only.



      5.   The grazing of and ranches for horses, cattle, sheep, and
goats, or other members of the equine, bovine, or ovine family on a lot or
parcel of land having a minimum area of not less than eighty thousand
(80,000) square feet, and provided said animals are maintained not less than
one hundred (100) feet from any building utilized for human habitation.



      6.   a.   On a lot or parcel of land having a minimum area
of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, one (1) horse per each
member of the family living on said lot or parcel of land may be permitted
for private use only; provided, however, not more than four (4) horses shall
be permitted.



         b.   Horses and housing of same as permitted by this
paragraph shall be maintained a minimum distance of not less than fifty (50)
feet from any building utilized for human habitation.



         c.   A fence, wall or similar enclosure of a minimum
height of six (6) feet above ground shall enclose an area utilized for the
maintenance of horses and shall be so constructed as to prevent their escape.
Gates providing access to the area of horse maintenance shall be kept locked
when said area is unattended.



      7.   Riding and hiking trails (motor driven vehicles
prohibited).



      8.   One (1) unlighted sign, with letters, advertising the
permitted agriculture use on said lot or parcel of land provided its area
shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.



      9.   Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer
mentally or physically handicapped, disordered or dependent persons not
requiring acute medical care.



      10.   Accessory dwelling units, subject to the regulations
contained in §§ 20.208.020 and 20.208.040 of this title, and state law.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title.



      1.   Residential Planned Unit and Cluster Developments subject
to the provisions of Chapter 20.16 of this title.



      2.   Commercial uses permitted in the C-N (Neighborhood
Commercial) Zone as specified in § 20.228.020.A. of this title and subject
to the following:



         a.   The use is an integral part of a Residential
Planned Unit Development.



         b.   The use is limited to a maximum area of not more
than one (1) gross acre, including off-street parking areas.



         c.   The use is enclosed entirely within a building,
except for the off-street parking area.



         d.   A sign advertising the commercial use shall not
exceed a total of twenty (20) square feet in area and shall contain only the
letters denoting the type of use, such as “grocery,” “market,”
“drug store,” etc.



         e.   The hours of operation shall be limited to between
6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



      3.   Subject to all applicable ordinances, rules and
regulations, the following agricultural uses:



         a.   Commercial poultry, rabbit, mink or chinchilla
ranches or farms and aviaries when said uses are located on a lot or parcel
of land having a minimum area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet.  The area where said poultry, rabbits, minks, chinchillas, birds and
bees are housed and maintained shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet
from any building utilized for human habitation.



         b.   Dairies and commercial riding and horse boarding
stables when said uses are located on a lot or parcel of land having a
minimum area of not less than eighty thousand (80,000) square feet and
provided the horses and cattle are maintained not less than one hundred (100)
feet from any building utilized for human habitation.



         c.   Garden nurseries.



         d.   Fruit and vegetable roadside stands when located on
the same lot or parcel of land upon which said fruit and vegetables are grown.



      4.   Private recreational areas when located within a
residential development intended to serve the residents of said development.



      5.   Churches, synagogues, parsonages, convents and other
institutions, buildings and uses utilized for and in conjunction with all
religious purposes.



      6.   Children's nursery schools.



      7.   Public and private schools.



      8.   Mobile home parks.



      9.   The placement of one (1) accessory dwelling unit per lot
subject to provisions of §§ 20.208.020 and 20.208.040, of this title,
excepting paragraph P. of § 20.208.040.



(Ord. 713, passed 4-21-81; Am. Ord. 760, passed 5-15-84; Am. Ord. 1203,
passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.200.030  PROHIBITED USES.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the R1-H Zone:



   A.   All uses not specifically permitted.



   B.   The parking or storage of commercial vehicles.



   C.   The following animals and agricultural uses:



      1.   Hogs and pigs.



      2.   Fox and monkey farms.



      3.   Slaughter houses.



      4.   Wild animals and reptiles.



(Ord. 713, passed 4-21-81; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 3-21-17)



§ 20.200.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The R-1 development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in
the R1-H Zone except where expressly modified by development standards set
forth below: 



   A.   Lot frontage and area.



      1.   The minimum lot frontages in the R1-H Zone shall be as
follows:



         a.   Fifty (50) feet at the fronting street having the
highest elevation for any double frontage lot having a natural slope of over
ten percent (10%).



         b.   Fifty-five (55) feet for any single frontage lot
having a natural slope of over ten percent (10%).



         c.   Sixty (60) feet for any single frontage lot not
having a natural slope of over ten percent (10%).



      2.   Double frontage lots in the R1-H Zone having a natural
slope of less than ten percent (10%) hereby are prohibited.



      3.   Lots in the R1-H Zone shall have correlations between
frontage and lot areas proportionately equivalent to those correlations set
forth below.  For example, double frontage at the fronting street having the
highest elevation would have a required minimum lot area of fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet.



         a.   Double frontage lots having a natural slope of over
ten percent (10%):



 



Frontage at the Fronting Street
 


Having the Highest Elevation
 
Minimum Lot Area


50 feet
 
5,000 square feet


60 feet
 
8,000 square feet


70 feet
 
10,000 square feet


80 feet
 
20,000 square feet


100 feet
 
40,000 square feet


150 feet
 
85,000 square feet




 



         b.   Single frontage lots having a natural slope of over
ten percent (10%):



 

Frontage
 
Minimum Lot Area


55 feet
 
5,000 square feet


65 feet
 
7,500 square feet


70 feet
 
10,000 square feet


80 feet
 
20,000 square feet


100 feet
 
40,000 square feet


150 feet
 
85,000 square feet



 



         c.   Single frontage lots not having a natural slope of
over ten percent (10%):



 

Frontage
 
Minimum Lot Area


60 feet
 
7,000 square feet


65 feet
 
8,000 square feet


70 feet
 
10,000 square feet


80 feet
 
20,000 square feet


100 feet
 
40,000 square feet


150 feet
 
85,000 square feet



 



      4.   Notwithstanding any other provision or provisions
contained in this section, the City Engineer may approve a lot in the R1-H
Zone having no frontage other than that area constituting a portion of an
access corridor serving said lot provided that the following conditions
pertain:



         a.   The access corridor is of a length of three hundred
(300) feet or less;



         b.   The access corridor serves no more than two (2)
lots;



         c.   The access corridor has at least sixteen (16)
consecutive feet of permanent construction material, concrete, asphalt or
other material approved by the City Engineer, measuring from the street to
which the access corridor connects the lot; and



         d.   The lot has a minimum area in compliance with this
section using for purposes of computation in the place of frontage the width
of the lot and excluding from said computation any area contained within the
access corridor.



   B.   Maximum elevation differences between adjoining lots. The
maximum elevation difference between any location on one (1) lot and any
location on another where the two (2) lots have common side lot lines shall
be five (5) feet.



   C.   Grading requirements.  As set forth in Chapter 20.56 of this
title.



   D.   Dwelling unit density.



      1.   Not more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be permitted on
any lot in the R1-H Zone except that where planned unit techniques are
employed.  The total number of dwelling units permitted on a parcel may be
developed on or divided between one (1) or more sites when the total
permitted net density is not exceeded and where it can be shown that adequate
access, utilities and public safety can be provided.



      2.   Each development approved by the city shall contain the
following percentage of lot sizes:



         a.   Over seventy-five percent (75%) of the lots shall
be greater than the minimum size allowable.



         b.   Over fifty (50) of the lots shall be greater than
eight thousand (8,000) square feet.



         c.   The remaining lots shall be not less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet and have an average lot size of seven thousand
(7,000) square feet.



   E.   Outdoor living space.  No requirements.



   F.   Minimum floor area.  The minimum gross floor area of any
dwelling unit located in the R1-H Zone shall be one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) square feet (garages excluded).



   G.   Off-street parking.



      1.   There shall not be less than two (2) off-street parking
spaces within a garage or a three (3) sided carport for each dwelling unit. 
In addition, should streets of twenty-eight (28) feet or less be proposed,
provision for an additional one and one-half (1½) spaces of off-street
parking per unit shall be provided.



      2.   Garages only shall be provided for off-street parking
spaces when located below living quarters.



      3.   Except as provided herein, the provisions of § 20.08.040
of this title shall apply.



   H.   Access.



      1.   All lots shall have vehicular access from a dedicated
street.



      2.   Except as otherwise provided in paragraph A.4. of this
section, with respect to lots having no frontage other than an area
constituting a portion of an access corridor, the entirety of the driveway
access to any garage or carport shall be of permanent construction material,
concrete, asphalt, or other material approved by the City Engineer.



   I.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



   J.   Lighting.  All lighting, interior and exterior, shall be
designed and located so as to confine all direct rays to the premises.



   K.   Exemption from property development standards.  If a dwelling
unit, or appurtenant structure, in existence at the time of the effective
date of this chapter, is partially or totally damaged or destroyed by wind,
fire, flood, explosion, act of God or any other occurrence, then, in that
event, such dwelling unit or appurtenant structure may be reconstructed
without compliance with the property development standards set forth in §
20.204.040 of this title; provided, however, that any such reconstruction of
an existing dwelling unit or appurtenant structure shall be in substantial
conformity with the original dwelling unit or appurtenant structure
including, but not limited to, such matters as type of structure, square
footage, number of stories and elevations.  Any such reconstruction shall
commence only subsequent to the issuance of a certificate of compatibility as
required under § 20.408.050 of this title and, any such reconstruction shall
comply with all Building, Electrical, Fire, Mechanical and/or Plumbing Codes
in effect at the time of the filing of the application for such
application.  No certificate of compatibility application fee shall be
required for construction under this paragraph.  Then applicable building
permit fees shall be paid.



(Ord. 713, passed 4-21-81; Am. Ord. 741, passed 6-21-83; Am. Ord. 965, passed
4-4-95)



§ 20.200.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the R1-H Zone.



(Ord. 713, passed 4-21-81; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.204:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 20.206:  HR HILLSIDE RESIDENTIAL ZONE



Section



   20.206.010   Purpose and intent



   20.206.020   Applicability and permit requirements



   20.206.022   Exemptions from hillside development permit



   20.206.024   Hillside development permit approving authority



   20.206.026   Voluntary pre-application review process



   20.206.028   Review procedure and cost recovery



   20.206.040   Land use regulations



   20.206.050   Application filing requirements



   20.206.060   Allowable density calculation procedures



   20.206.070   Subdivision standards



   20.206.080   Ridgeline preservation



   20.206.090   Open space



   20.206.100   Grading



   20.206.110   Edges



   20.206.120   Retaining walls



   20.206.130   Water quality and stormwater runoff control



   20.206.140   Street requirements and design



   20.206.150   Architectural standards



   20.206.160   Landscape standards



   20.206.170   Development standards; detached dwellings



   20.206.180   Development standards; attached dwellings



   20.206.190   Custom lot design and development standards



   20.206.200   Accessory structures



   20.206.210   Other regulations



   20.206.220   Penalty



   Appendix:   Plant palette



§ 20.206.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   A.   This chapter is established to achieve the city’s objective
to facilitate and permit the orderly development of property within the
hillside areas through a set of hillside development standards aimed at
protecting the public health, safety and welfare; protecting and preserving
natural and biological resources for the long-term benefit of the Brea
community and the broader community; recognizing the inherent value in the
properties subject to this chapter; allowing size, type, location, density,
and intensity of development based on available infrastructure, the
geographic steepness of terrain, presence of unique geographic conditions and
constraints, and presence of environmentally sensitive areas; and optimizing
the use of sensitive site design, grading, landscape architecture, and
architecture, all to achieve the city’s objectives.



   B.   The Hillside Residential (HR) zoning district and the
regulations contained in this chapter are intended to provide development
that is consistent with and serves to implement the goals and policies of the
Brea General Plan for properties designated Hillside Residential.  Specific
regulations and standards address the following city objectives:



      1.   To establish a hillside development application process
that requires property owners to select suitable development sites on their
real property for new hillside development projects based off of
science-based conclusions, including the use of slope density calculations,
maximum land holding capacity, or specific plans or development agreements as
set forth in § 20.206.060.C.3, to determine the appropriate density and
intensity of a structure that can be built on a particular hillside slope.



      2.   To involve early participation of affected resource
agencies at an early stage of the application process with new hillside
development projects.



      3.   To protect the value to the community and the subject
property of ridgelines, prominent landforms, rock outcroppings, open space
areas, hydrologic features, wildlife communities, unique and sensitive
habitat and vegetation communities, and other natural, biological, and scenic
resources.



      4.   To preserve and enhance the visual and aesthetic quality
of hillsides from the surrounding community.



      5.   To encourage all the characteristics and qualities of a
cohesive neighborhood that promotes a “sense of place” within a hillside
setting.



      6.   To promote and encourage a variety of high-quality,
alternative architectural and development designs and concepts appropriate
for hillside areas by utilizing the highest quality of prescribed standards.



      7.   To preserve the public health, safety, and welfare and
specifically protect the public and property from hazards such as seismic,
geologic, and fire.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-15-07)



§ 20.206.020  APPLICABILITY AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   This chapter applies to all properties within the incorporated
boundaries of the city, as well as those properties within the city’s
official sphere of influence that are designated Hillside Residential on the
city’s General Plan Land Use Map, and which lie within the Hillside
Residential (HR) zoning district.



   B.   No person shall subdivide, grade, erect, or construct into,
over or on top of property within the HR zoning district without first
obtaining a hillside development permit (HDP) in compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.022  EXEMPTIONS FROM HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 20.28.020, the following
actions and activities are exempt from the requirement for a hillside
development permit, except that all development in the Hillside Residential
zoning district shall comply with hillside development standards set forth in
this chapter:



      1.   Construction that does not require a grading permit or a
building permit.



      2.   The construction and installation (trenching, utility
construction and backfilling) of underground utility systems.



      3.   The re-grading of existing yard areas for landscaping
installation, provided such re-graded yard area does not exceed one thousand
(1,000) square feet in area.



      4.   Pool/spa construction that does not involve the
construction of any retaining walls, whether or not part of the pool
structure, over three (3) feet in height.



      5.   Additions to existing structures and/or construction of
accessory structures which are less than five hundred (500) square feet in
area, unless a grading permit for establishment of same is required.



      6.   Any project that has received final approval of a
hillside development permit prior to the effective date of this chapter,
provided that such permit or approval has not expired or is not otherwise
revoked, and further provided that the development is in accordance with the
approved hillside development permit and related approvals.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.024  HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPROVING AUTHORITY.



   A.   Two (2) types of permits established.  Two (2) types of
hillside development permits are established by this chapter:  the
administrative hillside development permit and the hillside development
permit.  For the purposes of this chapter, both are referred to herein as a
hillside development permit, unless specifically referenced as administrative
hillside development permit.



   B.   Concurrent applications.  An application for a hillside
development permit or hillside development permit amendment may be processed
and approved concurrently with any other development permits required by this
Title 20 and any other applicable provision of the Municipal Code. The same
decision-making body or official which has the authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the other development permits required for the
project shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a
hillside development permit.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.026  VOLUNTARY PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS.



   A.   Prior to the submittal of an application for any hillside
development permit or hillside development permit amendment, the property
owner  or an agent with written authorization is recommended to voluntarily
meet with the Director of Development Services or designee to review the
requirements of this chapter and to review matters set forth hereunder.



   B.   The purpose of pre-application review is to review the
requirements of this chapter, to identify and review available information
regarding physical conditions affecting the property for which the
application will be submitted, to respond to questions of the property owner
or agent, and to present and review General Plan policies affecting use and
development of the property.



   C.   The pre-application review process is not meant to constitute a
comprehensive hillside development permit application review and should not
be considered to commence any timeline, whether under the California
Environmental Quality Act, Permit Streamlining Act, or any law, statute or
ordinance.  City comments are to provide direction so that the review of the
subsequent hillside development permit or hillside development permit
amendment can be facilitated.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.028  REVIEW PROCEDURE AND COST RECOVERY.



   A.   Administrative hillside development permit.  An administrative
hillside development permit shall be processed in compliance with the
procedures and noticing requirements established for a certificate of
compatibility, as set forth in § 20.408.050.  The Director of Development
Services or designee may refer an administrative hillside development permit
to the Planning Commission, in which case, the Planning Commission acts as
the Director and follows the procedures and noticing requirements for a
conditional use permit, as set forth in § 20.408.030.



   B.   Hillside development permit.  A hillside development permit
shall be processed in compliance with the procedures and noticing
requirements established for a conditional use permit, as set forth in §
20.408.030, and it shall be acted upon by the approving authority having
final jurisdiction over accompanying actions.



   C.   Findings required.  In acting to approve an administrative
hillside development permit or hillside development permit, the approving
authority shall be required to make the following findings:



      1.   That the proposed development is consistent with and
serves to implement the city’s General Plan and specifically, those goals
and policies pertaining to hillside development;



      2.   That the proposed development is consistent with the
purpose and intent of this chapter as set forth in § 20.206.010;



      3.   That care was taken in the design of the development to
minimize exposure of persons to natural hazards, to avoid sensitive
biological resource habitat areas, and to maximize access to public open
space areas; and



      4.   That the design guidelines, where applicable, adopted for
the hillside development permit will provide for quality design consistent
with the intent of this chapter.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.040  LAND USE REGULATIONS.



   A.   Permitted land uses.  The following uses of land are permitted
in the HR zoning district and no discretionary permit is required, except
where a hillside development permit is required by § 20.206.020.



      1.   A single single-family dwelling unit, detached or
attached.



      2.   Accessory dwelling units, subject to the regulations
contained in § 20.208.040 and state law.



      3.   Accessory structures, including detached garages not to
exceed a cumulative total of six hundred (600) square feet.



      4.   Swimming pools, spas, and associated hardscape and
landscape improvements, subject to the issuance of a grading permit and
required building permits.



      5.   Tennis courts, basketball courts, and similar sports
courts, subject to the issuance of a grading permit and required building
permits.



      6.   Public and private parks.



      7.   Landscaped parkways and medians, landscaped slopes, and
similar other open spaces.



      8.   Riding and hiking trails for pedestrians, equestrians and
non-motorized vehicles.



      9.   Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer
mentally or physically disabled, disordered, or dependent persons.



   B.   Uses requiring an administrative hillside development permit.



      1.   The following applications for the development of
property in the Hillside Residential zoning district shall require an
administrative hillside development permit and any other permits that may be
required by § 20.206.040.  All other applications shall require a hillside
development permit.



         a.   The construction of one (1) detached single-family
dwelling unit on an existing legal lot.



         b.   Additions to existing dwelling units, whereby the
addition consists of five hundred (500) square feet or more of habitable
floor area.



         c.   An accessory structure or any combination of
accessory structures, including detached garages, containing more than six
hundred (600) of gross floor area.



         d.   Swimming pools, spas, and associated hardscape and
landscape improvements.



         e.   Tennis courts, basketball courts, and similar
sports courts.



         f.   Public and private parks.



         g.   Riding and hiking trails for pedestrians,
equestrians and non-motorized vehicles.



         h.   Stables, corrals, and similar facilities for the
private noncommercial keeping and containment of animals.



         i.   Lighting of tennis courts, basketball courts, and
similar sports courts.



      2.   An administrative hillside development permit shall be
processed in the same manner as a certificate of compatibility, as set forth
in § 20.408.050 of this title.



   C.   Uses requiring a conditional use permit.  The following uses
of land shall be subject to the granting of a conditional use permit in
compliance with the regulations contained in § 20.408.030.



      1.   The drilling for, removal of, and storage of oil and
hydrocarbons and associated activities, subject to the provisions of Chapter
8.24.



      2.   The grazing of and/or ranches for horses, cattle, sheep,
and goats, or other members of the equine, bovine, or ovine family, or
members of the ratite or cameloid families, on a lot in compliance with the
provisions of Title 6.



      3.   The cultivation of commercial agricultural products.



   D.   Permitted accessory uses.  The following are permitted as
accessory uses clearly subordinate to the principal use of the property: 
The keeping of animals other than those specified in § 20.206.040.C.2. in
compliance with the provisions of Title 6.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1203, passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.206.050  APPLICATION FILING REQUIREMENTS.



   The following information, maps, and other specified data shall be
submitted concurrently with all required application forms and fees.



   A.   A topographical map, at a scale specified in development
applications, which shall identify all existing slope banks, ridgelines,
canyons, natural drainage courses, federally recognized blue-line stream or
waters of the United States, rock outcroppings, and existing vegetation. 
The vegetation map shall indicate whether the plant communities or habitat
are native (e.g. southern mixed chaparral) or exotic (e.g. palm trees). 
Also depicted shall be known landslides and other existing geologic
conditions.



   B.   A conceptual grading plan, which shall include the following
items in addition to those required by the Municipal Code:



      1.   Top of walls;



      2.   Top of curbs;



      3.   High point and low point elevations;



      4.   Elevation of significant trees, which are defined to be
trees with a greater than six (6)-inch trunk diameter measured at four (4)
feet above grade;



      5.   Spot elevations, where appropriate;



      6.   Pad and/or finished floor elevations;



      7.   Change in direction of drainage;



      8.   A separate map with proposed fill areas colored green and
cut areas colored red, with depths of such areas clearly shown in five
(5)-foot topographic lines.  Quantities of each cut and fill area shall also
be clearly marked;



      9.   Areas of cut and fill, calculated as a percentage of the
total site area;



      10.   Contours for existing and proposed topography. 
Existing contours shall be depicted with a dashed line with every fifth
contour darker, and proposed contours shall be depicted as above except with
a solid line.  Contours shall be shown at minimum intervals of five (5) feet
of change in elevation, with two (2)-foot contours shown in the flatter areas;



      11.   Road grades, indicating both average and maximum;



      12.   Lot and pad dimensions, along with a statistical summary;



      13.   Design of roads and driveways, including average grades
indicated, as well as areas of the steepest grade;



      14.   Lot drainage, including the gradient of the drainage and
flow velocities; and



      15.   Proposed graded pad areas for each development lot
proposed, with pad dimensions and slope indicated.



   C.   A cut and fill map identifying proposed fill areas colored blue
and cut areas colored red, with depths of such areas clearly shown in ten
(10)-foot contour lines.  Quantities of each cut and fill area shall also be
clearly specified on the map.



   D.   A series of existing conditions and constraints composite maps
that, respectively, describe in detail the information described below. 
Such maps shall be included as part of any technical report required pursuant
to paragraph H. of this section.



      1.   Geotechnical and soils conditions, including known faults
and landslides.



      2.   Archaeological and paleontological resources, and
documented or potential historic resources.



      3.   Recorded easements and title report planning constraints,
including but not limited to abandoned wells and pipelines.



      4.   Active and abandoned oil and gas production and
processing facilities including, but not limited to wells, pipelines, staging
areas, and processing equipment.  The map shall include clear symbols
indicating which facilities will be retained and which will be abandoned.



      5.   Areas of known or suspected oil field contamination and
associated oil remediation plans.



      6.   Prominent ridgelines and required ridgeline setback
zones, consistent with information on the city’s official Prominent
Ridgeline Map.



      7.   Biological resource map showing all of the existing plant
communities, with sensitive or protected species or communities clearly
delineated, as well as known habitat area for protected animal species
including the location of sensitive biological resources.



      8.   Map identifying significant trees, which, for the
purposes of this map, are defined to be trees with a caliper greater than six
(6) inches when measured four (4) feet above grade.



      9.   One hundred (100)-year floodplain areas, U.S.G.S.
blueline streams, and jurisdictional wetlands.



      10.   Slope areas thirty percent (30%) or greater which are at
least one (1) acre in size and have a minimum dimension of fifty (50) feet in
any direction.



   E.   The following property slope information:



      1.   A detailed slope analysis map for the purposes of
determining the amount and location of land as it exists in its natural state
and for calculating the average slope.  For the slope analysis map, the
applicant shall use a base topographical map of the subject site, prepared
and signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.  The
map shall have a scale of not less than one (1) inch to one hundred (100)
feet and a contour interval of not more than ten (10) feet with two (2)-foot
intermediates.  This interval may be adjusted with the approval of the
Director of Development Services and City Engineer on the basis of good
engineering principles.  This base topographical map shall include all
adjoining properties within one hundred fifty (150) linear feet of the site
boundaries to portray the site’s context.  The slope map shall delineate
slope bands, with contrasting colors, for the following slope ranges:



         a.   Up to 10%;



         b.   10.1% to 20%;



         c.   20.1% to 25%;



         d.   25.1% to 30%;



         e.   Greater than 30%.



      2.   Also included shall be a tabulation of the land/area by
slope percentage specified in acres consistent with the slope categories
identified in subparagraph E.1. above.  Such slope map shall be prepared
using CAD-based or GIS-based software specifically designed for such purpose
and approved for such use by the City Engineer.



      3.   A calculation of the average slope of the entire
parcel.  Such calculation shall be performed by using the average percent
slope formula as follows:



 

S = (0.00229 I L)/A


Where S = Average percent slope


I = Contour interval, in feet


L = Summation of length of contours, in feet


A = Area in acres of parcel being considered



 



      4.   Calculations of average slope percent shall be based upon
accurate topographic surveys using a contour interval no greater than ten
(10) feet and a horizontal map scale of one (1) inch to two hundred  (200)
feet or larger.



      5.   The slope analysis shall be stamped and signed by a
registered or licensed professional competent to provide such analysis and
indicating the datum, source, and scale of topographic data used in the slope
analysis, and attesting to the fact that the slope analysis has been
accurately calculated.



   F.   In the event that no grading is proposed, a statement to that
effect shall be filed with a plan which shows possible future house plotting
and driveway design for each parcel proposed, to be prepared on a topographic
map drawn at the same scale as the conceptual grading plan.



   G.   Sufficient number of slope sections to clearly illustrate the
extent of the proposed grading.  The slope profiles shall:



      1.   All be drawn at the same scale and indexed, or keyed, to
the existing topography, grading plan, and project site map. Both vertical
and horizontal scales shall be indicated and not exaggerated.  The slope
section shall extend at least one hundred fifty (150) feet outside the
project site boundary to clearly show impact on adjacent property.



      2.   At a minimum, sections shall be drawn along those
locations of the project site where:



         a.   The greatest alteration of existing topography is
proposed;



         b.   The most intense or massive development is proposed;



         c.   The site is most visible from surrounding land uses;



         d.   At all site boundaries illustrating maximum and
minimum conditions; and



         e.   Where grading will impact natural drainage
conditions.



      3.   At least two (2) of the slope profiles shall be roughly
parallel to each other and roughly perpendicular to existing contour lines. 
At least one (1) other slope profile shall be roughly at a forty-five (45)
degree angle to the other slope profiles and existing contour lines.



      4.   The slope profiles shall be stamped and signed by a civil
engineer or landscape architect registered in the State of California
indicating the datum, source, and scale of topographic data used in the slope
profiles, and attesting to the fact that the slope profiles have been
accurately calculated and identified.



      5.   Show existing and proposed topography, structures, and
infrastructure facilities. Proposed topography, structures, and
infrastructures shall be drawn with a dashed line.  Existing topography and
features shall be drawn with a thin, solid line.



      6.   The slope profiles shall be stamped and signed by a
registered civil engineer indicating the datum, source, and scale of
topographic data used in the slope profiles, and attesting to the fact that
the slope profiles have been accurately calculated and identified.



   H.   The following technical reports:



      1.   A geologic and soils report prepared by a registered
geotechnical engineer and in sufficient detail to substantiate and support
the design concepts presented in the application as submitted.



      2.   Phase I (records search) and any and all Phase II
(physical investigation of soils) environmental assessments identifying any
hazards present on the property.



      3.   A biological resource survey report identifying all
existing plant communities, with sensitive or protected species or
communities clearly delineated, as well as known habitat area for protected
animal species, including the location of sensitive biological resources. 
All sensitive species surveys shall be conducted in accordance with any
applicable protocols established by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Agency and the
California Department of Fish and Game.  The report shall be signed by the
person preparing such report, with the signature intended to verify that the
mandatory protocols were conformed to in the analysis.



   I.   A comprehensive architectural and landscaping design guideline
manual.  Such manual shall be required for all hillside development permit
applications except those involving the construction of one (1) single-family
dwelling unit on an existing lot, in which case paragraph J. shall apply. 
Such manual shall be approved as part of the applicable hillside development
permit and shall be binding upon all subsequent development authorized by
that applicable hillside development permit.  The manual shall include the
following, but the applicant/landowner may include additional information at
his or her discretion.



      1.   Illustrative, color drawings or similar representations
of the various architectural styles to be used with text and visual
descriptions on the overall architectural theme of the project.



      2.   A neighborhood design diagram depicting the locations of
proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation, utility easements, developable
pad, property lines, perimeter setbacks, parks, and recreation centers.



      3.   A description of all housing types to be built which
reference the location of defined parcels within the property, diagrams of
how the product orients to the flat pad with setbacks, and an illustrative
street scene perspective of the product.



      4.   Identification of building articulation in the following
locations (but not limited to): front massing and entry scale, garage
placement, architectural projections, rear articulation, and corner lots.



      5.   Identification of exterior building materials (structure
and trim), roofing materials, and colors for primary structures.



      6.   Illustrations and descriptions of permitted fencing and
wall materials.



      7.   Illustrations and descriptions of permitted signage and
entry treatments.



      8.   Description and illustrative drawings or similar
representations of how the architecture and building approaches established
in the manual implement the architectural standards set forth in §
20.206.140.



      9.   Identification of landscaping approaches and plant
palettes for all common open space areas, roadway medians, edge and berm
treatments, common slopes, and private front yard areas.



      10.   Description of how the landscaping approaches and plant
palettes established in the manual implement the landscape standards set
forth in § 20.206.160.



   J.   For applications involving one (1) single-family dwelling unit
residence on an existing lot or a second unit on a single lot, architectural
and landscaping treatment materials shall be provided consistent with the
requirements for a certificate of compatibility, as set forth in §
20.408.050. Accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the regulations
contained in §§ 20.208.020 and 20.208.040 of this title, and state law.



   K.   The following items shall also be required as part of an
application, unless waived or conditionally waived by the Director of
Development Services or the Planning Commission, to aid in the analysis of
the proposed project to illustrate existing or proposed conditions or both:



      1.   A topographic model and/or large scale detailed partial
model at a one to one (1:1) scale.



      2.   Visual simulation of the post-development condition,
including use of photographic and/or computer-generated graphic renderings as
described in paragraph N. below.



   L.   Preliminary landscape and irrigation plans for all common areas
showing project compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
requirements of the Fire Chief for fire hazard mitigation and brush
management zones in Chapter 16.04.



   M.   Any pre-application comments received from other affected
government agencies having authority over any component of the development
application, including but not limited to the State Department of
Conservation, Division of Oil and Gas; California Department of Fish and
Game; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.



   N.   Visual three (3)-dimensional simulation of the post-development
condition, prepared in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
paragraph.  The purpose of requiring a visual simulation is to provide
decision makers with a pictorial representation of the future condition of a
development project as close to reality as possible.



      1.   Photography.



         a.   The photograph is the basis of view simulation, and
care shall be taken in the selection of a camera.  The goal is to select a
camera-lens combination that will yield photographs that, as closely as
possible, represent site views from a variety of locations distant from the
project and from surrounding areas that will have a direct view of the
project.



         b.   The photographs shall be taken with the camera
mounted on a leveled tripod and the height of the camera recorded.  If the
scene cannot be captured in one (1) photograph and a panoramic shot is
required, a proper panorama camera or lens/camera that accurately records a
panorama shall be used.  If a series of incremental panoramic shots were
taken, special stitching software or photo retouching software shall be used.



      2.   Control data.



         a.   The location of the camera shall be recorded as
accurately as possible at the time the photograph is taken.  The location
can be determined by field survey, existing topographic maps, or GPS locators.



         b.   Several items that appear in each photograph shall
be field surveyed for accurate location using the methods described above to
allow for accurate configuration of the views in the modeling software.



      3.   Computer modeling.  The proposed project shall be
modeled based on subdivision design, architectural, and landscape data. 
Existing terrain, buildings, survey data, and any field notes shall be
included in the modeling effort.  The level of detail included in the
computer model will be determined by the intended use of the simulation.



      4.   Staging.  The computer model shall be  aligned to the
photographs in the rendering software utilizing the alignment data and the
lens and focal length of the camera used.  The model shall be lighted
according to the time of day and year and the views rendered.



      5.   Rendering.  The rendering process shall be completed
after aligning the model to the photograph.  The subject matter should be
colored and textured to simulate the proposed project as closely as possible
to that intended.



      6.   Photocomposition.  Any retouching undertaken to make
foreground objects visible shall be done in such a way so as to preserve the
original photograph and the rendered image intact.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1203, passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.206.060  ALLOWABLE DENSITY CALCULATION PROCEDURES.



   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, allowable density is defined
as the maximum number of dwelling units permitted per gross acre of land. 
The maximum allowable density shall be based upon and established by the
average slope of a property, calculated in compliance with paragraph C.  The
maximum allowable density based on the average slope shall be as set forth in
Table 20.206.060.A:



 


TABLE 20.206.060.A




MAXIMUM ALLOWED DENSITY
BASED ON AVERAGE SLOPE




Average Slope

 

Maximum Allowable Density





Less than 10%, inclusive
 

2.2 units/acre



10.1 to 20%
 

1.6 units/acre



20.1 to 25%
 

1 unit/acre



25.1 to 30%
 

1 unit/5 acres



Greater than 30%
 

1 unit/ 20 acres





 



   B.   The maximum dwelling unit yield based on the maximum allowable
density mathematical sum shall be considered maximum potentials and not an
entitlement, right or vested right to develop.  Other factors and individual
property characteristics will affect and may reduce the yield, including but
not limited to: physical constraints, floor-area ratio (§ 20.206.060.D.);
compliance with design guidelines, engineering design standards, hillside
development standards; and performance criteria such as access, emergency
response standards, and sensitive grading techniques and volumes.



   C.   Calculating the maximum allowable density for any parcel or
group of parcels under common development application within the Hillside
Residential zoning district shall involve the following steps.  Establish
allowed density based on average slope:



      1.   Alternative 1 – Average slope of the parcel or group of
parcels. For Alternative 1, the average slope shall be calculated in
compliance with § 20.206.050.E.2.  For example, a one hundred (100)-acre
parcel which has an average slope for the entire parcel of twenty-five
percent (25%) would yield a maximum of one hundred (100) units.



      2.   Alternative 2 – Use of slope categories.  Cumulative
land areas of a site corresponding to the slope categories identified in
Table 20.206.060.A may be used to calculate site maximum density in
compliance with the method established in § 20.206.050.E.2. Land areas
within established slope categories which are not proposed for development
shall be excluded from the final density calculation, said areas to remain
undeveloped and set aside as natural open space and deed-restricted from any
future development pursuant to the provisions of § 20.206.090.E of this
chapter. The units/acre density used in the calculation shall correspond with
the steepest slope category within the area proposed for development.  For
example, on a one hundred (100)- acre parcel, of which sixty (60) acres has
an average slope of more than thirty percent (30%), ten (10) acres are
between 25.1 to 30 percent average slope, ten (10) acres are between 20.1 to
25 percent average slope, ten (10) acres are between 10.1 to 20 percent
averge slope, and the remaining ten (10) acres are under ten percent (10%)
average slope; let's assume you select the use of the land area within the
two lower average slope categories. The cumulative land area of twenty (20)
acres from the two slope categories of less than ten percent (10%) average
slope and 10.1 to 20 percent average slope can be used to calculate an
allowable density of thirty-two (32) units (1.6 units/acre X 20 acres = 32
units).



      3.   As an alternative to the Hillside Residential density
calculation procedures contained in § 20.206.060.C.1 and 2, development
proposals approved through a development agreement or specific plan (as
provided for in state law) may have a greater density than that allowed by
the slope density formula(s) provided that the proposal complies with all
other criteria of the Hillside Residential (HR) zoning standards, including
exceptions, and also provided that the maximum number of units does not
exceed 2.25 times the highest number calculated under the slope density
formulas.



   D.   For the purposes of this chapter, floor-area ratio (FAR) is
defined as the ratio of gross building floor area on a pad to the total land
area of the pad. For purposes of this definition, gross floor area shall
include the square footage of all structures on a pad, as measured from the
outside of the exterior walls. Gross floor area shall not include the first
six hundred (600) square feet of attached garages, decks, balconies, covered
patios, the total combined square footage of any and all accessory structures
and detached garages up to six hundred (600) square feet inclusive, and
attics that do not exceed a height of five (5) feet as measured from the top
of ceiling joist (floor) to the bottom of the ridge beam (ceiling).  For
detached dwelling units, after constraints and performance criteria have been
addressed to develop a maximum yield, the maximum yield for a development is
further affected by average FAR and shall be based on Table 20.206.060.B. 
For attached dwelling units, the maximum yield shall be irrespective of the
FAR.



 


TABLE 20.206.060.B




UNIT YIELD BASED ON FLOOR-AREA RATIO




Dwelling Unit Yield

 

Maximum FAR



Maximum units
 

0.4



80% of maximum
 

0.5



70% of maximum
 

0.6



60% of maximum
 

0.7




 



   E.   Physical constraints are the on-site circumstances and
resources that will be protected consistent with policies in the General Plan
or other regulatory requirements.  Factors that require special
consideration are as follows:



      1.   U.S.G.S. blueline streams and potential habitat areas for
endangered species;



      2.   Areas greater than thirty percent (30%) slope greater
than one (1) acre as determined by § 20.206.050.E.;



      3.   Liquefiable soils, Alquist-Priolo Zones, and faulting; and



      4.   Large, mature native trees including but not limited to
Coastal Live Oak, Sycamores, Willow, or Black Walnut.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-15-07)



§ 20.206.070  SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.



   A.   The purpose of creating subdivision design standards within the
Hillside Residential zone is to provide for hillside development that
maintains the integrity of the hillsides’ natural characteristics and
features while addressing development challenges present in hillside
settings, consistent with the purpose of this chapter set forth in §
20.206.010.



   B.   Further, the purpose of these subdivision design standards is
to require that infrastructure such as but not limited to roads, utilities,
drainage, and sound attenuation barriers serve both a utilitarian and
aesthetic purpose.  To better preserve the integrity of subdivision design
within the Hillside Residential district, design elements such as the cutting
of significant ridgelines, unarticulated linear slope faces, and massive
retaining walls are prohibited except as set forth in the exceptions listed
in §§ 20.206.080.C. or 20.206.100.B.6.



   C.   The subdivision design standards set forth in §§ 20.206.080
through 20.206.150, inclusive, are intended to augment, not replace, the
subdivision design and improvements regulations enforced by the  Municipal
Code.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-15-07)



§ 20.206.080  RIDGELINE PRESERVATION.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of creating ridgeline
preservation standards within the Hillside Residential zone is to ensure the
ridgelines that frame the city will be preserved to the greatest extent
possible.  Significant ridgeline standards shall be defined, described, and
established, along with a map delineating all significant ridgelines in the
city, to ensure that the most significant ridgelines will not be developed,
for the purpose of preserving the existing and future view that frames the
city.  A required three (3)-dimensional visual analysis shall be submitted
with the hillside development permit to ensure that the principles of
preserving significant ridgelines will be satisfied.







 



Figure 20.206.080.A



Hill forms and ridgelines create community identity.  Preserving ridgelines
provides a natural backdrop to the city’s developed areas and reinforces
the community’s connection to the hillsides and open space.



   B.    Significant ridgelines.



      1.   Significant ridgelines are those ridgelines characterized
by any combination of the criteria specified below.



         a.   The ridgelines that surround or visually dominate
the surrounding valley landscape either through their size in relation to the
hillside or mountain terrain of which they are a part.



         b.   Their visual dominance as characterized by a
silhouetting appearance against the sky.



         c.   A significant natural backdrop feature or
separation of communities.



         d.   Visual dominance due to proximity and view from
existing development or major corridors.



         e.   As an area of significant ecological, historical,
or cultural importance, such as those which connect park or trail systems.



      2.   The official Significant Ridgeline Map, contained as an
exhibit herein and maintained on file as part of the city Geographic
Information Systems database, identifies crests of significant ridgelines in
the city for the purpose of this chapter and specifically, this section. 
The precise delineation of a ridgeline shall be determined at the time a
development application is received based on official Significant Ridgeline
Map and the criteria in subparagraph B.1. above.



   C.   Ridgeline preservation.



      1.   No grading or improvements shall occur within one hundred
(100) feet of a designated and delineated significant ridgeline area, as
measured horizontally on a topographic map prior to any grading or
improvements.  A significant ridgeline area is determined by the Significant
Ridgelines Map on file at the Development Services Department except as
approved by a hillside development permit as in compliance with §
20.206.020.  No portion of any structure shall be closer to a designated and
delineated significant ridgeline area, as measured fifty (50) feet vertically
from a cross section of the area.



      2.   No engineered slopes, housing construction, streets,
utilities, excavation, or other permanent human-made features shall be
permitted within any significant ridgeline area, as the same is determined by
the Significant Ridgelines Map on file at the Development Services
Department.  Exceptions may be granted as part of the hillside development
permit process if findings are made that encroachment into a significant
ridgeline area will be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this
chapter and the specific criteria set forth herein and that conditions of
approval applied via the hillside development permit will implement the
provisions of this chapter.



      3.   Exceptions from the standards set forth in §
20.206.080.C.1 and 2 above may be granted if findings are made that:



         a.   Alternative projects of substantially similar
density, as determined under § 20.206.060.C, on a subject property are found
to be more environmentally harmful as compared to development on the
ridgeline. This consideration may only be achieved through the approval of a
development agreement or specific plan (as provided for in state law); or



         b.   Imposing ridgeline preservation standards could
preclude a reasonable economic return on the development of the subject
property, and the proposed development incorporates measures such as landform
grading, berming and landscaping to reduce the visual impact of any
structure, wall or fence constructed within the ridgeline area from lower
elevation development and any structure, wall or fence constructed within the
ridgeline area would not be visible from any roadway categorized on the Brea
General Plan Master Plan of Arterial Highways and, the project complies with
all other criteria of the Hillside Residential (HR) zoning standards,
including exceptions provided for in the zoning standards.







 



Figure 20.206.080.C



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-15-07)



§ 20.206.090  OPEN SPACE.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of establishing open space
requirements and standards for the Hillside Residential zone is to ensure
that open space is an integral part of subdivision design; to preserve
prominent landforms, rock outcroppings, hydrologic features, and sensitive
and unique habitat as permanent open space features to help frame a
community’s identity; to provide areas where residents can enjoy active and
passive recreation; to integrate landscaped medians, parkways, and slopes
into a development project; and to ensure that parks, recreation centers,
trails, and greenbelts are located next to natural open space to maximize the
amount of contiguous areas of open space within a community and create space
transition zones between residential development and open space.







 



Figure 20.206.090.A



Open space shall be an integral component of subdivision design, with
developed open space areas transitioning seamlessly to natural open space.



   B.   Types of open space.  Open space in the Hillside Residential
zoning district shall consist of two (2) general types of open space:



      1.   Natural open space, which shall be defined as undeveloped
areas retained in their naturally occurring condition with regard to
landform, vegetation, and hydrologic features, and which may contain dirt
trails for limited public access and enjoyment; and



      2.   Improved open space, which shall be defined as any area
not occupied by structures that has been improved with landscaping,
recreation amenities (i.e., golf courses, private lakes), and similar
features that provide opportunities for active and passive recreation, and
that provide landscape improvements that enhance the overall appearance and
character of a development.



   C.   Use of natural open space.  Undeveloped open space shall be
left in its natural state.  Permitted uses include trails and the necessary
improvements to establish trails and any associated viewing areas.



   D.   Use of improved open space.



      1.   Improved open space shall be provided for attached
residential development as set forth in § 20.206.180.H. and as otherwise
required for this chapter, and shall be used to meet general landscaping,
common open space, slope treatment, and parkway landscaping requirements.



      2.   Improved open space may be reserved for private use and
maintained by a homeowners association, secured with documents reserving the
land as open space in perpetuity.



   E.   Use in perpetuity of natural open space.  Any lands dedicated
for natural open space purposes shall contain covenants and recordable deed
restrictions burdening the subject property, in a form and content approved
by the City Attorney, ensuring that:



      1.   The natural open space area will not be subdivided in the
future;



      2.   The use of the natural open space will continue in
perpetuity for the purpose specified;



      3.   Appropriate provisions will be made for the maintenance
of the natural open space that clearly define future maintenance
responsibilities; and



      4.   Natural open space shall not be turned into a commercial
enterprise admitting the general public at a fee, unless otherwise authorized
by policy or law.



   F.   Natural open space ownership.



      1.   The fee title owner or easement holder of an interest in
the land that is dedicated for natural open space purposes shall be selected
by the property owner, developer, or subdivider, subject to the approval by
the Director of Development Services. The ownership may vest in, but not be
limited to, the following:



         a.   The city, subject to acceptance by the City Council
of a recordable interest.



         b.   Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to
their acceptance.



         c.   Quasi-public and nonprofit organizations, subject
to their acceptance.



         d.   Homeowner associations or other similar
organizations.



      2.   The city may, in its reasonable discretion, require that
the applicant establish a mechanism to fund the long-term maintenance of such
natural open space, which may include a cash deposit, an assessment district,
trust, or other appropriate funding mechanism.



   G.   Maintenance. The person or entity identified as having the
right of ownership or control over the natural open space shall be
responsible for its continuing upkeep and proper maintenance as set forth in
Chapter 15.216, unless the city authorizes alternate maintenance strategies.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.100  GRADING.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of establishing these grading
standards for the Hillside Residential zone is to minimize the visual impact
of development, provide for sufficient landscape opportunities, integrate
manufactured slopes with natural slopes, and limit grading impacts on
sensitive natural areas.



   B.   General grading requirements.



      1.   Landform grading techniques such as varying slope height,
rounding tops and toes of slopes, and incorporating variable gradients shall
be used to ensure that manufactured slopes mimic natural hill forms. Landform
grading shall be used for all post-disturbance conditions unless determined
by the Director of Development Services and the City Engineer that landform
grading is not feasible due to soil conditions, encroachment into sensitive
biological resource areas, protection of watersheds or watercourses, or other
similar considerations. Findings as part of the hillside development permit
record as to why landform grading is not feasible.







 



Figure 20.206.100.B



Applying the landform grading techniques illustrated above create the
appearance of natural hills.



      2.   Super slopes, as defined by this chapter, shall be used
in areas of high on-site and off-site project visibility, as determined by
the viewshed analysis required for the hillside development permit described
in § 20.206.050, to allow for visual breaks between terraced rows of housing
units and to provide areas where landscaping can be used to soften the
appearance of hillside development.  Super slopes shall integrate
manufactured slopes with natural slopes to give the appearance of a
continuous natural landform.



      3.   Re-created ridgelines shall be used to mask the view of
dwelling units on a hillside from off-site locations, to preserve the
appearance of a natural undeveloped hillside, and to preserve the appearance
of open space.



      4.   Berming shall be used to screen utilitarian features such
as, but not limited to, water tanks and detention basins.



      5.   All slopes which are visible from any public right-of-way
shall be landform graded.



      6.   No grading shall take place on any slope that exceeds
thirty percent (30%) over an area encompassing one (1) acre or more and has
any minimum horizontal dimension of fifty (50) feet.  The following slopes
shall be exempt from this standard:



         a.   Existing manufactured slopes.



         b.   City-approved soils remediation projects.



         c.   Slope requiring grading for safety purposes as
designated by the Director of Development Services.



         d.   Implementation of General Plan or master-planned
circulation routes.



         e.   e.   Grading for emergency access, including
where main road access also serves as emergency access.







 



Figure 20.206.100.8.6



No grading shall take place on any slope that exceeds thirty percent (30%)
over an area encompassing one (1) acre or more and has any minimum horizontal
dimension of fifty (50) feet.



         f.   Grading in connection with a development project
that proceeds by way of a development agreement or specific plan (as provided
under state law) where imposing the grading prohibition could preclude a
reasonable economic return on the development of the subject property,
provided that the proposal complies with all other criteria of the Hillside
Residential (HR) zoning standards including exceptions provided for in the
zoning standards and is consistent with the city's Hillside Residential goals
and policies as outlined in the Brea General Plan, including exceptions
provided for in the General Plan policies.



      7.   No excavation or other earth disturbance shall be
permitted on any hillside area prior to the issuance of a grading permit,
with the exception of drill holes and exploratory trenches for the collection
of geologic and soil data.  Such trenches shall be properly backfilled and
erosion treatment shall be provided where such slopes exceed twenty percent
(20%).



      8.   Graded or cut embankment adjacent to a publicly
maintained right-of-way shall not exceed a slope ratio greater than two (2)
feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical.



   C.   Prohibited grading practices.



      1.   The cutting of significant ridgelines is prohibited,
except as set forth in the exceptions listed in §§ 20.206.080.C. or
20.206.100.B.6.



      2.   Graded slopes that are characterized by linear (in plan),
planar slope surfaces with unvarying gradients and angular slope
intersections are prohibited.



   D.   Super slope requirements.  The use of super slopes shall be
required for the conditions set forth in §  20.206.100.B.2.  The following
standards shall be applied in the design of super slopes.



      1.   On any property for which a hillside development permit
application has been submitted whereby the vertical distance between the
lowermost elevation on the property and the uppermost elevation is sixty (60)
feet or greater, at least forty (40) feet of vertical height shall be
achieved for terraced manufactured slopes.



      2.   Such manufactured slopes shall be at most ten (10) feet
shorter or at least ten (10) feet taller in height than the height of the
structure built on the toe of the manufactured slope (see Figure
20.206.100.D.2.).







 



Figure 20.206.100.D.2



To avoid the appearance of stair-step development, top of slopes shall not be
within ten (10) feet above or below a structure’s roofline.



      3.   Manufactured slopes shall complement the adjacent natural
slopes in terms of hill form and slope height.



   E.   Berming.



      1.   Berming shall be used to screen hillside development from
distant views, as determined by the viewshed analysis required by the
hillside development permit described in § 20.206.050.



      2.   Any berm three (3) feet or greater in vertical height
shall be landform graded no steeper than three (3) to one (1).



      3.   All berms shall have varying slope gradients and rounded
tops with a horizontal dimension half the vertical height of the berm.



      4.   Berms shall be applied to screen utilitarian features
such as water tanks in a hillside project.



      5.   Landscaping materials used on berms shall conform to the
landscaping guidelines for the Hillside Residential zone set forth in the
city’s Landscaping Guidelines Manual.







 



Figure 20.206.100.F



Berms help screen hillside development and utilitarian features.  From
certain vantage points, the berm will completely hide development and other
structures, providing a view of natural slope face.



   F.   Slopes between residential pads.  Where there is at least a
two (2)-foot elevation difference between residential flat pads, slopes shall
be contour graded no steeper than two (2) to one (1).







 



Figure 20.206.100.F



Hillside development shall not be allowed in steep hillsides that exceed
thirty percent (30%) slope grade and are at least one (1) acre in area.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-15-07)



§ 20.206.110  EDGES.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose and intent of establishing
standards for edges in the Hillside Residential zone is to ensure that proper
landscape setbacks are provided to separate residential uses from
non-residential uses and to allow for transitions between natural open space
and development. Landscape setbacks along roads create aesthetic and spatial
benefits, allowing for thematic landscape screening between public and
private spaces in a community.  In areas where a project backs against
natural open space, proper landscape setbacks in combination with fuel
modification zones is essential for providing proper transitions between open
space and residential development.



   B.   Road systems along project edges.  Road systems shall be
placed along project edges to the greatest extent practicable to maximize the
use of aesthetic landscape buffers surrounding a development and to buffer
residential neighborhoods from vehicular traffic.  Project edges along
roadway systems shall consist of varied slope and landscape treatments to
provide visual interest.







 



Figure 20.206.110.B



Road systems placed along project edges create a buffer between the project
and adjacent land uses.  This strategy, as illustrated above, can also
provide a way to take advantage of panoramic views.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.120  RETAINING WALLS.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose and intent of establishing
standards for retaining walls in the Hillside Residential zone is to ensure
that the application of retaining walls is aesthetically pleasing, limited in
quantity throughout a development, and not used to artificially create
additional building area.



   B. Prohibited retaining walls.



      1.   Use of utilitarian retaining wall designs such as crib
walls and geogrids shall be prohibited.



      2.   No retaining walls shall be permitted between residential
lots as a means of creating additional useable pad area.



   C.   Use of Loffelstein and similar living walls. The use of
Loffelstein walls, and other similar living wall systems, that allow for
landscaping opportunities with planting pockets and stepped designs is
acceptable.  Such walls shall be subject to the following development
standards.



      1.   The minimum height shall be no less than fifteen (15)
feet, with a maximum height of thirty (30) feet.



      2.   Such walls shall utilize a curvilinear slope pattern to
mimic the appearance of natural hillside terrain.



      3.   Such walls shall be planted with landscape material
suitable for the climate, wall exposure relative to the sun, and taking into
consideration the landscape aesthetic effect to be achieved by the overall
development.  The color palette and materials selected for the retaining
wall shall blend in with adjacent hillsides and landscape plant palette.







 



Figure 20.206.120.C.1



Loffelstein walls and similar living wall systems retain large amounts of
earth while providing planting pockets for landscaping.  Once landscaping
matures, the wall will be masked and have a softer appearance than a
hardscape wall surface.



   D.   Contour construction and wall materials. Retaining walls shall
follow the natural contours of the slope, and all materials used to construct
retaining walls shall consist of native stone, poured-in-place concrete,
precast concrete block, and shall be of a color and texture that mimic the
color and texture of surrounding native plant materials.



   E. Required planting areas.  Slopes requiring retaining at a height
greater than three (3) feet shall be terraced for planting areas.  Such
planting areas shall have a minimum width of six (6) feet.  No more than two
(2) terraces of retaining walls shall be permitted on one (1) manufactured
slope.







 



Figure 20.206.120.E and 20.206.120.G



   F.   Irrigation systems required.  All planting areas for retaining
walls shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system.  Such
irrigation system shall be approved and inspected prior to the construction
of any wall.



   G.   Height standards.



      1.   Retaining walls shall be constructed at varying heights
throughout a development.



      2.   The cumulative height of any retaining wall, other than a
Loffelstein wall or similar living wall, built to retain a cut slope or fill
slope shall not exceed six  (6) feet in height.  Cumulative height shall
mean the combined height of any wall or series of walls required to retain a
single slope.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.130  WATER QUALITY AND STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of establishing water quality
and storm runoff control standards is to ensure that developments within the
Hillside Residential zone develop proper drainage and stormwater management
systems that are functional, aesthetically pleasing, integrated into the
overall project development as a functional landscape feature, facilitate
recharge of groundwater, and conform to state and federal law regarding
pollution and water quality.  Toward these ends, the use of bioswales and
landscaped water quality basins represent the preferred approach to runoff
and stormwater quality control, recognizing that such features add aesthetic
character, have the appearance of naturally occurring drainage channels, and
when located at project entries, serve as a functional element that allows
for stormwater management.







 



Figure 20.206.130.A



Bioswales and similar natural landscaped runoff control facilities shall be
used to enhance appearance and allow for groundwater recharge.



   B.   General.  Site and subdivision features required and designed
to control and retain stormwater and other runoff pursuant to the
requirements of city and county ordinances and the Regional Water Quality
Control Board shall be fully integrated into the design of the subdivision. 
Such features shall be designed and located to account for natural drainage
patterns, integration of open space into overall subdivision design, location
of trails and other mobility corridors, and placement of subdivision entry
statements or other aesthetic features.



   C.   Materials and color. Water retention and detention features
shall consist of natural earth and plant materials consistent with the plant
palette for the Hillside Residential zone set forth in the appendix to this
chapter.  Concrete or similar hardscape materials shall not be permitted
unless determined by the City Engineer to be the only feasible method of
containing runoff.  Wherever concrete or similar structures are necessary,
per drainage and stormwater control plans approved by the City Engineer, such
structures shall use integral color concrete to blend with surrounding color
palette that blend with the natural environment.



   D.   Detention basins.



      1.   A detention basin area with gentle slopes and lined with
turf may be used as an entry feature.  Detention basins shall not be
eligible for open space, park credit, or any fee credit.



      2.   The maximum slope of a detention basin side slope shall
be three (3) to one (1).



   E.   Bioswales.



      1.   Bioswales shall be used to collect surface runoff before
it crosses pavement areas and to reduce ponding and damage to walkways. 
Bioswales shall be graded to direct water away from paved areas into
detention basins.







 



Figure 20.206.130.E



Bioswales planted with native rocks and vegetation shall be used to the
maximum extent to serve as a hillside community’s drainage system.



      2.   Bioswales shall consist of primarily herbaceous plants
whose stems and leaves retard water flow and help settle pollutants, and
which, with the aid of the roots, decompose into the soil.







 



Figure 20.206.130.D



Detention basins can be landscaped with natural materials, presenting an
infrastructure element that has a pleasant and natural appearance.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.140  STREET REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN.



   A.   Purpose and intent.



      1.   The purpose of establishing street design requirements is
to ensure that the circulation system is a beneficial element in the hillside
development setting and maintains, to the greatest extent possible, the
natural characteristics of a hillside environment.  Through these
requirements, the city recognizes that the placement and alignment of the
road system must be designed to exemplify the features present in the
neighborhood and enhance the visual character of the hillside community, and
that the alignment of collector and arterial roads along project edges
separates the neighborhoods and residents from the effects of a highly used
road, resulting in a more pleasant living environment, and allows
opportunities for landscaping and panoramic views.



      2.   Further, with these requirements, the city recognizes
that requiring parkways along every street allows opportunities for
landscaping that helps maintain a more natural hillside environment,
separates pedestrians from vehicular traffic, and softens a project’s
visual impact as viewed from off site.



   B.   Minimum number of access points.  New hillside development
projects shall have a minimum of two (2) points of vehicular access, one (1)
of which may be established for emergency access only, as determined by the
Fire Chief or designee through the hillside development permit review process.



   C.   Street design standards.  All streets shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the following standards.



      1.   Street sections shall be designed in accordance with
street standards and specifications adopted by the city and as revised from
time to time. In addition to such adopted standards, the following street
standards shall apply to development in the Hillside Residential zone.



         a.   The maximum length of any cul-de-sac street shall
be six hundred (600) feet.



         b.   All streets shall contain two (2) clear twelve
(12)-foot travel lanes.



      2.   Split-level streets.  Where split level streets are
used, the following standards shall apply.



         a.   The use of split level roads is permitted to reduce
the amount and visual effect of grading (Figure 20.206.140.C.2).



         b.   The ground slope between the two (2) traffic ways
shall be of a ratio not less than two (2) to one (1).







 



Figure 20.206.140.C.2



Use of split level roadways is permitted and encouraged where such design can
be used to facilitate landform grading.  This type of road can also maximize
the view opportunities afforded by the hillside setting.



      3.   Street grades shall not exceed the following except as
may be modified by the Planning Commission in compliance with § 19.92.040. 
The maximum length of street runs at the maximum specified grade shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Fire Chief and City Engineer, or
their respective designees.



         a.   Primary arterials shall be no steeper than eight
percent (8%).



         b.   Secondary arterials shall be no steeper than ten
percent (10%).



         c.   Local streets shall be no steeper than ten percent
(10%).



         d.   Loaded local streets shall not be steeper than
eight percent (8%).



         e.   Intersections shall be at six percent (6%) grade or
less.



   D.   Private streets.  Private streets shall not be permitted.



   E.   Landscaped parkways required.



      1.   All public streets shall include a landscaped parkway
between the edge of street paving and adjacent property lines.  Such
parkways shall be of a width required by the city’s street design manual
and shall include a sidewalk or other pedestrian way or trail as set forth in
the street design manual or as otherwise may be required by the City Engineer
and/or Director of Development Services through the hillside development
permit review process.



      2.   Such required parkways shall be landscaped as set forth
in § 20.206.160, including specifically §  20.206.160.E.



      3.   Such landscaped parkways shall be continuously maintained
by a homeowners association, through a landscaping assessment district, or
via a similar legal mechanism, as approved through the applicable hillside
development permit.  The city shall have the authority to require bonding or
other similar surety to ensure that such landscaped parkways are fully
established and maintained prior to the establishment of a homeowners
association, landscaping assessment district, or similar legal mechanism.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.150  ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of establishing architectural
design standards in the Hillside Residential zone is to ensure quality
development that blends with the hillside environment, and to create
neighborhoods that display a cohesive and harmonious form and complementary
architectural styles.  To achieve hillside compatible development, the city
recognizes the importance of having architectural design that incorporates
rooflines and other building elements which reflect the naturally occurring
ridgeline silhouettes and topographical variation.



   B.   Conformance with project design manual. The applicant shall
demonstrate how the architectural criteria of this section are met in the
design guideline manual required by § 20.206.050.



   C.   Architectural themes.



      1.   For subdivisions consisting of production-style
development, whereby dwelling units are constructed by a single developer
utilizing a limited number of floor plans and building architectural styles,
the architectural styles throughout the development shall be thematically
consistent with one another.  Varying floor plans, colors, materials, and
building forms shall be utilized such that within a single development
project, a minimum of nine (9) different elevations are available.  However,
where attached units are provided, a more unified architectural scheme is
permitted.



      2.   For custom lot developments consisting of a subdivision
of more than one (1) lot, the requirement for a design guideline manual, as
set forth in § 20.206.050, shall apply.



      3.   For a development consisting of one (1) custom home on an
existing lot, such homes shall comply with the requirements of § 20.206.190.



   D.   Required treatments.



      1.   Architectural treatments on all exterior walls of any
building shall be designed to avoid a monotonous or continuous facade of the
exterior wall. Under no circumstance shall the front and rear facade of any
building be in one (1) continuous vertical or horizontal plane. 
Architectural features and details shall be located on all exterior walls of
the building, including the rear and sides of the building.  Buildings shall
utilize wall articulation (i.e., insets, pop-outs, etc.) and roof orientation
as a means to prevent massing.



      2.   The apparent size of exterior wall surfaces visible from
off the site shall be minimized through the use of single-story elements,
building face set backs, overhangs, landscaping, and/or other means of
horizontal and vertical articulation to create changing shadow lines and to
break up massive forms.







 



Figure 20.206.150.D



Building facades shall be articulated and create visual interest.



   E.   Finish materials/color.  Building materials and colors shall
be compatible with the natural setting. Exterior colors shall be limited to
earth tones found in nearby natural vegetation and/or soil, or come from
natural sources (e.g., rock, stone, wood), or resemble a natural appearance.



   F.   Support structures.



      1.   Support structures (for example, columns, pilings, etc.)
below the lowest floor on the downhill side of a house, if and where
permitted as part of the hillside development permit review process, shall be
enclosed unless visible structural members are an integral feature of the
architectural design.



      2.   A support structure wall surface shall not exceed six (6)
feet in height.







 



Figure 20.206.150.F



Support structures of minimal height can help ensure that structures closely
follow the hillside terrain and therefore reduce its visual impact. 
Hillside adaptive structures can be designed and constructed to look like
they are nestled into the hillside.



   G.   Fencing and privacy walls.



      1.   All fences and privacy walls adjacent to or visible from
public roads or major public spaces shall be of decorative masonry or other
approved materials which have a natural appearance (e.g. masonry walls,
pre-fabricated modular concrete) and shall be a color that blends with the
surrounding environment and complements the landscaping.  The use of
indigenous rock and colors or materials shall be preferred.  The applicant
shall present illustrations and descriptions of fencing and wall materials in
the design guideline manual required by § 20.206.050.



      2.   Any fence or privacy wall adjacent to a public road or
major public space shall be placed at the top of a slope.



      3.   All fences and privacy walls, whether or not visible from
a public road or major public open space, shall be limited in height to seven
(7) feet, as measured from the grade on which the bottom of the fence or wall
is placed to the uppermost extent of such fence or wall.



      4.   Solid fences and walls in a required front yard area
shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches.



      5.   Open work fences, whereby the fence is ninety percent
(90%) open or more, shall not exceed a height of fifty-four (54) inches.



      6.   The provisions of § 20.08.060 regarding corner cut-off
areas shall apply.



      7.   A minimum setback distance of twenty (20) feet shall be
provided between any fence or privacy wall adjacent to a public right-of-way,
with the distance measured from the fence or privacy wall to the face of curb.







 



Figure 20.206.150.G.7



A minimum twenty (20) feet setback ensures room for landscaping while being a
buffer between street traffic and private yards.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.160  LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of creating landscape design
standards for development within the Hillside Residential zone is to minimize
resource consumption through the use of a drought-tolerant native plant
palette, to establish landscape setbacks along roads and natural open space,
taking advantage of the topography and vegetation as a means of enhancing the
overall aesthetics of a development project, and to provide transitions
between developed areas and surrounding open space.







 



Figure 20.206.160.A



Landscaping shall be used for aesthetic enhancement, erosion control and
transition to natural open space areas.



   B.   Landscape and irrigation plan.



      1.   All proposed new development shall require approval of a
landscape and irrigation plan. Complete plans shall be submitted as part of
the application process set forth in § 20.206.050.  Such plans shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Director of Development Services
and the Fire Chief or designee.



      2.   All landscape and irrigation plans shall include all
information required by the Development Services Department and shall be
designed to ensure slope stability, fire safety, and design quality, as well
as a tree removal and retention plan with the following information.



         a.   Identification of the extent of vegetation removal
required for site preparation and development; and



         b.   The location and species of individual trees of
four (4)-inch caliper or more. Maximum effort should be exercised to retain
existing trees in place.



      3.   The Director of Development Services may waive the
landscape and irrigation plan requirement for additions and remodeling where
no or only minor alterations to the existing landscape or topography are
proposed.



      4.   All landscaping shall be planted and maintained in
compliance with approved plans.



      5.   The developer shall be responsible for ensuring that all
landscaping installed consistent with approved landscaping and irrigation
plans is properly and effectively established one (1) year from the date of
city sign-off on said installation.  The developer shall be responsible for
taking corrective measures directed by the city to ensure same.  The city
shall be authorized to require bonding or other surety to achieve this
requirement.



   C.   General landscaping standards.



      1.   All portions of a site where existing vegetative cover is
damaged or removed, or consists primarily of weeds (typically unwanted plants
that grow aggressively and are damaging to native plants), and are not
otherwise covered with new improvements, must be successfully re-vegetated
with a substantial mix of native and/or drought tolerant grasses and ground
covers.  The density of the reestablished vegetation must be adequate to
prevent soil erosion and invasion of weeds after one (1) growing season. 
Refer to the plant palette in this chapter for a list of noxious weeds and
non-natives that are not allowed in the Brea Hillside Management Zone.



      2.   Utilitarian structures such as fuel tanks, water tanks or
towers, similar storage facilities shall be installed underground.  Those
not installed underground shall be painted with earth tones found in the
adjacent area or shall be entirely screened with appropriate landscaping that
blends with the surrounding natural environment.



      3.   Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped
together in hydrozones.  Refer to the plant palette in this chapter.



      4.   Prior to planting consideration of soil compaction shall
be used to determine planting pit depths and drainage.



      5.   The Director of Development Services shall have the
authority to require other improvements such as the removal of dead or
diseased trees and the thinning of trees or other vegetation to encourage
desirable growth.



   D.   Tree removal and replacement.



      1.   For each existing native tree or shrub removed or damaged
with a combined caliper equal to or greater than four (4) inches at four (4)
feet above finish grade, a twenty-four (24)-inch box minimum replacement tree
or shrub of the same genus and species shall be planted on the site.  For
trees equal to or in excess of an eight (8)-inch combined caliper, the
replacement tree shall be a forty-eight (48)-inch box or larger of the same
genus and species.  Should a tree of the same genus and species not be
available, the applicant shall submit reasonable proof of general
unavailability in the region, and a list of no less than five (5)
substitutes, one (1) of which shall be of the same genus, for approval by the
Director of Development Services.



      2.   The Director of Development Services may approve a
substitute or may require provisions, including but not limited to bonds or
similar security, to assure the installation and maintenance of the specific
genus desired.







 



Figure 20.206.160.D



In order to ensure that native vegetation, such as oak trees, survive the
construction phase of hillside development, any grading activities must be
appropriately setback from the vegetation.  Tree protection standards are
established to ensure that preserved trees survive the construction phase. 
The preservation of trees will benefit hillside communities by giving an
established appearance to the community.



   E.   Setbacks/slopes along roadway edges.



      1.   The following setbacks from the curb face, or line that
would be the location of the curb face, to the property line shall be
required from the following roadways:



         a.   Major arterial:  Eighty (80) feet.



         b.   Primary arterial:  Sixty (60) feet.



         c.   Modified secondary and secondary arterial:  Forty
(40) feet.



         d.   Collector roadway:  Thirty-five (35) feet.



         e.   Local roadway:  Twenty (20) feet.







 



Figure 20.206.160.E.1



      2.   Setbacks and slopes along edges between roadways and rear
property lines shall be fully landscaped with materials consistent with all
other common open space areas.  The landscape material shall transition in
height to provide low vegetation immediately adjacent to the right-of-way
edge to taller trees on the slope.







 



Figure 20.206.160.E.2



      3.   Any manufactured slope that is part of a private lot and
that abuts any public or private street or other right-of-way or open space
use intended for public use and/or enjoyment shall be fully landscaped in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall be maintained by a
homeowners association or other entity established as part of the tentative
map approval process for the maintenance of common open space.







 



Figure 20.206.160.E.3



Landscaping along right-of-way edges shall exhibit a transition in height up
or down the slope.



   F.   Drought-tolerant/native vegetation.



      1.   All landscape plans must use native and/or
drought-tolerant plant materials appropriate for their location and soil
type, as identified in standard agricultural suitability soils test. 
Preferred landscaping materials shall consist of native plants identified in
the city’s landscape design manual.



      2.   All native vegetation outside the impact area shall be
preserved and protected from damage during construction.  Oak trees shall
have a preservation zone of the dripline plus ten (10) feet surrounding the
tree.  Any project impact within this preservation zone shall be considered
as damaging to the tree.



   G.   Interface between natural open space areas and development.



      1.   The area between a structure and wildfire hazard areas,
as defined by the Fire Chief or designee, shall be planted and maintained as
consistent with the provisions of paragraph J.  The transition between
manufactured areas and natural areas shall be established beyond residential
structures so as to permit the development to meet applicable Fire Department
brush clearance requirements.



      2.   Climactically suitable shrubs and trees shall be used as
wind breaks as appropriate.



   H.   Landscaping as focal points.



      1.   Significant landscaping, such as signature trees (i.e.,
large or unique trees), hedges, and flowering plants shall be used to provide
focal points within a development.  A landscape area with minimum dimensions
shall be provided for said landscaping.  This area shall require the
following minimum dimension measured diagonally from face of curb, or the
line that would be the location of the curb face:



         a.   Major arterial:  One hundred (100) feet.



         b.   Primary arterial:  Eighty (80) feet.



         c.   Modified secondary and secondary arterial:  Fifty
(50) feet.



         d.   Collector roadway:  Fifty (50) feet.



      2.   A landscape area shall then be provided generally
matching the depictions within Figure 20.206.106.H.  Provisions for
maintenance of said landscape areas shall be an integral component of project
approval.







 



Figure 20.206.106.H



   I.   Slope maintenance and erosion control.



      1.   All cut and fill slopes shall be planted with native
and/or drought-tolerant vegetation and irrigated with an automatic irrigation
system to prevent erosion.



      2.   All cut or fill slopes exceeding five (5) feet in
vertical height shall be planted with adequate plant material to protect the
slope against erosion. Planting shall be in the ratio of at least one (1)
shrub per sixteen (16) square feet of natural slope area and one (1) tree per
four hundred (400) square feet of actual slope area, with ground cover to
completely cover the slope within twelve (12) months from planting.



      3.   All shrubs shall be a minimum one (1) gallon size.



      4.   All trees shall be minimum fifteen (15) gallon size.



      5.   Slopes less than five (5) feet in vertical height shall
be planted with ground cover anticipated to cover the slopes completely
within twelve (12) months after planting.



      6.   Landscape coverage and stabilization of graded slopes
shall be selected and designed to be compatible with surrounding natural
vegetation.  A city-approved irrigation system shall be utilized for plant
establishment.  A minimum three (3) feet flat area from top or toe of slope
of twenty (20) feet or greater shall be maintained to face of wall on common
area maintenance slopes.



      7.   Random patterns or uniform coverage that is contrary to
or reasonably detracts from the surrounding natural environment shall be
avoided.



      8.   Shrubs on manufactured slopes shall be heavily
concentrated along the drainage flow of swales.



      9.   Lawns and sod shall not be installed on slopes greater
than four (4) to one (1). Low- maintenance bunch grasses can be used on
slopes steeper than three (3) to one (1).



   J.   Irrigation.



      1.   Irrigation shall be designed to conserve water and to
protect existing native vegetation.



      2.   Drip irrigation or similar water-efficient systems shall
be required in appropriate areas to reduce overspray and runoff.



      3.   Irrigation needs shall be reduced by careful control of
drainage pattern on a slope and selection of appropriate plant material.



      4.   Technological irrigation equipment, such as humidity
sensors, that control irrigation settings and run times due to season weather
changes shall be used.



   K.   Fuel modification zones.



      1.   A permanent fuel modification area and fire prevention
plan shall be required, subject to the determination of the Fire Chief,
around development projects, or portions thereof, that are adjacent or
exposed to hazardous fire areas for the purpose of fire protection.  The
recommended width of the fuel modification area shall be based on applicable
building and fire codes and the recommendations of the Fire Chief, with
consideration given to:



         a.   The natural ungraded slope of the land within the
project and in the areas adjacent to the project.



         b.   Fuel loading.



         c.   Access to the project by fire suppression
equipment, and access directly to the fuel modified area, and egress out of
the project in case of evacuation.



         d.   The on-site availability of water that can be used
for firefighting purposes with regard to fire flows, water pressure, and
duration.



         e.   “Built-in” fire protection within structures.



      2.   Adequate provisions shall be made for the continual
maintenance of such areas, and the Fire Chief may require brush, vegetation,
or debris to be removed and cleared consistent with the provisions of Chapter
15.216.



   L.   Private yard hardscape limitations.



      1.   In the front yard area, the paving or other covering with
impervious surfaces shall be limited to thirty percent (30%) of said yard
area, exclusive of any paving required to provide direct vehicular access to
a garage.



      2.   No more than fifty percent (50%) of the rear yard area
shall be covered with impervious surfaces with the exception of swimming
pools and spas as measured eighteen (18) inches outside the water’s edge.



   M.   Screening.



      1.   Landscaping shall be designed to screen the view of
downslope building elevations.  The landscape plan for individual
residential dwellings shall specifically consider the downslope elevation and
demonstrate that portions of elevations below the bottommost floor are
screened from view.  Downslope elevations visible from any adjacent property
or public right-of-way shall be landscaped with a selection of shrubs and
trees that screen the downslope portion from view to the satisfaction of the
Director of Community Services.



      2.   Visual screening and privacy within side and rear yards
shall be provided.  Front yards and building entrances shall be designed to
remain mostly visible for security purposes.



   N.   On-lot tree program.



      1.   A minimum of two (2) trees shall be installed and
maintained in each rear yard.



      2.   One (1) additional tree shall be installed along the side
yard adjacent to the street on corner lots with uphill visibility from roads.



      3.   Tree sizes shall be a minimum of twenty (24)-inch box for
rear yards with fifteen (15) feet depths or less and thirty-six (36)-inch box
for rear yards that are greater than fifteen (15) feet deep.



      4.   Minimum distance between tree trunk and adjacent wall is
five (5) feet.



      5.   Soil compaction and drainage shall be considered when
determining planting pit depths.







 



Figure 20.206.160.N



On-lot tree programs are beneficial to homeowners and the community in
general by providing landscaping while preserving views.



§ 20.206.170  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; DETACHED DWELLINGS.



   A.   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of creating development
standards for detached dwelling units is to ensure the development of
communities that are appropriate to the hillside setting as well as
preserving the look of a natural hillside to the greatest extent possible. 
The various standards are designed to work together and result in a hillside
community design that allows for the appropriate amount of setback for
structure-to-structure conditions and building-to-street conditions.  In
addition to appropriate setback requirements, the standards will also ensure
that structures will be built so as not to offset the visual scale of the
hillsides.







 



Figure 20.206.170.A



Estate detached product with large front, side and rear yard setbacks, and
low building profiles.



   B.   Density.  Density limitations shall be determined as set forth
in § 20.206.060.



   C.   Minimum pad size.  The minimum area of a pad on a lot,
including the summation of multiple pad areas where split-level construction
is proposed, shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet.



   D.   Building setbacks.  Building setbacks shall be set forth in
Table 20.206.170.C.  All setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the pad.



 


TABLE 20.206.170.D




BUILDING SETBACKS — DETACHED DWELLINGS



 

Pad Size in Square Feet/ Required Setbacks





Setbacks
 

6,000 to 7,999

 

8,000 to 9,999

 

10,000 and greater



Front yard
 

20 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

40 ft.



Side yard
 

7.5 ft.

 

7.5 ft.

 

10 ft.



Rear yard
 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

30 ft.



Corner Setbacks


Face of curb to privacy wall
 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

25 ft.



Privacy wall to structure
 

10 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

15 ft.





 







 



   E.   Floor-area ratios.  Maximum allowable floor-area ratios shall
be as set forth in § 20.206.060.D.



   F.   Building height; primary structure.  Each proposed
single-family detached structure in the Hillside Residential zone shall
comply with the following height limits.



      1.   Height measurement.  The maximum allowable building
height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the existing or
planned grade of the pad at the point of the building foundation to the
mid-point of the roof.  For split-level construction, each building
component shall be measured from the site pad area on which that component is
located.







 



Figure 20.206.170.F



      2.   General height limit.  No structure shall exceed a
height of thirty-five (35) feet.



      3.   Height of lowest floor level.  The vertical distance
between the lowest point where the foundation meets grade and the lowest
floor line of the structure shall not exceed six (6) feet.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-15-07)



§ 20.206.180  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; ATTACHED DWELLINGS.



   A.   Purpose and intent. The purpose of creating development
standards for attached development dwellings is to ensure the development of
communities that are appropriate to the hillside setting as well as
preserving the look of a natural hillside to the greatest extent possible. 
The various standards are designed to work together and result in a hillside
community design that provides the ideal amount of private and common open
space.  In addition to ideal amounts of open space, the standards will also
ensure that structures will be built so as not to offset the visual scale and
natural appearance of the hillsides.



   B.   Density.  Density limitations shall be determined as set forth
in § 20.206.060.  Where attached housing is proposed, the overall permitted
density of a development site shall determine the maximum number of units
allowed, and all such attached units may be placed on a pad or pads
restricted to a limited area of the development site, with the density
calculation applicable to the site as a whole.  However, in compliance with
the provisions of § 20.206.090, any remaining natural open space shall be
deed restricted against further residential development and shall be
permanently maintained as required by the provisions of this chapter.



   C.   Building setbacks.  Buildings shall be set back from pad edges
as indicated in Table 20.206.180.C.



 


TABLE 20.206.180.C




BUILDING SETBACKS:
ATTACHED DWELLINGS




Measurement Line

 

Required Setback





Front yard
 

20 ft.



Side yard
 

15 ft.



Rear yard
 

20 ft



Face of curb to privacy wall
 

20 ft.



Privacy wall to structure
 

10 ft.





 



      1.   Building to building.  The minimum setback between
structures shall be no less than twenty (20) feet.



      2.   Building to street or parking area.  The minimum
building setback to street or parking area shall be no less than twenty (20)
feet, measured from face of curb.



      3.   Building to privacy wall or exclusive use area. The
minimum building setback to privacy wall or exclusive use area shall be no
less than twenty (20) feet.







 



Figure 20.206.180.C



   D.   Building height.  Each proposed attached dwelling unit
structure shall comply with the following height limits.



      1.   Height measurement.  The maximum allowable building
height shall be measured as in compliance of §  20.206.170.F.1.



      2.   General height limit.  No structure or group of
structures shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet.



      3.   Height of lowest floor level.  The vertical distance
between the lowest point where the foundation meets grade and the lowest
floor line of the structure shall not exceed six (6) feet.



   E.   Required common open space area.  Every attached development
project shall be required to provide common open space areas accessible to
all dwelling units within such development project and located on a pad. 
The required area shall be as set forth in Table 20.206.180.E.  Such common
open space area may consist of landscaped areas that can accommodate active
use, common recreation facilities such as a swimming pool or sports court, or
any combination of such improvements.  The minimum dimensions of such common
open space area shall be twenty (20) feet by twenty (20) feet.  Such common
open space shall be centrally located and easily accessible to all dwelling
units within the development.  Landscaped slopes and natural open space
areas shall not count toward the common open space requirement.



 

TABLE 20.206.180.E


REQUIRED COMMON OPEN SPACE FOR ATTACHED DWELLINGS


Numbers of Dwelling Units within Development
 
Required Open Space Area


0-20
 
100 sq. ft. per dwelling unit


21-40
 
125 sq. ft. per dwelling unit


40+
 
150 sq. ft. per dwelling unit



 



   F.   Private open space.  Private open space shall be provided as
required by § 20.220.040.



   G.   Location of garages. Garage structures for attached
developments are not required to be attached to the dwelling units they
serve.  Common garage structures may be developed, provided parking is
provided for each dwelling unit in compliance with the requirements of §
20.206.040.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-15-07)



§ 20.206.190  CUSTOM LOT DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   A.   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of establishing
specific standards for custom lots is to preserve the rural character of the
hillsides, minimize grading impacts, and ensure that new houses are visually
compatible with the surrounding area.  The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to one (1) detached single-family dwelling unit established on an
existing legal lot and to custom homes designed and constructed as part of a
comprehensive subdivision or other development project.



   B.   Application requirements.



      1.   As specified in § 20.206.024, an individual dwelling
unit on an existing legal lot shall be subject to an administrative hillside
development permit.



      2.   Proposed subdivisions of land planned for custom home
sites shall be subject to a hillside development permit.



   C.   Design standards; general.



      1.   Roadways, driveways, and individual building pads shall
be designed to conform to the natural hillside contours, blending into the
environment rather than forcing building sites and infrastructure upon the
land.  An emphasis shall be placed on limiting grading to individual flat
graded pad areas for residential building sites and any roads accessing the
residential building sites, ensuring a minimal cut and fill situation.



      2.   Any areas that require grading shall incorporate landform
grading techniques to further encourage the natural appearance of custom pads.



      3.   For any standard not specifically indicated in this
section as applying to custom lot development, the general standards
applicable to all development in the Hillside Residential zone shall apply.



   D.   Landscape standards.  Custom lot development shall implement
landscape standards that avoid harsh or abrupt transitions between open space
and development while providing a combination of landscape materials that
blend into the adjoining natural open space.  Landscape setbacks along roads
and along flat pads of custom lots shall be required to ensure that suitable
transitions from residential development to natural open space are
accomplished.



   E.   Architectural standards.



      1.   Individual houses on custom lots shall be visually
compatible with the surrounding area, with architecture that complements the
adjacent natural environment and any adjoining residential structures and/or
neighborhoods.



      2.   The following standards shall be required in the
construction of subterranean garages:



         a.   Access to a subterranean garage is only permitted
under one (1)-story portions of a building.



         b.   Access shall not be visible from the front or rear
yards.



         c.   Ramps shall not be located within the front yard.



         d.   Subterranean exterior walls shall not extend beyond
the perimeter of the exterior walls defining the first floor above.



         e.   Structural decks over driveways are not permitted.



      3.   Carports shall not be allowed.



      4.   Attached dwelling units shall not be permitted within a
custom home subdivision.



   F.   Grading standards.



      1.   Unless otherwise specified in this section, the landform
grading practices set forth in § 20.206.100 shall apply.



      2.   Retaining walls shall not be visible from any public
rights-of-way.



   G.   Development standards.



      1.   The minimum pad size shall be no less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.



      2.   Maximum building height, as measured from finished grade
to top of building, shall be as follows:



         a.   Twenty (20) feet – Single-story portion of
structure.



         b.   Twenty-eight (28) feet – Two (2)-story portion of
structure.



         c.   Thirty-five (35) feet – Three (3)-story portion
of structure



      3.   Setbacks shall be provided as set forth in Table
20.206.170.C.



      4.   No fence or wall shall exceed a height of seven (7) feet,
and all fences and walls shall comply with the regulations set forth in §
20.206.150.G.



      5.   Walls and opaque fencing shall be permitted only on the
flat pad of a custom lot.



      6.   The minimum landscape setback of twenty (20) feet shall
be provided between developed pad and natural vegetation.



      7.   The maximum step in foundation wall shall be no higher
than ten (10) feet to account for homes built in a hillside setting.



      8.   Where no standard is specifically indicated in this
section, the development standards set forth in §  20.206.170 shall apply.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.200  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   A.   Accessory structures shall either be constructed as an integral
part of the main dwelling unit or be within the setbacks set forth in Tables
20.206.170.A and 20.206.180.D of this chapter.



   B.   The height of any accessory structure shall be limited to 12
feet.



   C.   Accessory structures shall not be permitted within any front
yard area.



   D.   Accessory structures shall maintain a minimum five (5)-foot
setback from rear and side pad edges. For pads on lots adjacent to a street,
a minimum twenty (20)-foot setback from any pad edge to the street shall be
maintained. A side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall maintain a
minimum twenty (20)-foot setback from pad edge.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.210  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   A.   Exterior lighting.  Exterior lighting shall be properly
shielded to avoid glare and the spill of light to surrounding areas. 
Low-level lighting and the use of multiple low profile fixtures is
encouraged, as opposed to the use of fewer, but taller fixtures. Emphasis for
exterior lighting shall be on safety and landscape lighting as opposed to
building lighting.  The applicant shall present descriptions of exterior
lighting in the design guideline manual required by § 20.206.050.



   B.   Decks.  Decks shall be integrated into the architecture of the
house and not appear as an add-on to the primary building mass.  All decks
shall be limited to the pad area(s) of a lot.  Decks over thirty (30) inches
in height shall maintain a minimum setback from pad edge of one-half (½) the
minimum setback for the applicable yard.  No decks within front yard setback
areas shall be allowed.  The applicant shall present illustrations and
descriptions of decks in the design guideline manual required by § 
20.206.050.



   C.   Utilities.  All newly installed utilities shall be placed
underground unless, in the determination of the authority responsible for
approving the hillside development permit, such requirement would result in
unsafe conditions. All existing electric power lines of capacity sixty-six
(66) kilovolts or less shall be relocated underground.



   D.   Gated communities prohibited. Gated communities shall be
prohibited.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



§ 20.206.220  PENALTY.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or
corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter or failing to comply with any of the
requirements thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both
fine and imprisonment.  Each and every person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such
person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this section.



   B.   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by
means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any
other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-2-04)



APPENDIX:  PLANT PALLETTE



 


Trees



Latin/Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Acacia baileyana
 
Bailey Acacia


Acacia decurrens
 
Green Wattle


Acacia longifolia
 
Sydney Golden Wattle


Acacia melanoxylon
 
Blackwood Acacia


Albizia julibrissin
 
Silk Tree


Arbutus unedo
 
Strawberry Tree


Brachychiton populneus
 
Kurrajong Bottle Tree


Cedrus atlantica & cvs
 
Atlas Cedar


Cedrus deodara & cvs
 
Deodar Cedar


Cercis canadensis & cvs
 
Eastern Redbud


Cercis occidentalis
 
Western Redbud


Cupressus sempervirens
 
Italian Cypress


Geijera parviflora
 
Australian Willow


Jacaranda mimosiflia
 
Jacaranda


Juglans californica
 
Southern California Black Walnut


Lagerstroemia indica & cvs
 
Crape Myrtle


Laurus nobilis
 
Sweet Bay


Leptospermum laevigatum
 
Australian Tea Tree


Lyonothamnus floribundus & var.
 
Catalina Ironwood


Metrosideros excelsus
 
New Zealand Christmas Tree


Olea europaea & cvs
 
Olive


Pinus coulteri
 
Coulter Pine


Pinus eldarica
 
Afghan Pine


Pinus halepensis
 
Aleppo Pine


Pinus pinea
 
Italian Stone Pine


Pinus torreyana
 
Torrey Pine


Platanus acerifolia
 
London Plane Tree


Platanus racemosa
 
Western Sycamore


Prunus caroliniana
 
Carolina Laurel Cherry


Prunus lyonii
 
Catalina Cherry


Punica granatum & cvs
 
Pomegranate


Quercus agrifolia
 
Coast Live Oak


Quercus engelmannii
 
Mesa Oak


Quercus ilex
 
Holly Oak


Quercus suber
 
Cork Oak


Rhus lancea
 
African Sumac


Robinia pseudoacacia
 
Black Locust


Sambucus mexicana
 
Blue Elderberry


Schinus molle
 
Pepper Tree


Schinus polygamus
 
Peruvian Pepper


Schinus terebinthifolius
 
Brazilian Pepper




 


Shrubs & Vines



Latin/Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Acacia longifolia
 
Sydney Golden Wattle


Aesculus californica
 
California Buckeye


Alyogyne huegelii
 
Blue Hibiscus


Arbutus unedo ‘Compacta’
 
Dwarf Strawberry Tree


Artemisia arborescens
 
Shrubby Wormwood


Artemisia californica & cvs
 
California Sagebrush


Artemisia ‘Powis Castle’
 
NCN


Azalea southern indica
 
Sun Azalea


Baccharis p. consanguinea
 
Chaparral Broom


Bergenia cordifolia
 
Heartleaf Bergenia


Bougainvillea spectabalis
 
Bougainvillea


Calliandra eriophylla
 
Fairy Duster


Calliandra haematocephala
 
Pink Powder Puff


Calliandra tweedii
 
Trinidad Flame


Ceanothus ‘Concha’
 
NCN


Ceanothus ‘Dark Star’
 
NCN


Ceanothus ‘Frosty Blue’
 
NCN


Ceanothus gloriosus & cvs
 
Point Reyes Ceanothus


Ceanothus griseus & cvs
 
Carmel Ceanothus


Ceanothus ‘Joyce Coulter’
 
NCN


Ceanothus ‘Julia Phelps’
 
NCN


Ceanothus maritimus & cvs
 
Maritime Ceanothus


Ceanothus ‘Ray Hartman’
 
NCN


Ceanothus rigidus & cvs
 
Monterey Ceanothus


Ceanothus thyrsiflorus & cvs
 
Blue Blossom Ceanothus


Ceanothus ‘Wheeler Canyon’
 
NCN


Cercis occidentalis
 
Western Redbud


Chamelaucium uncinatum
 
Geraldton Wax Flower


Cistus species & cvs
 
Rockrose


Comarostaphylis diversifolia
 
Summer Holly


Cotoneaster apiculatus
 
Cranberry Cotoneaster


Cotoneaster buxifolius
 
NCN


Cotoneaster congestus
 
NCN


Cotoneaster horizontalis
 
Rock Cotoneaster


Cotoneaster lacteus
 
Red Clusterberry


Cotoneaster salicifolius
 
Willowleaf Cotoneaster


Dendromecon species
 
Bush Poppy


Echium fastuosum
 
Pride of Madeira


Elaeagnus pungens
 
Silverberry


Encelia californica
 
California Encelia


Eriogonum fasciculatum
 
Common Buckwheat


Feijoa sellowiana
 
Pineapple Guava


Fremontodendron species & cvs
 
Flannel Bush


Gelsemion sempervirens
 
Carolina Jessamine


Grevillea species & cvs
 
Grevillea


Hakea suaveolens
 
Sweet-scented Hakea


Hardenbergia violacea
 
False Sarsaparilla


Hardenbergia violaceae
 
NCN


Heteromeles arbutifolia
 
Toyon


Heuchera sanguinea
 
Coral Bells


Jasminum polyanthum
 
Jasmine


Juniperus californica
 
California Juniper


Juniperus chinensis & cvs
 
NCN


Juniperus sabina & cvs
 
Savin Juniper


Juniperus scopulorum & cvs
 
Rocky Mountain Juniper


Lagerstroemia indica & cvs
 
Compact Crape Myrtle


Lantana camara
 
Yellow Sage


Lavandula species & cvs
 
Lavender


Leptospermum laevigatum
 
Australian Tea Tree


Leptospermum scoparium
 
New Zealand Tea Tree


Macfadyena unguis-cati
 
Cat’s Claw


Mahonia aquifolium
 
Oregon Grape


Mahonia ‘Golden Abundance’
 
NCN


Mahonia nevinii
 
Nevin Mahonia


Mahonia pinnata & cvs
 
California Grape


Malosma laurina
 
Laurel Sumac


Metrosideros excelsus
 
New Zealand Christmas Tree


Myrica californica
 
Pacific Wax Myrtle


Myrtus communis & cvs
 
True Myrtle


Limonium perezii
 
Statice


Oenothera berlanedieri
 
Mexican Evening Primrose


Pennisetum setaceum ‘Cupreum’
 
Red Fountain Grass


Prunus caroliniana cvs
 
Carolina Laurel Cherry


Prunus ilicifolia
 
Hollyleaf Cherry


Prunus lyonii
 
Catalina Cherry


Punica granatum & cvs
 
Pomegranate


Pyracantha species & cvs
 
Firethorn


Rhamnus alaternus
 
Italian Buckthorn


Rhamnus californica
 
California Coffeeberry


Rhamnus crocea & var.
 
Redberry


Rhus integrifolia
 
Lemonade Berry


Rhus ovata
 
Sugar Bush


Ribes aureum
 
Golden Currant


Ribes indecorum
 
White-flowered Currant


Ribes malevaceum
 
Chaparral Currant


Ribes speciosum
 
Fuchsia-flowering Gooseberry


Rosa banksiae
 
Lady Banks’ Rose


Rosa hybrids
 
Rose


Rosmarinus officinalis & cvs
 
Rosemary


Rumohra adiantiformis
 
Leatherleaf Fern


Salvia apiana
 
White Sage


Salvia greggii
 
Autumn Sage


Salvia leucantha
 
Mexican Bush Sage


Salvia leucophylla
 
Purple Sage


Salvia mellifera & cvs
 
Black Sage


Sambucus caerulea
 
Blue Elderberry


Santolina species
 
Lavender Cotton


Tecoma stans var. angustata
 
Hardy Yellow Trumpet Flower


Teucrium fruticans
 
Bush Germander


Vitex agnus-castus
 
Chaste Tree


Westringia species
 
NCN




 


Ground Covers



Latin/Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Acacia redolens & cvs
 
NCN


Ajuga reptans
 
Carpet Bugle


Arctostaphylos edmundsii & cvs
 
Little Sur Manzanita


Arctostaphylos ‘Emerald Carpet’
 
NCN


Arctostaphylos uva-ursi & cvs
 
Bearberry


Artemisia californica & cvs
 
Prostrate California Sagebrush


Baccharis ‘Centennial’
 
NCN


Baccharis pilularis & cvs
 
Prostrate Coyote Brush


Bougainvillea cultivars
 
Bougainvillea


Campanula poscharskyana
 
Serbian Bellflower


Ceanothus g. var. horizontalis
 
Carmel Pepper


Ceanothus g. var. h. ‘Yankee Point’
 
NCN


Ceanothus ‘Joyce Coulter’
 
NCN


Ceanothus maritimus & cvs
 
Maritime Ceanothus


Cistus salviifolius
 
Sageleaf Rockrose


Cotoneaster adpressus
 
Creeping Cotoneaster


Cotoneaster dammeri & cvs
 
NCN


Cotoneaster horizontalis
 
Rock Cotoneaster


Cotoneaster horizontalis perpusillus
 
Rock Spray Cotoneaster


Cotoneaster salicifolius ‘Repens’
 
NCN


Cynodon dactylon hybrids ‘Santa Ana’
 
Hybrid Bermuda Grass


Eriogonum fasciculatum & cvs
 
Common Buckwheat


Festuca ovina glauca
 
Blue Fescue


Frageria chiloenis & cvs
 
Strawberry


Gazania species & cvs
 
Gazania


Juniperus chinensis & cvs
 
NCN


Juniperus horizontalis & cvs
 
Creeping Juniper


Lantana montevidensis & cvs
 
Trailing Lantana


Lonicera japonica ‘Halliana’
 
Hall’s Japanese Honeysuckle


Mahonia aquifolium ‘Compacta’
 
Compact Oregon Grape


Mahonia repens
 
Creeping Mahonia


Pryracantha species & cvs
 
Firethorn


Ribes viburnifolium
 
Evergreen Currant


Rosmarinus officinalis & cvs
 
Prostrate Rosemary


Scaevola ‘Mauve Clusters’
 
NCN


Sedum species
 
Stonecrop


Senecio mandraliscae
 
NCN


Teucrium cossonii
 
NCN


Verbena species & cvs
 
Verbena




 


Perennials



Latin/Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Achillea species & cvs
 
Yarrow


Agapanthus africanus & cvs
 
Lily of the Nile


Anigozanthos species & cvs
 
Kangaroo Paw


Armeria maritima
 
Sea Pink


Brachycome multifida
 
Cut-leaf Daisy


Centaurea species
 
Dusty Miller


Centranthus ruber
 
Red Valerian


Cheiranthus ‘Bowles Mauve’
 
Shrubby Wallflower


Convolvulus cneorum
 
Bush Morning Glory


Convolvulus mauritanicus
 
Ground Morning Glory


Coreopsis species & cvs
 
Coreopsis


Dietes species & cvs
 
Fortnight Lily


Diplacus species & hybrids
 
Monkey Flower


Epilobium species & cvs
 
California Fuchsia


Eschscholzia californica
 
California Poppy


Helictotrichon sempervirens
 
Blue Oat Grass


Hemmercallis hybrids & cvs
 
Evergreen Day Lily


Heuchera species & cvs
 
Coral Bells


Iris douglasiana & cvs
 
Pacific Coast Iris


Limonium perezii
 
Sea Lavender


Muhlenbergia species
 
NCN


Oenothera species
 
Mexican Evening Primrose


Pennisetum setaceum & cvs
 
Fountain Grass


Penstemon species & cvs
 
Western Natives


Perovskia atriplicifolia
 
Russian Sage


Phormium tenax & cvs
 
New Zealand Flax


Romneya coulteri & cvs
 
Matilija Poppy


Salvia species & cvs
 
Sage


Senecio cineraria
 
Dusty Miller


Sisyrinchium bellum
 
Blue-eyed Grass


Stipa tenuissama
 
Mexican Feather Grass


Tagetes lemmonii
 
Mountain Marigold


Thymus species & cvs
 
Thyme


Tulbaghia violacea & cv
 
Society Garlic


Verbena species & cvs
 
Verbena


Zantedeschia aethiopica
 
Calla Lily




 


Agave, Cacti, Succulents, and Yucca



Latin/Botanical Name
 
Common Name


Agave americana
 
Century Plant


Dasylirion species
 
Desert Spoon


Echeveria species
 
Echeveria


Nolina species
 
Bear Grass


Opuntia species
 
Prickly Pear, Cholla



 



CHAPTER 20.208:  R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



Section



   20.208.010   Intent and purpose



   20.208.020   Uses permitted



   20.208.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.208.040   Property development standards



   20.208.050   Plan review



§ 20.208.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The R-1 Single Family Residential Zone is established to provide an
environment conducive to the development of single family homes with no mixed
or incompatible uses.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.208.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



      1.   Single family dwelling of a permanent character, placed
in a permanent location.



      2.   Accessory buildings and structures, including private
garages or carports.



      3.   Private non-commercial greenhouses, horticultural
collections, flower gardens, vegetable gardens, and fruit trees.



      4.   The following animals may be permitted:  three (3) dogs
or three (3) cats, or any combination thereof, not exceeding four (4) adults
four (4) months of age or more.  Other household pets which are neither farm
animals, exotic nor wild animals, such as domestic mice and rats, hamsters,
guinea pigs, turtles, tropical fish, canaries, birds of the psittacine
family, and other similar animals commonly sold in pet stores and kept as
household pets, may also be kept, so long as animals are not maintained for
commercial purposes, do not constitute a nuisance, are adequately provided
with food, care and sanitary facilities, and do not exceed a total of six (6)
animals (fish being exempt).  Their offspring shall not be counted until
four (4) months from birth.



      5.   Other animals permitted: animals not previously
classified.  Any animal not specifically classified within this section of
the code shall be classified by the Director of Development Services as
necessary, based upon a determination as to the probable negative impact of
the health, safety or general welfare upon the community.



      6.   Home occupations that comply with the criteria set forth
in Chapter 20.36..



      7.   Parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and
operated by a government agency, including businesses conducted within said
facilities subject to approval by the City Council.



      8.   The renting of not more than three (3) rooms or the
providing of board for not more than three (3) persons, the combination of
room and board not to exceed three (3) persons. 



      9.   Temporary tract sales offices and temporary parking
compounds for contractors' equipment.



      10.   Model homes (temporary real estate offices).  A
subdivider may construct six (6) or less model homes for the temporary
purpose of using the same as displays to aid the subdivider in effecting the
marketing of the property.  Any of said model homes also may be utilized on
a temporary basis as a real estate sales office.  The model home/real estate
office (hereinafter referred to as “model home”) temporary use shall be
subject to each of the following conditions:



         a.   A model home must be located on a lot established
and depicted on an approved tentative tract map encompassing the property in
question.



         b.   The model home must meet each and every development
standard set forth in this zoning code.



         c.   A building permit may be issued for a model home
prior to the recordation of a final tract map encompassing the property in
question provided that the model home and the location thereof complies with
all other applicable ordinances, regulations, resolutions, rules, and
standards in force in the city established by the city or by any other
governmental entity.



         d.   A certificate of occupancy for model home and/or
real estate sales office use shall not be issued prior to the recordation of
a final tract map encompassing the subject property.



         e.   If a final tract map encompassing the property upon
which a model home is situated is not recorded within the time allowed
pursuant to the California Subdivision Map Act and all city ordinances,
resolutions, rules, and regulations promulgated thereunder, the subdivider
shall forthwith upon the expiration of the time in which such final tract map
may be recorded, demolish any model home theretofore constructed and remove
any and all buildings and structures from the site thereof.  In that regard,
prior to the issuance of a building permit for any model home, the subdivider
shall provide security in the form of a surety or cash bond or in another
form satisfactory to the City Attorney and the Director of Development
Services guaranteeing the discharge of any obligation which the subdivider
incurs to demolish a model home and remove all structures and buildings from
the site thereof.



         f.   Subsequent to the recordation of a final tract map
encompassing the area of a model home, the parcel of a real property upon
which the model home is situated and the model home may be sold and occupied
as a residence provided that the same complies with all applicable
development standards contained in this title and further provided that the
same complies with all other applicable statutes, ordinances, resolutions,
rules, and regulations established by the city or by any other governmental
entity.



      11.   Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer
mentally or physically handicapped, disordered or dependent persons not
requiring acute medical care. 



      12.   A maximum of one (1) accessory dwelling unit per lot
provided that: 



         a.   The lot contains one (1) existing or proposed
primary dwelling unit.



         b.   The occupant of either the existing dwelling unit
or the accessory dwelling unit shall be the owner of both units.



         c.   The accessory dwelling unit shall meet all
development standards as set forth in § 20.208.040 of this chapter.



         d.   The accessory dwelling unit shall not be
constructed as to cause the existing dwelling to conflict with the minimum
standards applicable to the single family zone on which it is located,
including but not limited to, minimum dwelling area.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title:



      1.   Churches, parsonages, convents, and other buildings and
structures used in connection with a religious purpose.



      2.   Nursery schools.



      3.   Schools, public and private.



      4.   Keeping of household pets in excess of the specified
number:  household pets may be kept in excess of the number and distribution
hereby permitted upon the granting of a noncommercial kennel permit pursuant
to § 20.20.070 of this title.



      5.   Subject to all applicable ordinances, rules and
regulations, the following agricultural use on a site of a minimum of one
acre in size:



         a.   Growing of berry, bush, field, and  vine crops;
flower and vegetable farms; fruit and nut tree orchards.



         b.   Seasonal fruit and vegetable roadside stands when
located on the same site upon which said fruit and vegetables are grown.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 467, passed 7-13-70; Am. Ord. 594,
passed 6-29-76; Am. Ord. 760, passed 5-15-84; Am. Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92;
Am. Ord. 1025, passed 7-20-99, Am. Ord. 1046, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. 1203,
passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.208.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the R-1 Zone:



   A.   Parking or storage of commercial vehicles.



   B.   Mobile homes used as a residence, other than those located
within an authorized mobile home park.



   C.   Any party which requires, impliedly or expressly, any admission
charge to attend or participate.



   D.   Animals expressly prohibited:  Wild and exotic animals
including but not limited to tigers, wild cats, lions, raccoons, and such
other animals not typically sold in a pet store; bee keeping; noisy animals
including any animal that habitually disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or person, creating a nuisance by howling, barking, crying,
baying or making any other noise; keeping of roosters, peacocks, and geese;
and the keeping of equines, bovines, swine, and/or ovine in either private or
commercial stables.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 926,
passed 8-18-92; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 3-21-17)



§ 20.208.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the R-1 Zone:



   A.   Lot area.



      1.   Each lot shall have a minimum area of seven thousand two
hundred (7,200) square feet.



      2.   In Planned Unit and Cluster Development, the size of the
lots may vary, provided the overall density provisions of the zone are
maintained within the project and all other requirements of this title are
complied with.



   B.   Lot dimensions.



      1.   Width.  Each lot shall have a minimum width of sixty
(60) feet, except as follows:



         a.   Corner lots - seventy (70) feet.



         b.   Reversed corner lots - seventy-five (75) feet.



      2.   Depth.  Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one
hundred (100) feet.



      3.   In Planned Unit and Cluster Development the lot width and
depth may be modified to conform to the buildings and structures proposed,
provided said dimensions permit conformity with all other provisions of this
section.



   C.   Dwelling unit density.  Not more than one (1) dwelling unit
shall be permitted to be on any lot in the R-1 (Single Family Residential)
Zone except that an accessory dwelling unit may be permitted subject to the
provisions set forth herein.



   D.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the R-1 Zone shall
have a height no greater than thirty (30) feet.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire
or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, domestic radio and
television masts, or similar structures may be erected above the maximum
height permitted in each zone.  No structure shall be allowed for purposes
of providing additional floor space.



   E.   Yards.



      1.   Front yard.



         a.   A minimum twenty-five (25) foot front yard shall be
required.



         b.   Notwithstanding other provisions contained herein;
the entire front yard area, including the minimum required front yard, shall
be kept and maintained free and clear of all attached or detached accessory
structures, building and automotive materials, trash, debris, trash storage
receptacles, inoperable motor vehicles, camper shells not mounted on motor
vehicles, boats, or boats and trailers, including utility trailers.  Parking
and driveway areas within the entire front yard area shall not exceed
fifty-five percent (55%) of such yard area; for lots at the end of cul-de-sac
with a lot frontage of less than forty (40) feet, the parking and driveway
areas within the entire front yard may be paved up to a maximum of eighty
percent (80%), all subject to the Development Services Director's review and
approval.  The parking of operable motor vehicles shall be permitted only on
an all weather surface, subject to the review and approval of the Development
Services Director.



         c.   Recreational vehicle parking may occur as follows:



            (1)   Parking within a garage or three (3) sided
carport.



            (2)   Outdoor parking in the side or rear yards
beyond the required twenty-five (25) foot front setback, except in a street
side yard of a corner lot or reverse corner lot.



            (3)   Outdoor parking in a driveway or improved
pad, provided that:



               (a)   Parking of said vehicle within a
garage or three (3) sided carport is not possible.



               (b)   Space is not available in the side or
rear yards or no access exists to such yards.



               (c)   No part of said unit extends over
public sidewalks or rights-of-way.



               (d)   The vehicle or unit at no time creates
a sight obstruction that poses a safety hazard.



               (e)   Such vehicles shall be determined to
be in an operable condition.



               (f)   The vehicle is not used for dwelling
purposes; cooking is not permitted in the recreational vehicle at any time
and accordingly, butane and propane shall not be used.



               (g)   The vehicle is not permanently
connected to electricity, sewer lines or water lines.  The recreational
vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries
and cleaning purposes only.



               (h)   The vehicle shall not be used for
storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items considered
to be part of the unit or essential for its immediate use.



               (i)   The vehicle shall not block required
emergency access to the rear yard area.  A five (5) foot clear area shall be
maintained to provide such access.



         d.   Where the entire block frontage is designed and
developed as a neighborhood unit, the front yard setback may vary, providing
that an average building setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet is
maintained.  The minimum front yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.



         e.   Notwithstanding other requirements herein, all
garages with vehicle entrances facing a street shall set back not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from the property line.  A carport with a vehicle
entrance facing a street and not screened from public view from any point on
the public right-of-way line which abuts the property upon which said carport
is located shall be prohibited.



         f.   Front yards on the turn-around end of cul-de-sac
street may be reduced to not less than twenty (20) feet.



      2.   Side yards.



         a.   Lots shall have a side yard on each side of not
less than five (5) feet.  An additional two and one-half (2½) feet shall be
required for side yards adjacent to a main building twenty (20) feet or more
in height.



         b.   A side yard on the street side of a corner lot
shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.



         c.   Any storage of materials including but not limited
to, trash and trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, and debris, within side yards, shall
be substantially screened with a combination of open or solid fencing, and
landscaping, or enclosed within an openwork structure such as wood or metal
lattice, so as to substantially minimize views as seen from adjacent private
and public streets, and public right-of-way (excluding alleys).



         d.   All side yard setbacks shall be measured from the
property line to the building wall. 



      3.   Rear yards.



         a.   Each yard shall have a rear yard of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet except that the main building may project to within ten
(10) feet of the rear property line.  The combined coverage by the main
building and any accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the required rear yard area.



         b.   Any storage of materials including, but not limited
to, trash and trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, debris, inoperable motor vehicles,
camper shells not mounted on motor vehicles, or boats and trailers, within
rear yards, shall be substantially screened with a combination of open or
solid fencing, and landscaping, or enclosed within an openwork structure such
as wood or metal lattice, so as to substantially minimize views as seen from
adjacent private and public streets, and public right-of-way (excluding
alleys).  Stored materials shall not cover an area greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the total square footage of the rear yard.



      4.   Location of accessory buildings in required yards.



         a.   Detached accessory buildings may be located in the
required side or rear yard areas provided that said structure or structures
are not less than five (5) feet from any common property line to the eave
line and provided that all run-off water from the roof is disposed on the lot.



         b.   Where access to a garage or carport is provided
from any alley, the garage or carport shall be located not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from the opposite property line or five (5) feet from
the alley right-of-way line, whichever is more restrictive.  If the vehicle
entrance faces the alley, garage only shall be permitted and the vehicle
entrance door shall not project beyond the property line when open or being
opened.  A carport with a vehicle entrance facing an alley and not screened
from public view from any point on the public right-of-way which abuts the
property upon which the carport is located shall be prohibited.



      5.   Projections into required yards.  The provisions of §
20.08.020 of this title shall apply.



      6.   Garage and carport side street setback.  Notwithstanding
other requirements herein, a garage with a vehicle entrance facing a side
street shall set back not less than twenty-three (23) feet from the street
side property line.  A carport with a vehicle entrance facing a side street
and not screened from public view from any point on the public right-of-way
line which abuts the property upon which said carport is located shall be
prohibited.



      7.   Location of accessory dwelling units.



         a.   An accessory dwelling unit that is detached or
attached to the primary dwelling unit shall maintain an rear yard of not less
than ten (10) feet, unless otherwise permitted under subparagraph (b), (c),
and (d) below, and conform to the development standards set forth herein.



         b.   An accessory dwelling unit constructed within
existing square footage within the primary dwelling unit or within an
existing accessory building on the property may be permitted ministerially,
subject to the issuance of a building permit, if complying with building and
safety codes, has independent exterior access from the existing residence and
has sufficient side and rear setbacks for fire safety.



         c.   No additional building setback shall be required
for an existing garage or an existing accessory building that is converted to
an accessory dwelling unit. Pursuant to the standards set forth in 20.08.040,
the property is required to provide and maintain parking for the primary
residence.



         d.   A setback of no more than five (5) feet from the
side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that
is constructed above or attached to a garage that is existing or proposed
with the accessory dwelling unit.



   F.   Outdoor living space.



      1.   Each lot shall contain a usable area of not less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet for outdoor living.  The minimum dimension
shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet.  Where contiguous to a side or
rear yard, said yards may be included as part of the minimum.  Slopes with a
grade in excess of ten percent (10%) may not be included as satisfying this
requirement.



      2.   The provisions of § 20.08.030 of this title shall apply.



   G.   Walls, fences, and landscaping.



      1.   Fences and walls and solid hedges shall not exceed seven
(7) feet above the finished grade immediately abutting the fence with the
following exceptions:



         a.   Solid fences, walls and hedges in a required front
yard shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches.



         b.   Open work fences (not less than ninety percent
(90%) open) in a required front yard shall not exceed a height of four and
one-half (4½) feet.



         c.   Property owners are responsible for the continual
maintenance of all landscaped areas on-site, as well as contiguous planted
areas within the public right-of-way.  All landscaped areas shall be kept
free from weeds and debris, and maintained.



         d.   The provisions of § 20.08.060 of this title
pertaining to corner cut-off areas shall apply.



         e.   Fences and walls shall be located a minimum of six
(6) inches from any property line which is adjacent to a public right-of-way.



   H.   Distance between buildings.



      1.   The distance between external walls of detached buildings
shall not be less than ten (10) feet, if there are either doors or windows
facing on said space between walls.  Where no openings face said space, it
may be reduced to six (6) feet.



      2.   A detached accessory dwelling unit shall maintain a
minimum separation of not less than ten (10) feet (regardless of openings in
walls) from the external walls of the existing primary dwelling unit on the
same lot. No additional distance shall be required for an existing garage or
other accessory structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit.



   I.   Minimum dwelling area.



      1.   Each dwelling unit shall have a gross floor area of not
less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.



      2.   Accessory dwelling units shall have a minimum floor area
of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet.



   J.   Coverage by structures.  Not more than thirty-five (35%) of
the lot area shall be covered by buildings or structures.



   K.   Off-street parking.



      1.   There shall be not less than two (2) off-street parking
spaces within a garage for the primary dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling
unit shall provide one (1) additional off-street parking space in addition to
the required parking for the existing primary dwelling unit. This additional
parking space may be covered or uncovered and shall meet all parking space
location, dimension, and surfacing requirements for this title. The
additional parking space may be provided as tandem parking on an existing
driveway. If the existing two (2) garage spaces are converted to or displaced
for an accessory dwelling unit and one (1) additional parking space is
provided for the accessory dwelling unit, then the replacement parking spaces
for the primary residence may be covered, uncovered, tandem, or spaces
created by mechanical automobile parking lifts. Parking standards for an
accessory dwelling unit may be waived in any of the following instances:



         a.   The accessory dwelling unit is located within
one-half (1/2) mile of public transit, including transit stations and bus
stations. The one-half (1/2) mile distance shall be measured on actual
walking routes between the accessory dwelling unit and the public transit,
rather than a straight line between points.



         b.   The accessory dwelling unit is located within an
architecturally and historically significant district.



         c.   The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing
primary residence or an existing accessory structure.



         d.   When on-street parking permits are required but not
offered to the occupants of the accessory dwelling unit.



         e.   When there is a car share vehicle located within
one (1) block of the accessory dwelling unit.



      2.   Garages only shall be provided for off-street parking
spaces when located below living quarters.



      3.   Except as provided herein, the provisions of § 20.08.040
of this title shall apply.



   L.   Access.



      1.   All lots shall have vehicular access from a dedicated
street or alley.



      2.   Driveway access to garages or carports shall be of
permanent construction material, concrete or asphalt or other material
approved by the City Engineer.



   M.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



   N.   Lighting.  All lighting, interior and exterior, shall be
designed and located so as to confine all direct rays to the premises.



   O.   Accessory dwelling unit architecture.  Each accessory dwelling
unit shall be architecturally compatible with the existing dwelling unit.



   P.   Plan review. The provisions of § 20.408.050 of this title
shall apply to the development of an accessory dwelling unit.



   Q.   Accessory dwelling unit size.



      1.   The increase floor area of an accessory dwelling unit
shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the existing living area of the
primary residence, with a maximum total floor area of one thousand, two
hundred (1,200) square feet.



      2.   Accessory dwelling unit may exceed the total floor area
permitted ministerially with the approval of a certificate of compatibility
set forth in § 20.408.050.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 478, passed 12-14-70; Am. Ord. 741,
passed 6-21-83; Am. Ord. 760, passed 5-15-84; Am. Ord. 770, passed 3-19-85;
Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. 1129,
passed 10-20-09; Am. Ord. 1203, passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.208.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the R-1 Zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.212:  R-1 (5,000) SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



Section



   20.212.010   Intent and purpose



   20.212.020   Uses permitted



   20.212.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.212.040   Property development standards



   20.212.050   Plan review



§ 20.212.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The R-1 (5,000) Single Family Residential Zone is established to
provide for the development of medium density single family housing.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.212.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No building or structure or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



      1.   Single family dwelling subject to the dwelling unit
density control.  Two (2) story developments may be permitted where the
second story is an integral part of the first floor unit.  No separate
second story dwelling unit shall be permitted.



      2.   Townhouses.



      3.   Accessory buildings and structures including garages or
carports.



      4.   The following animals may be permitted:  three (3) dogs
or three (3) cats, or any combination thereof, not exceeding four (4) adults
four (4) months-of-age or more.  Other household pets which are neither farm
animals, exotic or wild animals, such as domestic mice and rats, hamsters,
guinea pigs, turtles, tropical fish, canaries, birds of the psittacine
family, and other similar animals commonly sold in pet stores and kept as
household pets, may also be kept, so long as animals are not maintained for
commercial purposes, do not constitute a nuisance, are adequately provided
with food, care and sanitary facilities, and do not exceed a total of six (6)
animals (fish being exempt).  Their offspring shall not be counted until
four (4) months from birth.



      5.   Other animals permitted:  animals not previously
classified.  Any animal not specifically classified within this section of
the code shall be classified by the Director of Development Services as
necessary, based upon a determination as to the probable negative impact of
the health, safety or general welfare upon the community.



      6.   Home occupations that comply with the criteria set forth
in Chapter 20.36.



      7.   Parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and
operated by a government agency, including business conducted within said
facility subject to approval by the City Council.



      8.   The renting of not more than three (3) rooms or the
providing of board for not more than three (3) persons, the combination of
room and board not to exceed three (3) persons.



      9.   Temporary tract sales offices, temporary parking
compounds for contractors equipment, and model homes, provided that each and
every provision of § 20.208.020.A.10. of this title, including paragraphs a.
through f., inclusive, thereof shall apply to any model home use and the
model home use shall be restricted to single family dwellings and
townhouses.  Each single dwelling unit in a townhouse shall be considered
one (1) model home for purposes of this paragraph.



      10.   Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer
mentally or physically handicapped, disordered or dependent persons not
requiring acute medical care.



      11.   Accessory dwelling units, subject to the regulations
contained in §§ 20.208.020 and 20.208.040 of this title, and state law.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title.



      1.   Churches, parsonages, convents and other buildings and
structures used in connection with a religious purpose.



      2.   Nursery schools.



      3.   Schools, public and private.



      4.   Keeping of household pets in excess of the specified
number:  household pets may be kept in excess of the number and distribution
hereby permitted upon the granting of a noncommercial kennel permit pursuant
to § 20.20.070 of this title.



      5.   Subject to all applicable ordinances, rules and
regulations, the following agricultural use on a site of a minimum of one
acre in size:



         a.   Growing of berry, bush, field, and  vine crops;
flower and vegetable farms; fruit and nut tree orchards.



         b.   Seasonal fruit and vegetable roadside stands when
located on the same site upon which said fruit and vegetables are grown.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 1025,
passed 7-20-99, Am. Ord. 1046, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. 1129, passed
10-20-09; Am. Ord. 1203, passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.212.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited:



   A.   Parking or storage of commercial vehicles.



   B.   Mobile homes used as a residence, other than those located
within an authorized mobile home park.



   C.   Any party which requires, impliedly or expressly, any admission
charge to attend or participate.



   D.   Animals expressly prohibited:  Wild and exotic animals
including but not limited to tigers, wildcats, lions, raccoons, and such
other animals not typically sold in a pet store; bee keeping; noisy animals
including any animal that habitually disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or person, creating a nuisance by howling, barking, crying,
baying, or making any other noise; keeping of roosters, peacocks, and geese;
and the keeping of equines, bovines, swine, and/or ovine in either private or
commercial stables.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 926,
passed 8-18-92; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 3-21-17)



§ 20.212.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the R-1 (5,000) Zone:



   A.   Lot area.



      1.   Each lot shall have a minimum area of five thousand
(5,000) square feet.



      2.   In a Residential Planned Unit Development, the size of
the lots may vary, provided the overall density provisions of the zone are
maintained within the project and all other requirements of this section are
complied with.



   B.   Lot dimensions.



      1.   Width.



         a.   Interior lots shall have a minimum width of fifty
(50) feet.



         b.   Corner lots shall have a minimum width of sixty
(60) feet.



         c.   Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum width of
sixty-five (65) feet.



      2.   Depth.  Each lot shall have a minimum depth of ninety
(90) feet.



      3.   In a Residential Planned Unit Development the lot width
and depth may be modified to conform to the buildings and structures
proposed, provided said dimensions permit conformity with all other
provisions of this section.



   C.   Dwelling unit density.  Maximum net dwelling unit density
shall not exceed the required minimum net area per dwelling unit of five
thousand (5,000) square feet.



   D.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures shall have a height no greater
than thirty-five (35) feet.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire
or parapet walls, sky-lights, flagpoles, chimneys, domestic radio and
television masts, or similar structures may be erected above the maximum
height permitted in each zone.  No structure shall be allowed for purposes
of providing additional floor space.



   E.   Yards.



      1.   Front yard. 



         a.   A minimum fifteen (15) foot front yard shall be
required.



         b.   The entire front yard shall be maintained as
required in § 20.208.040.E.1.b. and c. of this title.



         c.   Where the entire block frontage is designed and
developed as a neighborhood unit, the front yard setback may vary, provided,
however, the average minimum front yard shall be not less than fifteen (15)
feet and no front yard shall be reduced to less than ten (10) feet.



         d.   Notwithstanding other requirements herein, all
garages with vehicle entrances facing a street shall set back not less than
twenty-three (23) feet from the front property line.  A carport with a
vehicle entrance facing a street and not screened from any point on the
public right-of-way line which abuts the property upon which said carport is
located shall be prohibited.



         e.   Front yards on the turn-around end of a cul-de-sac
street may be reduced to not less than ten (10) feet.



      2.   Side yards.



         a.   Interior lots shall have a side yard on each side
of not less than five (5) feet.  The side yard may be reduced to zero (0)
feet on one (1) side of the interior lot lines.  When a zero (0) foot side
yard is utilized, the following shall apply:



            (1)   The total width of the two (2) side yards
shall not be less than ten (10) feet.



            (2)   No eave shall project over a lot line.



            (3)   The minimum distance between eaves shall not
be less than seven (7) feet.



            (4)   The minimum distance between walls of
buildings shall be not less than ten (10) feet.



            (5)   The maximum eave projection shall not be
more than three (3) feet.



            (6)   A masonry or concrete block wall seven (7)
feet in height shall be erected and maintained on the rear and side property
lines, except within the required front yard.



            (7)   An additional two and one-half (2½) feet
shall be required for side yards adjacent to a main building twenty (20) feet
or more in height.



         b.   A side yard on the street side of a corner lot, may
have a minimum street side yard of ten (10) feet and a zero (0) foot side
yard on the interior lot line.



         c.   A side yard on the street side of a reversed corner
lot may have a minimum side yard of fifteen (15) and a zero (0) foot side
yard on the interior lot line.



         d.   An opening of a minimum width of not less than four
(4) feet shall be provided for access to the rear yard on one of the side
yards of a lot.  The opening may be provided with a gate but shall not be
fenced or walled.



         e.   Any storage of materials including but not limited
to, trash and trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, and debris, within side yards, shall
be substantially screened with a combination of open or solid fencing, and
landscaping, or enclosed within an openwork structure such as wood or metal
lattice, so as to substantially minimize views as seen from adjacent private
and public streets, and public rights-of-way (excluding alleys).



         f.   All side yard setbacks shall be measured from the
property line to the building wall. 



      3.   Rear yard.



         a.   Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than
ten (10) feet.



         b.   Any storage of materials including but not limited
to, trash and trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, debris, inoperable motor vehicles,
camper shells not mounted on motor vehicles, or boats and trailers, within
rear yards, shall be substantially screened with a combination of open or
solid fencing, and landscaping, or enclosed within an openwork structure such
as wood or metal lattice, so as to substantially minimize views as seen from
adjacent private and public streets, and public right-of-way (excluding
alleys).  Stored materials shall not cover an area greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the total square footage of the rear yard.



      4.   Location of accessory buildings in required yards.



         a.   Detached accessory buildings may be located in the
required side or rear yard areas provided that said structures are not less
than five (5) feet from any common property line to the wall of said
structure; and provided an eave shall not project into a required side yard
more than eighteen (18) inches nor into the required rear yard more than
three (3) feet.



         b.   Where access to a garage or carport is provided
from an alley, the garage or carport shall be located not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from the opposite property line or five (5) feet from
the alley right-of-way line, whichever is more restrictive.  If the vehicle
entrance faces the alley, a garage only shall be permitted and the vehicle
entrance door shall not project beyond the property line when open or being
opened.  A carport with a vehicle entrance facing an alley and not screened
from public view from any point on the public right-of-way line which abuts
the property upon which said carport is located shall be prohibited.



      5.   Projections into required yards.  Except as provided
herein, the provisions of § 20.08.020 of this title shall apply.



      6.   Garage and carport side street setback.  Notwithstanding
other requirements herein, a garage with a vehicle entrance facing a side
street shall set back not less than twenty-three (23) feet from the street
side property line.  A carport with a vehicle entrance facing a side street
and not screened from public view from any point on the public right-of-way
line which abuts the property upon which said carport is located shall be
prohibited.



   F.   Outdoor living space.  Each lot shall contain outdoor living
space of not less than five hundred (500) square feet.



   G.   Walls, fences and landscaping.



      1.   Fences and walls and solid hedges shall not exceed seven
(7) feet above the finished grade immediately abutting the fence with the
following exceptions:



         a.   Solid fences, walls and hedges in a required front
yard shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches.



         b.   Open work fences (not less than ninety percent
(90%) open) in a required front yard shall not exceed a height of four and
one-half (4½) feet.



         c.   Property owners are responsible for the continual
maintenance of all landscaped areas on-site, as well as contiguous planted
areas within the public right-of-way.  All landscaped areas shall be kept
free from weeds and debris, and maintained.



         d.   The provisions of § 20.08.060 of this title
pertaining to corner cut-off areas shall apply.



         e.   Fences and walls shall be located a minimum of six
(6) inches from any property line which is adjacent to a public right-of-way.



   H.   Distance between buildings.  The distance between external
walls of detached buildings shall not be less than ten (10) feet, if there
are either doors or windows facing on said space between walls.  Where no
openings face said space, it may be reduced to six (6) feet.



   I.   Minimum dwelling area.  Dwelling units shall have a minimum
gross floor area of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet.



   J.   Coverage by structures.  No more than fifty percent (50%) of
the lot area shall be covered by buildings or structures.



   K.   Off-street parking.  The provisions of § 20.08.040 of this
title shall apply.



   L.   Access.



      1.   All lots shall have a vehicular access from a dedicated
street or alley.



      2.   Driveway access to garages or carports shall be of
permanent construction material, concrete or asphalt or other material
approved by the City Engineer.



   M.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89; Am. Ord. 965, passed
4-4-95)



§ 20.212.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the R-1 (5,000) Zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.216:  R-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



Section



   20.216.010   Intent and purpose



   20.216.020   Uses permitted



   20.216.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.216.040   Property development standards



   20.216.050   Plan review



§ 20.216.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The R-2 Multiple Family Residential Zone is established to provide for
the development of low density multiple family housing.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.216.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No building or structure or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



      1.   Single family, two (2) family, and multiple family
dwelling subject to the dwelling unit density control.  Two (2) story
developments may be permitted where the second story is an integral part of
the first floor unit.  No separate second story dwelling unit shall be
permitted.



      2.   Townhouses (rowhouses).



      3.   Accessory buildings and structures including garages or
carports.



      4.   Private noncommercial greenhouses, horticultural
collections, flower gardens, vegetable gardens, and fruit trees.



      5.   The following animals may be permitted:  three (3) dogs
or three (3) cats, or any combination thereof, not exceeding four (4) adults
four (4) months-of-age or more.  Other household pets which are neither farm
animals, exotic or wild animals, such as domestic mice and rats, hamsters,
guinea pigs, turtles, tropical fish, canaries, birds of the psittacine
family, and other similar animals commonly sold in pet stores and kept as
household pets, may also be kept, so long as animals are not maintained for
commercial purposes, do not constitute a nuisance, are adequately provided
with food, care and sanitary facilities, and do not exceed a total of six (6)
animals (fish being exempt).  Their offspring shall not be counted until
four (4) months from birth. 



      6.   Other animals permitted:  animals not previously
classified.  Any animal not specifically classified within this section of
the code shall be classified by the Director of Development Services as
necessary, based upon a determination as to the probable negative impact of
the health, safety or general welfare upon the community.



      7.   Home occupations that comply with the criteria set forth
in Chapter 20.36..



      8.   Parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and
operated by a government agency, including business conducted within said
facility subject to approval by the City Council.



      9.   The renting of not more than three (3) rooms or the
providing of board for not more than three (3) persons, the combination of
room and board not to exceed three (3) persons.



      10.   Temporary tract sales offices, temporary parking
compounds for contractors' equipment, and model homes, provided that each and
every provision of § 20.208.020.A.10. of this title, including paragraphs a.
through f., inclusive, thereof shall apply to any model home use and the
model home use shall be restricted to single family dwellings and
townhouses.  Each single dwelling unit in a townhouse shall be considered
one (1) model home for purposes of this paragraph.



      11.   Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer
mentally or physically handicapped, disordered or dependent persons not
requiring acute medical care. 



      12.   Accessory dwelling units, subject to the regulations
contained in §§ 20.208.020 and 20.208.040 of this title, and state law.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title.



      1.   Churches, parsonages, convents and other buildings and
structures used in connection with a religious purpose.



      2.   Nursery schools.



      3.   Schools, public and private.



      4.   Mobile home parks on not less than ten (10) acres of land
area. 



      5.   Keeping of household pets in excess of the specified
number:  household pets may be kept in excess of the number and distribution
hereby permitted upon the granting of a noncommercial kennel permit pursuant
to § 20.20.070 of this title.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 467, passed 7-13-70; Am. Ord. 594,
passed 6-29-76; Am. Ord. 674, passed 4-3-79; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-19-88;
Am. Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 1025, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 1203,
passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.216.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the R-2 Zone:



   A.   Parking or storage of commercial vehicles.



   B.   Mobile homes used as a residence, other than those located
within an authorized mobile home park.



   C.   Any party which requires, impliedly or expressly, any admission
charge to attend or participate.



   D.   Animals expressly prohibited:  Wild and exotic animals include
but are not limited to tigers, wild cats, lions, raccoons, and such other
animals not typically sold in a pet store; bee keeping; noisy animals
including:  any animal that habitually disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or person, creating a nuisance by howling, barking, crying,
baying, or making any other noise; keeping of roosters, peacocks, and geese;
and the keeping of equines, bovines, swine, and/or ovine in either private or
commercial stables. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 926,
passed 8-18-92; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 3-21-17)



§ 20.216.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the R-2 Zone:



   A.   Lot area.



      1.   Each lot shall have a minimum area of nine thousand
(9,000) square feet; except that a lot approved for single-family residential
use, only, either by subdivision or lot split, may have a minimum area of
four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 



      2.   In Planned Unit and Cluster Development, the size of the
lots may vary, provided the overall density provisions of the zone are
maintained within the project and all other requirements of this section are
complied with.



   B.   Lot dimensions.



      1.   Width.



         a.   Interior lots shall have a minimum width of sixty
(60) feet; except that an interior lot approved for single-family residential
use, only, either by subdivision or lot split, with a minimum area of less
than nine thousand (9,000) square feet, may have a minimum width of not less
than fifty (50) feet.



         b.   Corner lots shall have a minimum width of seventy
(70) feet except that a corner lot approved for single-family residential
use, only, either by subdivision or lot split, with a minimum area of less
than nine thousand (9,000) square feet, may have a minimum width of not less
than sixty (60) feet.



         c.   Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum width of
seventy-five (75) feet; except that a reversed corner lot approved for single
family residential use only, either by subdivision or lot split, with a
minimum area of less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet, may have a
minimum width of not less than sixty-five (65) feet.



      2.   Depth.  Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one
hundred thirty-five (135) feet; except that a lot approved for single-family
residential use only, either by subdivision or lot split, with a minimum area
of less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet, may have a minimum depth of
ninety (90) feet.



      3.   In Planned Unit and Cluster Development the lot width and
depth may be modified to conform to the buildings and structures proposed,
provided said dimensions permit conformity with all other provisions of this
section.



   C.   Dwelling unit density.  Maximum dwelling unit density shall
not exceed twelve (12) dwelling units per acre (one (1) unit per three
thousand six hundred thirty (3,630) square feet).



   D.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the R-2 Zone shall
have a height no greater than thirty-five (35) feet.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit. Roof structures
for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire or parapet
walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, domestic radio and television masts,
or similar structures may be erected above the maximum height permitted in
each zone.  No structure shall be allowed for purposes of providing
additional floor space.



   E.   Yards.



      1.   Front yard.



         a.   A minimum twenty-three (23) foot front yard shall
be required; except that a lot approved for single family residential use,
only, either by subdivision or lot split, with a minimum area of less than
nine thousand (9,000) square feet, may have a minimum front yard of fifteen
(15) feet.



         b.   The entire front yard area shall be maintained as
required in § 20.208.040.E.1.b. of this title.



         c.   Recreational vehicles, as defined in §
20.00.070.B. of this title, may be located within front yard setback areas
twice per calendar month for a continuous period of time not to exceed
forty-eight (48) hours for housekeeping and loading purposes only.



      2.   Side yards.



         a.   Interior lots shall have a side yard on each side
of not less than five (5) feet.  The side yard may be reduced to zero (0)
feet on one of the interior lot lines on a lot approved for single-family
residential use, only, by lot split or subdivision, with a minimum area of
less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet.  When a zero (0) foot side yard
is utilized, the following shall apply:



            (1)   The total width of the two (2) side yards
shall be not less than ten (10) feet.



            (2)   No eave shall project over a lot line.



            (3)   The minimum distance between eaves shall not
be less than seven (7) feet.



            (4)   The minimum distance between walls of
buildings shall be not less than ten (10) feet.



            (5)   The maximum eave projection shall be not
more than three (3) feet.



            (6)   A masonry or concrete block wall seven (7)
feet in height shall be erected and maintained on the rear and side property
lines; except within the required front yard.



            (7)   An additional two and one-half (2½) feet
shall be required for side yards adjacent to a main building twenty (20) feet
or more in height.



         b.   A side yard on the street side of a corner lot
shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet; except that a corner lot approved
for single-family residential use, only, either by subdivision or lot split,
with a minimum area of less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet, may have
a minimum street side yard of ten (10) feet and a zero (0) foot side yard on
the interior lot line.



         c.   A side yard on the street side of a reversed corner
lot shall be not less than twenty (20) feet, except that a reversed corner
lot approved for single-family residential use, only, either by subdivision
or lot split, with a minimum area of less than nine thousand (9,000) square
feet, may have a minimum side yard of fifteen (15) feet and a zero (0) foot
side yard on the interior lot line.



         d.   An opening of a minimum width of not less than four
(4) feet shall be provided for access to the rear yard on one of the side
yards of a lot.  The opening may be provided with a gate, but shall not be
fenced or walled.



         e.   Any storage of materials including but not limited
to, trash and trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, and debris, within side yards, shall
be substantially screened with a combination of open or solid fencing, and
landscaping, or enclosed within an openwork structure such as wood or metal
lattice, so as to substantially minimize views as seen from adjacent private
and public streets, and public right-of-way (excluding alleys).



      3.   Rear yards.



         a.   Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than
ten (10) feet; except that a lot approved for single-family residential use,
only, either by lot split or subdivision, with a minimum area of less than
nine thousand (9,000) square feet, shall have a minimum rear yard of not less
than fifteen (15) feet.



         b.   Any storage of materials including but not limited
to, trash and trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, debris, inoperable motor vehicles,
camper shells not mounted on motor vehicles, or boats and trailers, within
rear yards, shall be substantially screened with a combination of open or
solid fencing, and landscaping, or enclosed within an openwork structure such
as wood or metal lattice, so as to substantially minimize views as seen from
adjacent private and public streets, and public right-of-way (excluding
alleys).  Stored materials shall not cover an area greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the total square footage of the rear yard.



      4.   Location of accessory buildings in required yards.



         a.   Detached accessory buildings may be located in the
required side or rear yard areas provided that said structures are not less
than five (5) feet from any common property line to the wall of said
structure; and provided an eave shall not project into a required side yard
more than eighteen (18) inches nor into the required rear yard more than
three (3) feet.



         b.   Where access to a garage or carport is provided
from an alley, the garage or carport shall be located not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from the opposite property line or five (5) feet from
the alley right-of-way line, whichever is more restrictive.  If the vehicle
entrance faces the alley, a garage only shall be permitted and the vehicle
entrance door shall not project beyond the property line when open or being
opened.  A carport with a vehicle entrance facing an alley and not screened
from public view from any point on the public right-of-way line which abuts
the property upon which said carport is located shall be prohibited.



      5.   Projections into required yards.  Except as provided
herein, the provisions of § 20.08.020 of this title shall apply.



      6.   Garage and carport side street setback. Notwithstanding
other requirements herein, a garage with a vehicle entrance facing a side
street shall set back not less than twenty-three (23) feet from the street
side property line.  A carport with a vehicle entrance facing a side street
and not screened from public view from any point on the public right-of-way
line which abuts the property upon which said carport is located shall be
prohibited.



   F.   Outdoor living space.



      1.   Each lot shall contain outdoor living space of not less
than five hundred (500) square feet for each dwelling unit.



      2.   The provisions of § 20.08.030 of this title shall apply.



   G.   Walls, fences, and landscaping.  Fences and walls and solid
hedges shall not exceed seven (7) feet above the finished grade immediately
abutting the fence with the following exceptions:



      1.   Solid fences, walls, and hedges in a required front yard
shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches.



      2.   Open work fences (not less than ninety percent (90%)
open) in a required front yard shall not exceed a height of four and one-half
(4½) feet.



      3.   Fences and walls shall be located a minimum of six (6)
inches from any property line which is adjacent to a public right-of-way.



      4.   The provisions of § 20.08.060 of this title pertaining
to corner cut-off areas shall apply.



      5.   Property owners are responsible for the continual
maintenance of all landscaped areas on-site, as well as contiguous planted
areas within the public right-of-way.  All landscaped areas shall be kept
free from weeds and debris, and maintained.



   H.   Distance between main buildings.  The distance between walls
of opposing buildings shall conform with the following:



      1.   Distance between buildings across a court.  The minimum
distance between opposing main buildings or portions of main buildings which
create a court shall be not less than twenty (20) feet plus a distance equal
to one-half (½) the combined heights of said walls.



      2.   Distance between main buildings which do not form a
court. 



         a.   If there are windows or entrances along either or
both walls of opposing buildings (not facing a court), the distance between
said walls shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet or a distance equal to
one-half (½) the combined height of both walls whichever is greater.  A
minimum of ten (10) feet between buildings shall be free of any building
projections.



         b.   If there are no windows or entrances along either
wall of opposing buildings (not facing a court), the distance between said
walls shall not be less than ten (10) feet.



   I.   Minimum dwelling area.  Dwelling units shall have a minimum
gross floor area of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet.



   J.   Coverage by structures.  No more than fifty percent (50%) of
the lot area shall be covered by buildings or structures.



   K.   Off-street parking.  The provisions of § 20.08.040 of this
title shall apply.



   L.   Access.



      1.   All lots shall have a vehicular access from a dedicated
street or alley.



      2.   Driveway access to garages or carports shall be of
permanent construction material, concrete or asphalt or other material
approved by the City Engineer.



   M.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



   N.   Lighting.  All lighting, interior and exterior, shall be
designed and located so as to confine all direct rays to the premises.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 447, passed 8-11-69; Am. Ord. 478,
passed 12-14-70; Am. Ord. 708, passed 1-20-81; Am. Ord. 741, passed 6-21-83;
Am. Ord. 770, passed 3-19-85; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-19-88; Am. Ord. 873,
passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.216.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the R-2 Zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.220:  R-3 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



Section



   20.220.010   Intent and purpose



   20.220.020   Uses permitted



   20.220.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.220.040   Property development standards



   20.220.050   Plan review



§ 20.220.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The R-3 and R-3-I, Multiple Family Residential Zones are established to
provide for the development of high density, multiple family housing, such as
condominiums and apartments.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 863, passed 5-2-89)



§ 20.220.020  USES PERMITTED.



   Within R-3 and R-3-I Zones, no buildings or structures or land shall be
used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally
altered or enlarged except for the following purposes: 



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



      1.   Single family, two (2) family and multiple family
dwelling subject to the dwelling unit density established by the zone.



      2.   Townhouses (row housing).



      3.   Accessory buildings and structures including garages and
carports.



      4.   Boarding houses.



      5.   Private noncommercial greenhouses, horticultural
collections, flower gardens, vegetable gardens, and fruit trees.



      6.   The following animals may be permitted:  two (2) dogs or
two (2) cats, or any combination thereof, not to exceed three (3) adults four
(4) months-of-age or more.  With the exception that lots that have a minimum
rear yard of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of open space
available may have three (3) dogs or three (3) cats not to exceed four (4)
adults four (4) months-of-age or more.  Other household pets which are
neither farm animals, exotic or wild animals, such as domestic mice and rats,
hamsters, guinea pigs, turtles, tropical fish, canaries, birds of the
psittacine family, and other similar animals commonly sold in pet stores and
kept as household pets, may also be kept, so long as animals are not
maintained for commercial purposes, do not constitute a nuisance, are
adequately provided with food, care and sanitary facilities, and do not
exceed a total of three (3) animals (fish being exempt).  With the exception
that lots that have a minimum rear yard of one thousand two hundred fifty
(1,250) square feet of open space area may have six (6) animals.  Their
offspring shall not be counted until four (4) months from birth.



      7.   Other animals permitted:  animals not previously
classified.  Any animal not specifically classified within this section of
the code shall be classified by the Director of Development Services as
necessary, based upon a determination as to the probable negative impact of
the health, safety or general welfare upon the community.



      8.   Home occupations that comply with the criteria set forth
in Chapter 20.36.



      9.   Parks, playgrounds or community centers owned and
operated by a government agency, including business conducted with permission
of the City Council.



      10.   One (1) permanent resident manager's office devoted
solely to the rental of the dwelling units on the same parcel provided said
office and surrounding grounds retain a residential character; that signs be
limited to those permitted in the R-3 Zone; that no advertising devices be
erected other than those permitted.



      11.   Temporary tract sales offices, temporary parking
compounds for contractors' equipment, and model homes, provided that each and
every provision of § 20.208.020.A.10. of this title, including paragraphs a.
through f., inclusive, thereof shall apply to any model home use and the
model home use shall be restricted to single family dwellings and
townhouses.  Each single dwelling unit in a townhouse shall be considered
one (1) model home for purposes of this paragraph.



      12.   Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer
mentally or physically handicapped, disordered or dependent persons not
requiring acute medical care. 



      13.   Accessory dwelling units, subject to the regulations
contained in §§ 20.208.020 and 20.208.040 of this title, and state law.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title.



      1.   Churches, parsonages, convents, and other buildings and
structures used in connection with a religious purpose.



      2.   Nursery schools.



      3.   Schools, public and private.



      4.   Mobile home parks on not less than ten (10) acres of net
land area with not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of land area
within the park for each mobile home unit.



      5.   Residential care facility.



      6.   Commercial parking lots when abutting any commercial zone.



      7.   Fraternities and sororities.



      8.   Clubs, lodges, meeting places.



      9.   Keeping of household animals in excess of the specified
number:  household animals may be kept in excess of the number and
distribution hereby permitted upon the granting of a noncommercial kennel
permit pursuant to § 20.20.070 of this title.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 467, passed 7-13-70; Am. Ord. 581,
passed 11-18-75; Am. Ord. 594, passed 6-29-76; Am. Ord. 674, passed 4-3-79;
Am. Ord. 863, passed 5-2-89; Am. Ord. 920, passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 1025,
passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 1203, passed 2-20-18)



§ 20.220.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited:



   A.   Parking or storage of commercial vehicles.



   B.   Mobile homes used as a residence other than those located
within an authorized mobile home park.



   C.   Any party which requires, impliedly or expressly, any admission
charge to attend or participate.



   D.   Animals expressly prohibited:  wild and exotic animals include
but are not limited to tigers, wild cats, lions, raccoons, and such other
animals not typically sold in a pet store; bee keeping; noisy animals
including any animal that habitually disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or person, creating a nuisance by howling, barking, crying,
baying, or making any other noise; keeping of roosters, peacocks and geese;
keeping of turkeys, chickens, ducks, pigeons, other non-domestic birds; and
the keeping of equines, bovines, swine, and/or ovine in either private or
commercial stables. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 863, passed 5-2-89; Am. Ord. 920, passed
5-19-92; Am. Ord. 926, passed 8-18-92; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 3-21-17)



§ 20.220.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the R-3 and R-3-I Zones:



   A.   Lot area, width and depth.



      1.   Area.  The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand
(10,000) square feet in an R-3 Zone and seven thousand (7,000) square feet in
an R-3-I Zone.



      2.   Width.



         a.   The minimum average lot width shall be seventy-five
(75) feet on an interior lot and eighty-five (85) feet on a corner lot in an
R-3 Zone.



         b.   The minimum average lot width shall be fifty (50)
feet on an interior lot and sixty (60) feet on a corner lot in an  R-3-I
Zone.



      3.   Depth.  The minimum average lot depth shall be one
hundred twenty (120) feet in an R-3 Zone and one hundred (100) feet in an
R-3-I Zone.



   B.   Dwelling unit density.



      1.   The minimum land area for each dwelling unit on a lot in
the R-3 and R-3-I Zones shall be one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750)
square feet.



      2.   Any property zoned R-3-I at the date of adoption of
Ordinance No. 863 and developed prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 863
shall not be considered restricted by the provisions of Chapter 20.24 of this
title due to the density of the development exceeding the density allowed by
Ordinance No. 863, and will be allowed to be replaced in kind provided the
replacement units meet all the standards pertaining to the R-3-I District
contained in this title and as the same may be amended from time to time.



   C.   Building height. 



      1.   Except as provided herein, buildings and structures in
the R-3 and R-3-I Zones shall have maximum heights as follows:



         a.   Thirty-five (35) feet when located on a lot that is
within one hundred (100) feet from any land zoned R-1, R-2 or RH.



         b.   Fifty (50) feet when located on a lot that is more
than one hundred (100) feet but less than two hundred (200) feet, from any
land zoned R-1, R-2, or RH.



         c.   Seventy-five (75) feet when located on a lot that
is more than two hundred (200) feet from any land zoned R-1, R-2 or RH.



      2.   The following structures may be permitted above the
maximum height limits required herein:



         a.   Chimneys.



         b.   Domestic radio and television masts.



         c.   Fire and parapet walls.



         d.   Roof structures for the housing of air
conditioners, elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, and similar
equipment.



         e.   Skylights.



      3.   No structure shall be permitted above the height limits
for the purpose of providing additional living area or floor space.



   D.   Yards.



      1.   Front yard. 



         a.   Except as provided herein, there shall be a minimum
front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet on lots in the R-3 and R-3-I
Zones.



         b.   The entire front yard shall be maintained as
required in § 20.208.040.E.1.b. of this title.



         c.   Recreational vehicles, as defined in §
20.00.070.B. of this title, may be located within front yard setback areas
twice per calendar month for a continuous period of time not to exceed
forty-eight (48) hours for housekeeping and loading purposes only.



         d.   Where an entire block frontage is designed and
developed as a neighborhood unit, the front yards may vary, provided that an
average of not less than fifteen (15) feet is maintained.  However, no front
yard shall be less than ten (10) feet.



         e.   Front yards on the turn around end of a cul-de-sac
street may be reduced to not less than ten (10) feet.



         f.   Notwithstanding other requirements herein, all
garages with vehicle entrances facing a street shall set back not less than
twenty-three (23) feet from the front property line.  A carport with a
vehicle entrance facing a street and not screened from public view from any
point on the public right-of-way line which abuts the property upon which
said carport is located shall be prohibited. 



      2.   Side yards.



         a.   Except as provided herein, there shall be minimum
side yard of not less than five (5) feet from the side property line on
interior lots and from the interior side lot lines on corner lots in the R-3
and R-3-I Zones.



         b.   The minimum side yard from the street side property
line shall be not less than ten (10) feet on a corner lot.



         c.   Except as provided herein, side yards adjacent to
buildings or structures more than twenty (20) feet in height shall be
increased two and one-half (2½) feet for each additional fifteen (15) feet
in height; provided however, the total side yard need not be more than ten
(10) feet in width.



         d.   Where any dwelling or group of dwellings face a
common property line, the side yard shall be not less than ten (10) feet plus
a distance of one-half (½) the height of the dwelling or fifteen (15) feet,
whichever is greater.



         e.   All side yard widths shall be measured from the
eave line.



         f.   Notwithstanding other requirements herein, a garage
with a vehicle entrance facing a side street shall set back not less than
twenty-three (23) feet from the street side property line.  A carport with a
vehicle entrance facing a side street and not screened from public view from
any point on the public right-of-way line which abuts the property upon which
said carport is located shall be prohibited. 



         g.   Any storage of materials including but not limited
to, trash and trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, and debris, within side yards, shall
be substantially screened with a combination of open or solid fencing, and
landscaping, or enclosed within an openwork structure such as wood or metal
lattice, so as to substantially minimize views as seen from adjacent private
and public streets, and public right-of-way (excluding alleys). 



      3.   Rear yard.



         a.   Except as provided herein, there shall be a minimum
rear yard for main building of not less than fifteen (15) feet on lots in the
R-3 and R-3-I Zones.



         b.   Except as provided herein, a rear yard adjacent to
a building more than thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be increased five
(5) feet in width for each additional fifteen (15) feet in height.



         c.   Detached accessory buildings not more than fifteen
(15) feet in height may be permitted in the required rear yard, provided they
are located not less than five (5) feet from the eave line to a property line.



         d.   Where access to a garage or carport is provided
from an alley, the garage or carport shall be located not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from the opposite property line or five (5) feet from
the alley right-of-way line, whichever is more restrictive.  If the vehicle
entrance faces the alley, a garage only shall be permitted and the vehicle
entrance door shall not project beyond the property line when open or being
opened.  A carport with a vehicle entrance facing an alley and not screened
from public view from any point on the public right-of-way line which abuts
the property upon which said carport is located shall be prohibited. 



         e.   Any storage of materials including but not limited
to, trash and trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, debris, inoperable motor vehicles,
camper shells not mounted on motor vehicles, or boats and trailers, within
rear yards, shall be substantially screened with a combination of open or
solid fencing, and landscaping, or enclosed within an openwork structure such
as wood or metal lattice, so as to substantially minimize views as seen from
adjacent private and public streets, and public right-of-way (excluding
alleys).  Stored materials shall not cover an area greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the total square footage of the rear yard.



      4.   Projections into required yards.  Except as provided
herein, the provisions of § 20.08.020 of this title shall apply to
projections into the required front, side, and rear yards.



   E.   Outdoor living space. 



      1.   Each in the R-3 and R-3-I Zones shall contain not less
than two hundred (200) square feet of outdoor living area for each dwelling
unit located thereon.



      2.   Outdoor living area shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 20.08.030 of this title.



   F.   Fences, walls, and hedges.  Fences and walls and solid hedges
shall not exceed seven (7) feet above the finished grade immediately abutting
the fence with the following exceptions:



      1.   Solid fences, walls, and hedges in a required front yard
shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches.



      2.   Open work fences (not less than ninety percent (90%)
open) in a required front yard shall not exceed a height of four and one-half
(4½) feet.



      3.   Fences and walls shall be located a minimum of six (6)
inches from any property line which is adjacent to a public right-of-way.



      4.   The provisions of § 20.08.060 of this title pertaining
to corner cut-off areas shall apply.



      5.   Property owners are responsible for the continual
maintenance of all landscaped areas on-site, as well as contiguous planted
areas within the public right-of-way.  All landscaped areas shall be kept
free from weeds and debris, and maintained.



   G.   Distance between buildings.  The following minimum distances
between exterior walls of buildings and structures on a lot in the R-3 and
R-3-I Zones shall apply:



      1.   One-half (½) the combined height of the walls of
buildings or structures which do not form a court, or fifteen (15) feet,
whichever is greater.



      2.   One-half (½) the combined height of the walls of
buildings or structures which form a court plus fifteen (15) feet.



      3.   In no instance shall the eaves between buildings be
closer than ten (10) feet.



   H.   Building area.  The minimum living area for a dwelling unit on
a lot in the R-3 and R-3-I Zones, which shall not include garage area, shall
have a gross floor area of not less than the following:



      1.   Bachelor Unit:  Four hundred fifty (450) square feet.



      2.   One (1) Bedroom Unit:  Six hundred fifty (650) square
feet.



      3.   Two (2) or more - Bedroom Unit:  Eight hundred (800)
square feet.



   I.   Lot coverage.  Not more than sixty percent (60%) of a lot in
the R-3 and R-3-I Zone shall be covered by buildings and structures.  A
minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the required uncovered lot area shall
be provided in one (1) contiguous location and shall be kept free and clear
of any building and structural intrusions or any other intrusions that would
inhibit the development of said area of uninterrupted usable, open green
space.



   J.   Off-street parking.  The provisions of § 20.08.040 of this
title shall apply.



   K.   Signs.  Signs permitted in the R-3 and R-3-I Zones shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title.



   L.   Lighting.  All lighting, interior and exterior, shall be
designed and located so as to confine all direct rays to the premises.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 470, passed 8-24-70; Am. Ord. 478,
passed 12-14-70; Am. Ord. 741, passed 6-21-83; Am. Ord. 770, passed 3-19-85;
Am. Ord. 863, passed 5-2-89; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.220.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the R-3 Zone. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 863, passed 5-2-89; Am. Ord. 963, passed
1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.224:  C-P COMMERCIAL, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND PROFESSIONAL
OFFICE ZONE



Section



   20.224.010   Intent and purpose



   20.224.020   Uses permitted



   20.224.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.224.040   Property development standards



   20.224.050   Special development standards



   20.224.060   Plan review



§ 20.224.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The C-P Commercial, Administrative and Professional Office Zone is
established to provide for the development of administrative and professional
offices and other related uses and facilities.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.224.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged except
for the following purposes:



   (A)   Principal permitted uses.  Administrative or professional
offices (any office in which chattels or goods, ware or merchandise are not
manufactured or sold):



   Art gallery



   Dental clinics



   Laboratories, biological, medical, dental, and X-ray



   Libraries and reading rooms



   Massage establishments that are in compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 5.220 of the Brea Municipal Code



   Medical, dental, and therapeutic clinics



   Medical equipment and supplies



   Mimeo and addressing services



   Photographers studio



   Post office



   Public utility commercial offices



   Tourist information centers



   The following retail commercial uses shall be permitted only as an
accessory use when operated within a totally enclosed building being used for
one or more of those permitted in this section.



   The following accessory uses shall not occupy more than twenty-five
(25%) of the total building area:



   Barber and beauty shop



   Book or stationery store



   Cigar store



   Coffee shop



   Confectionery shop



   Florist



   Gift shop



   Office supply store



   Pharmacy



   Restaurant, tea room, cafe, provided no dancing or theatrical
performances be permitted.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit.  The
following uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit, §
20.408.030 of this title:



   Alcoholic sales; on- and off-sale 



   Ambulance services



   Auditorium and conference room



   Churches and religious institutions



   Dancing school



   Hospital, general and convalescent



   Lodges and meeting halls



   Mortuary



   Private schools



   Residential care facility



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 581, passed 11-18-75; Am. Ord. 761,
passed 3-19-85; Am. Ord. 1066, passed 4-20-04)



§ 20.224.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-P Zone:



   All uses not specifically permitted.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.224.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the C-P Zone:



   A.   Lot area.  No requirements.



   B.   Lot dimensions.  No requirements.



   C.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the C-P Zone shall
have a height no greater than thirty (30) feet.  Heights in excess of the
maximum may be permitted by conditional use permit, subject to the
requirements of § 20.408.030 of this title.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire
or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, wireless
and television masts, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected above
the maximum height permitted in each zone.  No structure shall be allowed
for purposes of providing additional floor space.



   D.   Yards.



      1.   Front yards and side yards on the street side of a corner
or reversed corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet and shall not
be used for off-street parking.  If the required yard is across a local
street from any residential zone, a wall not less than thirty (30) inches nor
more than six (6) feet in height shall be erected on the building (setback)
line where there is no building on said line and where parking is provided to
the rear of said line.



      2.   Where the C-P Zone abuts any residential zone, there
shall be a yard abutting the zone boundary of not less than ten (10) feet
plus an additional one (1) foot of setback shall be required for each
additional one (1) foot of building height in excess of ten (10) feet.  Said
required yard may be used for parking, loading and access.  A solid wall not
less than six (6) feet nor more than seven (7) feet in height shall be
erected on the zone boundary line, to within fifteen (15) feet of any street
property line.



   E.   Fences, walls and landscaping and property maintenance. 



      1.   Required walls.



         a.   Walls along common property lines shall be erected
as required in paragraph D. above.



         b.   Required walls six (6) feet or more in height shall
be constructed of masonry material.



         c.   Required walls less than six (6) feet in height may
be constructed of other permanent material not including wood or corrugated
sheet material.



      2.   Permitted fences and walls.  Fences and walls not to
exceed seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted within any required side
or rear yard area or along any common property line provided, however, that
the wall or fence does not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches within the
front yard or side yard on the street side of a corner lot.



      3.   The height of walls and fences shall be measured from
highest ground level immediately adjacent to the base of the wall.



      4.   Landscaping.  The provisions of § 20.236.040.M. of C-G
Zone shall apply.



      5.   Property maintenance.  The provisions of §
20.236.040.M. of C-G Zone shall apply.



   F.   Distance between buildings.  No requirements.



   G.   Floor area ratio. The gross floor area of main building(s)
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.



   H.   Off-street parking and loading.



      1.   All loading spaces shall be located behind either masonry
walls not less than six (6) feet in height, or buildings so that they will
not be visible from any abutting street.



      2.   The provisions of § 20.08.040 of this title shall apply.



   I.   Access.  Access to all off-street parking and loading areas
shall conform with requirements of the City Engineer, and shall be subject to
modification by the Planning Commission upon review of the site plans.



   J.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.224.050  SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   A.   All uses in the C-P Zone shall be conducted entirely within a
building.  All storage of materials and trash shall be screened by a masonry
wall in such a manner that it is not visible from adjacent property or from
any abutting streets.



   B.   All noise producing equipment shall be located and housed in
such a manner that sound does not create a nuisance beyond any common
property line abutting any residential zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.224.060  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the C-P Zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.228:  C-N NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE



Section



   20.228.010   Intent and purpose



   20.228.020   Uses permitted



   20.228.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.228.040   Property development standards



   20.228.050   Special development standards



   20.228.060   Plan review



§ 20.228.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The C-N Neighborhood Commercial Zone is established to provide for the
development of small neighborhood shopping centers to serve the convenience
shopping needs of the nearby residential population.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.228.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



   Any use permitted in the C-P Commercial,



   Administrative and Professional Office Zone



   Apparel store



   Bakery shop



   Bank and financial institution



   Barber and beauty shops



   Book store



   Confectionery store



   Delicatessen



   Drug store



   Eating place excluding drive-in restaurants 



   Florist shop



   Food market



   Gift shop



   Hardware store



   Health food store



   Hobby supply store



   Ice cream parlor



   Ice dispenser



   Jewelry store 



   Laundry and dry cleaning agency, pick-up only



   Laundry and dry cleaning, self-service only



   Liquor store (off-sale only)



   Meat market, no slaughtering



   Notions and novelty store



   Nurseries, retail plants (no outdoor storage of fertilizers or other
non-plant
   materials)



   Pet store 



   Pharmacy



   Photo shop - sales and repairs



   Shoe sale and/or repair store



   Shoeshine stands



   Stationery store



   Tobacco shop



   Toy store



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title:



      1.   Any conditional use permitted under § 20.224.020.B. of
this title (C-P Zone).



      2.   Alcohol sales; on- and off-sale. 



      3.   Gasoline service stations.



         a.   A conditional use permit for a new service station
at any location within the corporate limits of the city shall not be approved
and granted to any company or an affiliated company that owns, leases, rents
or has control of, in any manner, property that is presently occupied by an
abandoned or vacant service station at any other location within the
corporate limits of the city.  Abandoned or vacant, as used herein, shall
mean that the service station has not been in operation for a period of
ninety (90) days or more prior to the date the Planning Commission adopts its
resolution on the application for a new service station.



         b.   This provision shall not apply to an abandoned or
vacated service station that has been legally converted to and is being
utilized for another permitted use, or to a service station that is not in
operation because it is in the process of being reconstructed or remodeled.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 464, passed 4-27-70; Am. Ord. 689,
passed 1-15-80; Am. Ord. 761, passed 9-18-84; Am. Ord. 955, passed 8-2-94)



§ 20.228.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-N Zone:



   Residential uses



   Manufacturing uses



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.228.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the C-N Zone:



   A.   Lot area.



      1.   Minimum area.  The site shall not be less than three (3)
acres.



      2.   Maximum area.  The site for any shopping center shall
not exceed eight (8) acres.



   B.   Lot dimensions.  The width of the site shall not exceed a
ratio of two (2) feet for each foot of depth.



   C.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the C-N Zone shall
have a height no greater than thirty (30) feet.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit. Roof structures
for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire or parapet
walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, wireless and
television masts, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected above the
maximum height permitted in each zone.  No structure shall be allowed for
purposes of providing additional floor space.



   D.   Yards and setbacks.



      1.   Front yards and side yards on the street side of a corner
and reversed corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet and shall
not be used for off-street parking.  A wall not less than thirty (30) inches
nor more than six (6) feet in height shall be erected on the building
(setback) line, where there is no building on said line and where parking and
loading is provided to the rear of said line.



      2.   Buildings and structures shall be located not less than
forty (40) feet from any property line adjacent to any residential zone. 
The intervening space may be used for parking, loading and access.  A solid
wall not less than six (6) feet nor more than seven (7) feet in height shall
be erected on the zone boundary line to within fifteen (15) feet of any
street lot line.



   E.   Walls, fences, landscaping and property maintenance.



      1.   Required walls.



         a.   Walls along common property lines shall be erected
as required in paragraph D. above.



         b.   Required walls six (6) feet or more in height shall
be constructed of masonry material.



         c.   Required walls less than six (6) feet in height may
be constructed of other permanent material not including wood or corrugated
sheet metal.



      2.   Permitted fences and walls.  Fences and walls not to
exceed seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted within any side or rear
yard area or along any common property line provided, however, that the wall
or fence does not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches within the front yard
or side yard on the street side of a corner or reversed corner lot.



      3.   Height of walls and fences. The height of walls and
fences shall be measured from highest ground level immediately adjacent to
the base of the wall.



      4.   Landscaping.  The provisions of § 20.236.040.M. of C-G
Zone shall apply.



      5.   Property maintenance.  The provisions of §
20.236.040.M. of C-G Zone shall apply.



   F.   Distance between buildings.  No requirements.



   G.   Floor area ratio. The gross floor area of main building(s)
shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.



   H.   Off-street parking and loading.  The provisions of §
20.08.040 of this title shall apply.



   I.   Access.  Access to all off-street parking and loading area
shall conform with requirements of the City Engineer, and shall be subject to
modification by the Planning Commission upon review of the site plans.



   J.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.228.050  SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   A.   All uses in the C-N Zone shall be conducted entirely within a
building.  All storage of materials and trash shall be screened by a masonry
wall in such a manner that it is not visible from adjacent property or from
any abutting streets.



   B.   All noise producing equipment shall be located and housed in
such a manner that sound does not create a nuisance beyond any common
property line abutting any residential zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.228.060  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the C-N Zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.232:  C-C MAJOR SHOPPING
CENTER ZONE



Section



   20.232.010   Intent and purpose



   20.232.020   Uses permitted



   20.232.030   Property development standards



   20.232.040   Special development standards



   20.232.050   Plan review



§ 20.232.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The C-C Major Shopping Center Zone is established to provide for the
development of large modern shopping center facilities to serve the community.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.232.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



   Any use permitted in the C-N Zone, § 20.228.020.A.



   Antique store



   Appliance store (household) including repairs



   Auto supply store, and auto repairs, minor



   Child care center



   Department store



   Dry goods store



   Eating place, excluding drive-in restaurants



   Furniture store



   Interior decorating shop



   Knit shop



   Laundry and dry cleaning agency



   Leather goods store



   Mail order house, no warehousing



   Millinery shop



   Music store



   News stand



   Office equipment sales and incidental repairs



   Paint and wallpaper store



   Liquor, on-sale



   Picture frame shop



   Pet store and pet supplies



   Pottery store



   Radio and T.V. store



   Redemption center (trading stamps)



   Sporting goods store



   Tailor shop



   Theater, walk-in



   Yarn and yardage shop



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title:



   Alcoholic sales; on- and off-sale. 



   Ambulance service



   Amusement center 



   Auto repair, major



   Auditorium and conference rooms



   Churches and religious institutions



   Dancing schools



   Drive-in restaurants 



   Hotel and uses accessory thereto 



   Lodges and meeting halls



   Mortuaries



   Parks and playgrounds, private and public



   Private schools



   Residential care facility 



   Gasoline service stations, subject to the provisions of §
20.228.020.B.3.  (C-N Zone)



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 464, passed 8-27-70; Am. Ord. 581,
passed 11-18-75; Am. Ord. 635, passed 9-20-77; Am. Ord. 689, passed 1-15-80;
Am. Ord. 761, passed 9-18-84; Am. Ord. 776, passed 3-16-82)



§ 20.232.030  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the C-C Zone:



   A.   Zone area. 



      1.   Minimum area.  Any area to which this zoning is applied
shall not be less than ten (10) acres.



   B.   Lot dimensions.  The width of the site shall not exceed a
ratio of two (2) feet for each foot of depth.



   C.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the C-C Zone shall
have a height no greater than seventy-five (75) feet; except that a building
or structure may exceed a height of seventy-five (75) feet if a conditional
use permit for this purpose is granted subject to the provisions of §
20.408.030 of this title.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire
or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, wireless
and television masts, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected above
the maximum height permitted in each zone.  No structure shall be allowed
for purposes of providing additional floor space.



   D.   Yards and setbacks.



      1.   All yards and setbacks shall be subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission at the time of site plan review pursuant
to § 20.408.040 of this title.  In no instance, however, shall any
building, main or accessory, be located within one hundred (100) feet of any
property line which abuts any residential zone.



      2.   The Planning Commission may require, through the site
plan review procedure, permanent masonry walls and landscaping which is
deemed necessary to protect adjacent residential zones and/or to improve the
visual quality of the commercial complex as viewed from any abutting street.



   E.   Walls, fences, landscaping and property maintenance. 



      1.   Required walls.



         a.   Walls along common property lines shall be erected
as required in paragraph D. above.



         b.   Required walls six (6) feet or more in height shall
be constructed of masonry material.



         c.   Required walls less than six (6) feet in height may
be constructed of other permanent material not including wood or corrugated
sheet metal.



      2.   Permitted fences and walls.  Fences and walls not to
exceed seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted within any side or rear
yard area or along any common property line provided, however, that the wall
or fence does not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches within any required
street setback yard area.



      3.   Height of walls and fences.  The height of walls and
fences shall be measured from highest ground level immediately adjacent to
the base of the wall.



      4.   Landscaping.  The provisions of § 20.236.040.M. of C-G
Zone shall apply.



      5.   Property maintenance.  The provisions of §
20.236.040.M. of C-G Zone shall apply.



   F.   Distance between buildings.  No requirements.



   G.   Off-street parking and loading.  The provisions of §
20.08.040 of this title shall apply.



   H.   Access.  Access to all off-street parking and loading areas
shall conform with requirements of the City Engineer, and shall be subject to
modifications by the Planning Commission upon review of the site plans.



   I.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 776, passed 3-16-82; Am. Ord. 873,
passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.232.040  SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   A.   All uses in the C-C Zone shall be conducted entirely within a
building.  All storage of materials and trash shall be screened by a masonry
wall or in such a manner that it is not visible from adjacent property or
from any abutting streets.



   B.   All noise producing equipment shall be located and housed in
such a manner that sound does not create a nuisance beyond any common
property line abutting any residential zone.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.232.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the C-C Zone. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.236:  C-G GENERAL
COMMERCIAL ZONE



Section



   20.236.010   Intent and purpose



   20.236.020   Uses permitted



   20.236.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.236.040   Property development standards



   20.236.050   Plan review



   Appendix:   Required boundary landscaping; required trees diagram



§ 20.236.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The C-G (General Commercial Zone) is established to provide for the
development of general commercial and highway related uses.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.236.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No building or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses. 



   Any use permitted in the C-C Zone, § 20.232.020.A.



   Ambulance service - (outside use permitted)



   Auto rental agency - (outside use permitted)



   Auto repair, major



   Bicycle and scooter rental, sales, service and repair - (outside use
for rental and sales, only, permitted)



   Billiard parlors 



   Boat and other marine equipment sale, service and repair - (outside use
for sales, only, permitted)



   Bowling alley



   Dancing school



   Electrical distribution substation including microwave facilities
incorporated as part of a public utility installation (outside use permitted)



   Equipment rental, household and garden (outside use permitted)



   Health center



   Hotel



   Lodge hall



   Motorcycle rental, sales, service and repair - (outside use for rental
and sales, only, permitted)



   Motor vehicle tire sales, service and repair



   Nursery, plant - (outside use permitted)



   Photo engraving



   Plumbing supplies



   Printers and publishers



   Private club



   Schools, business



   Secondhand store



   Skating rink, ice and roller



   Swimming pool, commercial - (outside use permitted)



   Swimming pool sales agency - (outside use permitted)



   Taxi service - (outside use permitted)



   Telephone exchange



   Tile sales, ornamental - (outside use permitted)



   Trailer rental, sales, service and repair, excluding truck trailers -
(outside use for rental and sales only, permitted)



   Wedding chapel - (outside use permitted)



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title:



   Alcohol sales; on- and off-sale 



   Amusement center 



   Animal hospitals and kennels



   Auditorium and conference rooms



   Automobile car washes



   Churches and religious institutions



   Dance halls



   Drive-in restaurants 



   Drive-thru restaurants



   Gasoline service stations, subject to the provisions of §
20.228.020.B.3.  (C-N Zone)



   Golf driving range



   Golf, miniature courses



   Mortuaries



   Motels



   Parking structures, automobile



   Parks and playgrounds, public and private



   Private schools



   Residential care facility 



   Theaters, drive-in



   Trampoline centers



   Vehicle sales, new and used - (outside use permitted) 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 449, passed 8-11-69; Am. Ord. 522,
passed 8-21-73; Am. Ord. 581, passed 11-18-75; Am. Ord. 635, passed 9-20-77;
Am. Ord. 689, passed 1-15-80; Am. Ord. 761, passed 9-18-84)



§ 20.236.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the C-G Zone:



   Residential uses



   Manufacturing uses



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.236.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the C-G Zone:



   A.   Lot area.  No lot shall be less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet.



   B.   Lot dimensions.  No requirements.



   C.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the C-G Zone shall
have a height no greater than thirty-five (35) feet.  Heights above the
maximum may be permitted by conditional use subject to the provisions of §
20.408.030 of this title.  Height shall be measured from adjacent finish
grade.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire
or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, wireless
and television masts, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected above
the maximum height permitted in each zone.  No structure shall be allowed
for purposes of providing additional floor space.  All such structures six
(6) feet above the maximum height shall be subject to staff review.



   D.   Yards and setbacks.



      1.   Front setback.  Buildings and structures shall be
located not less than ten (10) feet from the property line abutting a street.



      2.   Side and rear setbacks.  Buildings and structures shall
be located no less than forty (40) feet from any common property line
adjacent to any residential zone.  The intervening space may be used for
parking, loading and access.  A solid wall not less than six (6) feet nor
more than seven (7) feet in height shall be erected on the zone boundary
line, to within fifteen (15) feet of any street lot line.



   E.   Walls and fences.



      1.   Required walls.



         a.   Walls along common property lines shall be erected
as required in paragraph D. above.



         b.   Walls or fences of sheet or corrugated iron, steel,
aluminum, asbestos, or security chain-link fencing are specifically
prohibited, except that security chain-link fencing may be permitted when
combined with redwood battens or a similar aesthetic treatment.



      2.   Permitted fences and walls.  Fences and walls not to
exceed seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted within any side or rear
yard area or along any common property line provided, however, no walls
greater than three and one-half (3½) feet shall be located within the
setback area paralleling a street right-of-way.



      3.   The height of walls and fences shall be measured from
highest ground level immediately adjacent to the base of the wall.



      4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a fence
or wall height as required by any law or regulation of the state or agency
thereof.



   F.   Distance between buildings.  No requirements.



   G.   Building site coverage.  The maximum building site coverage
shall be fifty percent (50%) of the net area of the site.



   H.   Off-street parking and loading.  The provisions of §
20.08.040 of this title shall apply.



   I.   Access.  Access to all off-street parking and loading areas
shall conform with requirements of the City Engineer, and shall be subject to
modification by the Planning Commission upon review of the site plans.



   J.   Signs.     The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title
shall apply.



   K.   Storage and refuse collection areas.



      1.   All storage areas/and refuse collection areas shall be
screened from public view by a concrete block or masonry wall or in such a
manner so that it is not visible from adjacent property and abutting public
right-of-ways.



      2.   All noise producing equipment shall be so housed and
located in such a manner that sound does not create a nuisance beyond any
common property line abutting a residential zone and shall be screened in
such a manner so that it is not visible from adjacent property and abutting
public right-of-ways.



      3.   Outdoor storage shall include all company-owned and
-operated motor vehicles, except for passenger vehicles.



      4.   Storage or refuse collection shall not be permitted
within setback areas.



   L.   Roof mounted equipment.  All roof mounted mechanical
equipment, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment shall be visually
screened from view from adjacent property and abutting right-of-ways. 
Required screens shall be architecturally compatible with the building or
structure on which they occur.



   M.   Landscaping.



      1.   General.



         a.   All improved building sites shall have a minimum
landscaped coverage of fifteen percent (15%) of the net site area. 
Landscaping shall consist of an effective combination of sculpturing, street
trees, ground cover and shrubbery.  All required boundary landscaping may be
included within this requirement.



         b.   Required landscaping shall be provided with an
irrigation system.  Dry landscape materials may be used in side and rear
setback areas only.



         c.   All unpaved, non-work areas (excluding vacant lots)
shall be landscaped.



         d.   Fifty percent (50%) of all required trees shall
have a trunk at least three (3) inches in diameter at a point two (2) feet
above the ground.



      2.   Boundary areas.(See the diagram in the Appendix following
this chapter.)



         a.   A landscaped area not less than eight (8) feet wide
is required along all areas abutting adjacent streets.  This landscape strip
shall be continuous except where crossed by required automobile access.  A
minimum of one (1) tree per twenty-five (25) linear feet of each property
line abutting a street is required.  Required trees may be grouped or
clustered and shall be in addition to required ground cover and shrub
material.



         b.   A landscaped area not less than five (5) feet wide
is required around the perimeter of all buildings and structures.  This
landscape strip shall be continuous except for areas required for truck or
auto service and access.



         c.   A landscaped area not less than five (5) feet wide
is required on all interior property lines.  This landscaping shall be
continuous along all interior property lines.  A minimum of one (1) tree per
thirty (30) feet of each interior property line is required.  Required trees
may be grouped or clustered and shall be in addition to required ground cover
and shrub material.



      3.   Driveway and parking area.



         a.   Driveway and parking areas shall be separated from
adjacent landscaping by a wall or curb at least four (4) inches high, but no
more than three (3) feet six (6) inches high.



         b.   Parking areas shall be screened so as to minimize
the effect from all adjacent access streets, freeways, and other
properties.  Plant material used for screening shall consist of bermed,
linear or grouped masses of shrubs and/or trees of a sufficient size and
height to meet this requirement.



         c.   One (1) tree per each five (5) parking stalls,
which may be clustered or grouped, shall be installed within the parking
area.  Boundary planting cannot be counted towards this requirement.  Trees
should be placed so as to give relief to the monotony of rows of parked
vehicles.



      4.   Undeveloped areas.



         a.   Landscaping plans shall incorporate provisions for
erosion control on all grades sites which shall remain vacant prior to
building construction.



         b.   Undeveloped areas shall be maintained in a
weed-free condition.



      5.   Landscaping maintenance. 



         a.   Prior to the installation of the landscaping in the
public right-of-way, the developer shall provide for continual maintenance by
an agreement with the city.



         b.   Property owners are responsible for the continual
maintenance of all landscaped areas on-site, as well as contiguous planted
areas within the public right-of-way.  All landscaped areas shall be kept
free from weeds and debris, maintained in a healthy, growing condition and
shall receive regular pruning, fertilizing, mowing and trimming.  Any
diseased, dead, damaged or decaying plant materials shall be removed and
replaced within thirty (30) days following written notice from the
Development Services Director.



         c.   Irrigation systems shall be kept in working
condition.  Adjustments, replacements, repairs and cleaning shall be a part
of regular maintenance.



         d.   Trees shall be staked and tied with lodge poles. 
Stakes and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct functions. 
Ties shall be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or girdling on trunks or
branches.



         e.   Street trees planted within public rights-of-way
and/or trees planted adjacent to public sidewalks shall be provided with root
barriers, subject to Development Services Director review and approval.



         f.   Stakes and ties on trees shall be checked regularly
for correct functions.  Ties shall be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions
or girdling on trunks or branches.



      6.   Property maintenance.  Property owners shall maintain
all structures, including buildings, paved areas, accessory buildings and
signs in the manner required to protect the health and safety of the user,
occupants and the general public.  The property shall be deemed substandard
when it displays evidences of a substantial number of dilapidated conditions
including, but not limited to the following:



         a.   Faulty, sagging or leaking roof;



         b.   Improper weatherization of building siding
materials such as chipped or worn paint, wood siding showing signs of dry
rot, cracked or chipped stucco and dented or rusted metal siding;



         c.   Broken or missing windows and sign panels;



         d.   Inadequate site drainage or standing water adjacent
to building foundations;



         e.   Broken or inoperable sanitary and plumbing
facilities;



         f.   Broken or missing foundation and attic vent screens
and window screens; and



         g.   Structural deficiencies.



   N.   Loading areas.  Loading shall be allowed providing the loading
dock is set back a minimum of seventy (70) feet from the street right-of-way
line, and forty (40) feet from any residential property.  Said loading areas
shall be screened from view of adjacent streets.



   O.   Telephone and electrical service facilities.  All
“on-site” telephone and electrical lines of twelve (12) KV or less shall
be placed underground.  Transformer or terminal equipment shall be screened
from view of adjacent streets and properties.



   P.   Maintenance.



      1.   All structures shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
manner.



      2.   All permitted signs shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly manner.



   Q.   Lighting.  All lighting, including signs, shall be designed to
confine all direct rays to the premises and so no direct rays or glare shall
obstruct the vision of motorists either on the site or on adjacent roads.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.236.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the C-G Zone. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 670, passed 1-2-79; Am. Ord. 963, passed
1-17-95)



APPENDIX:  REQUIRED BOUNDARY LANDSCAPING;
REQUIRED TREES DIAGRAM




Please see the printed code of ordinances to view the illustration




CHAPTER 20.240:  C-M COMMERCIAL
INDUSTRIAL ZONE



Section



   20.240.010   Intent



   20.240.020   Uses permitted



   20.240.030   Principal uses permitted



   20.240.040   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit



   20.240.050   Uses prohibited



   20.240.060   Property development standards



   20.240.070   Performance standards



   20.240.080   Plan review



§ 20.240.010  INTENT.



   A.   There are certain uses which may generally be thought of as
commercial in nature, but which are more compatible with manufacturing
uses.  There are also certain mixed uses which are appropriate in a
manufacturing zone, and there are certain other services or mixed uses which
are appropriate in a manufacturing zone to service other businesses in such
zone.  It is the intent of the C-M (Commercial/Industrial) Zone to permit
certain uses consonant with the foregoing in areas master planned for
industrial use, either on parcels wherein the permitted uses under said C-M
Zone will not conflict with permitted uses on adjacent property, or where a
buffer is desirable between heavier manufacturing operations and other
adjacent zones.  The Council hereby finds that the provisions of the C-M
Zone are consistent with the General Plan for industrial uses, subject to
Council determination as to the specific area or areas wherein C-M zoning is
appropriate.



   B.   Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, any
and every building and premises or land in the C-M (Commercial/Industrial)
Zones shall be used for, or occupied, and every building shall be erected,
constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, and moved into or
within such C-M (Commercial/Industrial) Zones exclusively and only in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.240.020  USES PERMITTED.



   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the C-M
(Commercial/Industrial) Zone, provided site plans are submitted and approved
in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title (Plan
Review) and provided, further, that the outdoor display of equipment, goods
or merchandise for advertising, sales or merchandising purposes shall be
permitted for those uses noted herein and shall be subject to a review of the
specifics of any proposal as a part of such plan review procedure.  In
acting on proposals for the improvement of areas outside of existing
buildings or structures for purposes of display, the criteria for approval,
disapproval or approval with conditions, as may be determined by the City
Planner through the plan review shall be the general compatibility of the
proposed use with adjacent existing or permitted uses.  In addition, the
City Planner in reviewing proposals for outdoor display, shall take into
consideration the intent and purpose for establishing C-M
(Commercial/Industrial) Zoning regulations and districts as well as other
factors of compatibility, including but not limited to noise, traffic
circulation, appearance, and such performance features as are provided for or
referenced herein.



   B.   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no
buildings or structures shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged except for the following purposes. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



§ 20.240.030  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   A.   Uses permitted in the C-P Zone, § 20.224.020A of this title,
excepting massage establishments as defined in Chapter 5.220 of the Brea
Municipal Code.



   B.   Uses permitted in the M-P Zone, § 20.248.020.A. of this title.



   C.   Retail establishments engaged in selling merchandise for
personal, household, business, or industrial consumption, and rendering
services incidental to such sales.



   Astrology shops, fortune-telling, etc. 



   Automobile parts sales, new



   Automobile service (within completely enclosed building)



   Bakery, retail and wholesale



   Bicycle shop



   Building materials, new



   Ceramics, sales (outside display may be permitted, see § 20.240.020)



   Electrical supplies



   Home furnishings



   Motorcycle sales, new and used (outside display may be permitted, see
§ 20.240.020, outside repair work prohibited)



   Picture framing



   Plumbing (all storage of supplies and equipment must be within a
building or enclosed area)



   Radio/television sales, repair and service



   Restaurants



   Tire, battery and accessory store



   D.   Service establishments engaged in rendering services to
individuals, businesses, and industrial uses:



   Animal hospital, kennels, pet shops (all operations including runs,
kennels, and grooming, must be connected within a completely enclosed masonry
building)



   Automobile repairs (all storage of supplies and equipment must be
within a building or an enclosed area)



   Distributors



   Equipment rental (outside display of rental equipment may be permitted,
see § 20.240.020, outside repair work is prohibited)



   Frozen food locker



   Laundry and linen



   Locksmith



   Moving and storage of furniture and household goods



   Parcel delivery



   Property maintenance service or supplies sales



   Upholstery shops



   Warehousing, wholesaling



   E.   Manufacturing establishments conducting light manufacturing
activities including processing and assembly operations compatible with other
permitted commercial uses:



   Boat building (limited to boats which do not exceed twenty-seven (27)
feet in overall hull length)



   Cabinet making, carpentry and furniture



   Camper and trailer assembly or manufacture



   Sheet metal



   Sign painting



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 636, passed 10-4-77; Am. Ord. 965,
passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. 1066, passed 4-20-04)



§ 20.240.040  USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   The following uses may be permitted subject to the approval of a
conditional use permit application in accordance with the provisions of §
20.408.030 of this title and subject to the additional finding that any
proposed use be primarily dependent upon and related to the activities and
services generated by industrial uses:



   Alcohol sales; on- and off-sale 



   Banks and financial institutions 



   Car wash



   Churches, religious institutions and similar places of assembly.



      The city has identified the following development guidelines as
important for consideration within the review of any Conditional Use Permit
for a church or religious institution within the industrial zones:



      a.   Churches, religious institutions or similar places of
assembly should not locate within one thousand (1,000) feet, as measured from
closest property line, of a previously entitled church or religious
institution within the CM, MP, M1 or M2 zoning districts.



   Contractor’s yard



   Service station



   Vehicle sales, new and used (outside use permitted, subject to §
20.240.020)



   Welding shop



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 689, passed 1-15-80; Am. Ord. 844,
passed 6-7-88; Am. Ord. 1066, passed 4-20-04; Am. Ord. 1092, passed 5-16-06;
Am. Ord. 1119, passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 6-21-11)



§ 20.240.050  USES PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are hereby determined to be inconsistent with the
intent and purpose of the C-M (Commercial/Industrial) Zone and are hereby
prohibited.



   Junk yards



   Used tire sales and recapping



   Any outdoor manufacturing or processing operation



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.240.060  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to the use of
all land and/or buildings in the C-M (Commercial/Industrial) Zones:



   A.   Minimum lot size.  Every lot shall have a minimum width on a
publicly-dedicated street of one hundred (100) feet; a minimum depth of one
hundred fifty (150) feet and a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet; provided, however, where a lot has less area than required by
the provisions of this section and was held under separate ownership or was
of record on the date of the adoption of this section, such lot may be
occupied by any use permitted in the C-M (Commercial/ Industrial) Zone if all
other regulations are complied with.



   B.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the C-M
(Commercial/Industrial) Zone shall have a height no greater than thirty-five
(35) feet.  Heights above the maximum may be permitted by conditional use,
subject to the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire
or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, wireless
television masts, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected above the
maximum height permitted in each zone.  No structure shall be allowed for
purposes of providing additional floor space, except as provided for in
paragraph B.1. above.



   C.   Yards and setbacks.  Yard and setback requirements in the C-M
(Commercial/Industrial) Zone shall be the same as those provided for in the
M-P (Planned Industrial) Zone (§ 20.248.040.D. of this title) and the
provisions thereof for requirements.



   D.   Walls, fences, landscaping and property maintenance.



      1.   Required walls.



         a.   Walls along setback lines and along the common
property lines shall be erected as required in § 20.248.040.D. and E. of
this title.



         b.   Required walls six (6) feet or more in height shall
be constructed of masonry material.



         c.   Required walls less than six (6) feet in height may
be constructed of other permanent material not including wood or corrugated
sheet metal.



      2.   Permitted fences and walls.  Fences and walls not to
exceed seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted within any side or rear
yard area along any common property line provided, however, that the wall or
fence does not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches within the front yard or
side yard on the street side of a corner or reverse corner lot.



      3.   The height of walls and fences shall be measured from the
highest ground level immediately adjacent to the base of the wall.



      4.   Landscaping requirements and property maintenance.  The
provisions of § 20.252.040.E.5., 6., and 7. of the M-1 Zone shall apply.



   E.   Distance between buildings.  No requirements.



   F.   Coverage by structure.  Lot area coverage by buildings or
structures shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.



   G.   Access.  Access to all off-street parking and loading areas
shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.



   H.   Off-street parking and loading.  The provisions of §
20.08.040 of this title shall apply.



   I.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



   J.   Outdoor activities and storage.



      1.   Outdoor storage and activities associated with permitted
uses shall be entirely enclosed by building walls or by a solid masonry wall
located so as to effectively screen such storage or activities.  Said wall
cannot be constructed frontward of the front setback line and shall not be
less than seven (7) feet in height, along all other property lines. 
Proposed outdoor storage or activity areas shall be enclosed by a seven (7)
foot wall or by screen landscaping not less than eight (8) feet in height
plus a fence of chain link, or other similar material, not less than six (6)
feet in height to screen stock piles from external boundaries of property. 
Items shall not be stacked or stored higher than six (6) feet.



      2.   The storage of combustible materials shall be not less
than twenty (20) feet from any interior lot line.



      3.   No material or wastes shall be deposited upon a subject
lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by
natural causes or forces.



      4.   Wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required
enclosures.



   K.   Trash storage.  All storage of trash receptacles shall be
screened from public view by a concrete block or masonry wall or in such a
manner so that it is not visible from adjacent property and abutting public
rights-of-way.  Trash storage areas shall be so located on the property as
to be readily accessible to service vehicles.



   L.   Metal buildings.  Metal buildings shall not be permitted
within the C-M (Commercial/Industrial) Zone except that buildings or
structures having exterior walls of sheet metal may be located not closer
than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the property line along any freeway,
major or secondary highway or any other dedicated street provided.



      1.   The sheet metal comprises twenty-five percent (25%) or
less of the exterior wall area of said building or structure which is
adjacent, parallel to and/or visible from a publicly-dedicated street; and



      2.   The sheet metal consists of panels with baked enamel or
similar finish; and



      3.   Said building is screened from the public view with
walls, fencing, and landscaping or other structures.



   M.   Minimum size of zoning.  No parcel of land containing less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall be zoned C-M
(Commercial/Industrial) unless such parcel is contiguous to an existing C-M
(Commercial/Industrial) Zone and is adaptable as to shape and dimensions for
development compatible with such contiguously zoned C-M (Commercial/
Industrial) property.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.240.070  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All uses within the C-M (Commercial/Industrial) Zone shall comply with
the provisions of Chapter 20.20 of this title (Performance Standards).



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 772, passed 4-16-85)



§ 20.240.080  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title (Plan Review) shall apply
to all proposed development in the C-M (Commercial/Industrial) Zone. 
Additionally, all property zoned C-M and located within three hundred (300)
feet of any “R” (residentially) zoned property shall not be developed
except upon the previous approval of a conditional use permit. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 772, passed 4-16-85; Am. Ord. 963,
passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.244:  C-RC COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONE



Section



   20.244.010   Intent and purpose



   20.244.020   Uses permitted



   20.244.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.244.040   Property development standards



   20.244.050   Plan review



§ 20.244.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The C-RC Commercial Recreation Zone is established to provide for the
development of commercial recreation uses, in areas suited for this purpose.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.244.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



   Archery



   Art galleries



   Bicycle and motor scooter rentals and sales



   Billiard parlors 



   Bowling alleys



   Electrical distribution substations



   Fishing and casting pools



   Golf courses, regulation and miniature



   Golf driving ranges



   Health centers and retreats



   Hotel, motel, and resort complexes



   Ice dispenser



   Lawn and court games, commercial



   Massage establishments that are in compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 5.220 of the Brea Municipal Code



   Microwave facilities incorporated as part of a public utility
installation



   Mineral spas



   Parks and playgrounds, private and public



   Skating rinks, ice and roller



   Theaters, walk-in



   Tourist information centers



   Trampoline centers



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title:



   Auditoriums and conference rooms



   Commercial uses related to and developed as an integral part of a
hotel, motel, or resort complex



   Dance halls



   Eating places, walk-in and drive-in



   Liquor, on-sale and off-sale



   Lodge halls



   Private clubs



   Residential care facility 



   Sports arenas and stadiums



   Theaters, drive-in



   Gasoline service stations, subject to the provisions of §
20.228.020.B.3. (C-N Zone) 



   Parks for the exclusive purpose of providing temporary or overnight
parking for campers, housecars, and recreational house trailers. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 464, passed 4-27-70; Am. Ord. 467,
passed 7-13-70; Am. Ord. 522, passed 8-21-73; Am. Ord. 581, passed 11-18-75;
Am. Ord. 1066, passed 4-20-04)



§ 20.244.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following are expressly prohibited in the C-RC Zone:



   Residential uses



   Manufacturing uses



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.244.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the C-RC Zone:



   A.   Lot area.



      1.   Minimum lot area - One (1) acre except public utility
uses which may have a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.



   B.   Lot dimensions.



      1.   Minimum width.  A lot shall not be less than two hundred
(200) feet in width.



   C.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the C-RC Zone shall
have a height no greater than thirty-five (35) feet.  Heights above the
maximum may be permitted by conditional use subject to provisions of §
20.408.030 of this title.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limits.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire
or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, wireless
and televisions masts, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected
above the maximum height permitted in each zone.  No structure shall be
allowed for purposes of providing additional floor space.



   D.   Yards and setbacks.



      1.   Front yard.  A minimum thirty-five (35) foot yard shall
be required.  Said yard shall be kept and maintained free and clear of all
buildings and structures, trailers, mobile homes, boats, off-street parking
or storage of materials.  The front fifteen (15) feet shall be landscaped.



      2.   Side yard on a corner lot.  A minimum fifteen (15) foot
landscaped yard shall be required along the street side of a corner lot.



      3.   Side and rear yards.  A minimum one hundred (100) foot
yard area shall be required along any side or rear property line adjacent to
any residential zone.



   E.   Walls, fences, landscaping and property maintenance. 



      1.   Required walls. The Commission may require a six (6) foot
masonry wall along any property line which abuts any residential zone as a
condition of the plan review where such wall is deemed necessary and
practical to protect these abutting areas.



      2.   Permitted fences and walls.  Fences and walls not to
exceed seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted within any side or rear
yard area or along any common property line provided, however, that the wall
or fence does not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches within the front yard
or side yard on the street side of a corner or reversed corner lot.



      3.   Height of walls and fences.  The height of walls and
fences shall be measured from the highest ground level immediately adjacent
to the base of the wall.



      4.   Landscaping.  The provisions of § 20.236.040.M.5. of
C-G Zone shall apply.



      5.   Property maintenance.  The provisions of §
20.236.040.M.6. of C-G Zone shall apply.



   F.   Distance between buildings.  No requirements



   G.   Floor area ratio.  No requirements



   H.   Off-street parking loading.  The provisions of § 20.08.040 of
this title shall apply.



   I.   Access.  Access to all off-street parking and loading areas
shall conform with requirements of the City Engineer, and shall be subject to
modification by the Planning Commission upon review of the site plans.



   J.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.244.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the C-RC Zone. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



CHAPTER 20.248:  M-P PLANNED
INDUSTRIAL ZONE



Section



   20.248.010   Intent and purpose



   20.248.020   Uses permitted



   20.248.030   Uses prohibited



   20.248.040   Property development standards



   20.248.050   Plan review



   20.248.060   Performance standards



§ 20.248.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   A.   This zone is intended to provide for and encourage planned
industrial zones of a research and scientific type compatible with
surrounding uses or adjacent zones.  Uses are to be confined to those
industrial and administrative activities which can be carried on in
unobtrusive manner, and to certain accessory commercial facilities that are
necessary to serve the employees of the zone.



   B.   No industrial use shall be permitted which, by the nature of
the development or operation, would in any way adversely affect the
environment of the M-P Zone or surrounding zones.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.248.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structures shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



      1.   Research laboratories and facilities, developmental
laboratories and facilities, and testing laboratories and facilities.



      2.   Manufacture, assembly, testing and repair of components,
devices, equipment and systems of an electrical, electronic or
electromechanical nature, such as, but not limited to:



         Television and radio equipment and systems



         Phonographs and audio units



         Metering instruments, equipment and systems



         Radar, infrared and ultraviolet equipment and systems



         Coils, tubes, semiconductors and similar components



         Scientific and mechanical instruments



         Data processing equipment and systems



         Communication, navigation control, transmission and
reception equipment, control equipment and systems, guidance equipment and
systems



      3.   Manufacture, testing, repair and assembly of optical
devices, equipment and systems.



      4.   Manufacture, testing, repair, and assembly of testing
equipment.



      5.   Research and development facilities for the creation of
prototypes.



      6.   Pharmaceutical laboratory.



      7.   Blueprinting, photocopying, photo engraving and film
processing.



      8.   Assembly of plastic products.



      9.   Manufacture of ceramic products using only previously
pulverized clay and using kilns fired only by electricity or gas.



      10.   Manufacture of control devices and gauges.



      11.   Administrative, professional and business offices
accessory to uses permitted in the district.



      12.   Industrial medical facilities.



      13.   Cafeteria, restaurant or auditorium facility accessory
to any uses permitted in the district.



      14.   Recreation area or facility accessory to any uses
permitted in this district.



      15.   Agricultural uses.



   B.   Uses subject to conditional use permit.  The following uses
are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit application in
accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title:



      1.   Any principal use permitted in the M-1 Zone as specified
in § 20.252.020.A. of this title and subject to all provisions therein.



      2.   Alcohol sales; on-sale only 



         Ambulance service



         Animal boarding places, hospitals and kennels



         Astrology, fortune-telling, etc.



         Auditorium and conference rooms



         Automobile laundries



         Business, professional, technical, and trade schools



         Churches, religious institutions and similar placesof
assembly.



            The city has identified the following development
guidelines as important for consideration within the review of any
Conditional Use Permit for a church or religious institution within the
industrial zones:



            a.   Churches, religious institutions or similar
places of assembly should not locate within one thousand (1,000) feet, as
measured from closest property line, of a previously entitled church or
religious institution within the CM, MP, M1 or M2 zoning districts.



         Commercial uses which are proposed to be established as
separate facilities, but which are accessory to principal permitted uses in
the M-P Zone:



         Construction equipment rental, repair, sales, and service



         Eating places, walk-in and drive-in



         Golf courses, commercial



         Motels



         Outdoor advertising structures (billboards)



         Recreation areas and facilities



      3.   Gasoline service stations, subject to the provisions of
§ 20.228.020.B.3. of this title (C-N Zone).



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 464, passed 4-27-70; Am. Ord. 761,
passed 9-18-84; Am. Ord. 878, passed 12-5-89; Am. Ord. 1092, passed 5-16-06;
Am. Ord. 1119, passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 6-21-11)



§ 20.248.030  USES PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the M-P Zone:



   Any outdoor manufacturing or processing operation



   Residential uses, except caretakers quarters



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.248.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following property development standards shall apply to all land
and buildings in the M-P Zone:



   A.   Parcel area.  Each parcel to be developed for uses permitted
in this zone shall contain a minimum of five (5) acres.  A development plan
for the entire parcel must be submitted under the provisions of § 20.408.040
of this title and all off-site improvements as shown on said development plan
must be installed prior to construction of any structures thereon.



   B.   Lot dimensions.



      1.   Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred
(100) feet.



      2.   Depth.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one
hundred fifty (150) feet.



   C.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the M-P Zone shall
have a height no greater than sixty (60) feet.  Heights above the maximum
may be permitted by conditional use permit subject to the provisions of §
20.408.030 of this title.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limits.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings, and fire
or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, smoke stacks, flagpoles,
chimneys, wireless and television masts, water tanks, or similar structures
may be erected above the maximum height permitted in each zone.  No
structure shall be allowed for purposes of providing additional floor space.



   D.   Yards.



      1.   Where the M-P Zone fronts, sides, or rears on any
arterial street, or a local street which is a boundary with residential zone,
there shall be a yard abutting said arterial or local street of not less than
fifty (50) feet.  The twenty (20) feet nearest the street shall be
landscaped and maintained.  The remainder may be used for parking.



      2.   Where the M-P Zone fronts, sides, or rears on a local
street which is not a boundary with a residential zone, there shall be a yard
abutting said street of not less than twenty (20) feet.  The ten (10) feet
nearest the street shall be landscaped and maintained.  The remainder may be
used for parking.



      3.   Where the M-P abuts the residential zone, there shall be
a yard of not less than one hundred (100) feet.  Said yard may be used for
parking.  A solid masonry wall not less than seven (7) feet in height shall
be installed along the property line abutting the residential zone.



      4.   Where the M-P Zone sides or rears on an alley which is a
boundary with a residential zone, there shall be a yard of not less than one
hundred (100) feet.  Said yard may be used for parking.  A solid masonry
wall seven (7) feet in height shall be installed along the property line.



   E.   Walls, fences, landscaping and property maintenance.  The
provisions of § 20.252.040.E.6. and 7. of the M-1 Zone shall apply.



   F.   Distance between buildings.  No requirements.



   G.   Coverage by structures.  Lot area coverage by buildings or
structures shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.



   H.   Access.  Access to all off-street parking and loading areas
shall conform with requirements of the City Engineer.



   I.   Off-street parking and loading.  The provisions of §
20.08.040 of this title shall apply.



   J.   Signs.  The provisions of Chapter 20.28 of this title shall
apply.



   K.   Outdoor storage and waste disposal.



      1.    Outdoor storage and activities associated with permitted
uses shall be entirely enclosed by building walls or by a solid masonry wall
on front setback line.  Said wall to be not less than seven (7) feet in
height.  On all other property lines said uses shall be enclosed by a seven
(7) foot wall or by screen landscaping not less than eight (8) feet in height
plus a fence not less than six (6) feet in height, of chain link, or other
similar material to screen stock piles from external boundaries of
property.  Items shall not be stacked or stored higher than six (6) feet.



      2.   The storage of combustible materials shall not be less
than twenty (20) feet from any interior lot line, and a roadway shall be
provided, graded, surfaced, and maintained from the street to the rear of the
property to permit free access of fire trucks at any time.



      3.   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a subject
lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by
natural causes or forces.  All waste materials shall be stored in an
enclosed area and shall be accessible to service vehicles.



      4.   Wastes which might cause fumes or dust which constitute a
fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents
or insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures.



   L.   Metal buildings.  Buildings or structures having exterior
walls of sheet metal shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty (150)
feet from the property line along any freeway, major or secondary highway, or
closer than one hundred (100) feet from the property line along any other
dedicated street, except that said buildings or structures may be located
closer to the street if any of the following conditions prevail:



      (1)   The sheet metal comprises twenty-five percent (25%) or
less of the exterior wall area of said building or structure; or



      (2)   The sheet metal consists of panels with baked enamel or
similar finish; or



      (3)   Said building or structure is concealed from view from
the public street by walls, fences, landscaping, or other buildings or
structures.



   M.   Minimum size of zone.  No parcel of land containing less than
twenty (20) acres shall be zoned M-P unless property is contiguous to an
existing M-P Zone and has a shape and dimension adaptable for such purposes.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-5-89)



§ 20.248.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title shall apply to all
development in the M-P Zone. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 963, passed 1-17-95)



§ 20.248.060  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All uses in the M-P Zone shall comply with limitation of performance
standards, Chapter 20.20 of this title.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



CHAPTER 20.252:  M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE



Section



   20.252.010   Intent and purpose



   20.252.020   Uses permitted



   20.252.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.252.040   Property development standards



   20.252.050   Plan review



   20.252.060   Performance standards



§ 20.252.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the M-1 Zone is to provide appropriately located areas
for the establishment of industrial plants and related activities and to
promote the concentration of such uses in a manner which will foster mutually
beneficial relationships with each other, as well as with those areas of the
city zoned for other development.  The regulation of uses and standards of
development set forth in the M-1 Zone are those deemed necessary to provide
the proper environment for the efficient and desirable use of this type of
industrial land, and to provide the proper safeguards to protect nearby
residential, commercial, and public uses.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.252.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structures shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



      1.   Uses permitted in the M-P Zone, § 20.248.020 of this
title.



      2.   Agricultural.



      3.   Manufacturing.  Subject to the conditions of this zone,
manufacturing, assembling, repairing, testing, processing, warehousing,
wholesaling, research or treatment of products; may be conducted, other than
those which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor,
dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or other similar causes detrimental to the
public health, safety or general welfare, including but not limited to the
following:



      Aircraft and aircraft accessories



      Aluminum products



      Auto trailer, camper, and mobile home manufacturing



      Bakery wholesale



      Boat building



      Bottling plant



      Building material and hardware sales



      Cabinet shop



      Carpet cleaning plants



      Catering services



      Cleaning and dyeing plants, general



      Cutlery, hardware, hand tool, and utensil manufacturing



      Dairy products processing



      Electric distribution substations, electric transmission
substations, gas metering and regulating stations, public utility buildings
and service and storage yards including microwave facilities incorporated as
part of a public utility installation



      Electric or neon sign manufacturing



      Food products processing, manufacturing, canning, preserving, and
freezing (excluding fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and
the rendering or refining of fats and oils)



      Furniture manufacturing, upholstering and refinishing



      Garage, parking or parking structure



      Garment manufacturing



      Hospital or medical clinic, industrial



      Ice and cold storage plant



      Laundries



      Lumber yards (planing mills excluded)



      Machine shop



      Metal plating



      Metal working, light fabricating or welding firm



      Motion picture studio, laboratories and film processing



      Paint mixing, provided a boiling process is not employed (no
above ground tank farm or surface storage is permitted except above surface
thinner storage is limited to two hundred (200) gallons and is permitted)



      Paper, fabrication form



      Petroleum bulk plants



      Plastic, fabricating from



      Printing establishments



      Product service centers



      Radio broadcasting studio or station



      Rubber products if:



         1.   The rubber is not melted



         2.   An internal type mixer is used, and residue
therefrom is collected in accordance with rules and regulations specified by
the Orange County Air Pollution Control District



      Sheet metal shop



      Telephone exchange, office and equipment building



      Television broadcasting studio or station



      Textile manufacture



      Training center, industrial



      Warehouses and storage buildings



      Woodworking shop



      4.   Other uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted
only where they are integrated with and clearly incidental to a primary
permitted industrial use:



         Dwelling, single, where used exclusively by a caretaker or
superintendent of a  permitted industrial use and his or her family



         Employees’ cafeterias or coffee shops



         Exhibition of products produced on the premises or
available for wholesale distribution



         Offices



      5.   Emergency shelter, subject to the following standards.



         a.   A single emergency shelter for thirty (30)
occupants, or a combination of multiple shelters with a combined capacity not
to exceed thirty (30) occupants, shall be allowed as a principal permitted
use, consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65583(4)(A).  Any other emergency
shelter shall meet the minimum standards contained in subparagraph
20.252.020.A.5. and shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use
permit consistent with § 20.408.030.  Churches or religious institutions
within the M-1 zone may establish emergency shelters for up to thirty (30)
occupants without further CUP consideration, regardless of current combined
capacity of any existing emergency shelters currently in operation, subject
to the minimum development standards contained in § 20.252.020.A.5.



         b.   Stays at the facility shall be on a first-come
first-served basis with clients only on-site and admitted to the facility
between 6:00 p.m. and  8:00 a.m. during pacific daylight time and 5:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. during pacific standard time.  Clients must vacate the
facility  by  8:00 a.m. and have no guaranteed bed for the next night.



         c.   Maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed one
hundred twenty (120) days in a three hundred sixty-five(365) day period.



         d.   Facility location shall be within a half (1/2) mile
radius from an OCTA bus stop, as measured from the property line. 



         e.   A minimum distance of five hundred (500) feet shall
be maintained from any other emergency shelter, any residentially zoned
property and any public or private school, as measured from the property line.



         f.   A minimum of one (1) staff member per fifteen (15)
beds shall be awake and on duty when the facility is open.



         g.   Bike rack parking shall also be provided by the
facility.



         h.   Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire
outdoor area of the site consistent with the provisions of  subparagraph
20.08.40.C.5.b. 



         i.   A waiting area shall be provided which contains a
minimum of ten (10) square feet per bed provided at the facility.  The
waiting area shall be in a location not adjacent to the public right-of-way,
shall be visually separated from public view by minimum six (6) foot tall
visually screening mature landscaping or a minimum six (6) foot tall
decorative masonry wall, and shall provide consideration for shade/rain
provisions.



         j.   Any outdoor storage, including, but not limited to,
items brought on-site by clients for overnight stays, shall be screened from
public view.  Any outdoor storage areas provided shall be screened from
public view by minimum six (6) foot tall visually screening mature
landscaping or a minimum six (6) foot tall decorative masonry wall.



         k.   Facility improvements shall comply with Title 15,
Division I and Title 16 of the Brea Municipal Code, specific to the
establishment of dormitories and shall additionally provide:



            (1)   A minimum of one (1) toilet for every eight
(8) beds per gender;



            (2)   A minimum of one (1) shower for every eight
(8) beds per gender; and



            (3)   Private shower and toilet facility for each
area designated for use by individual families.



         l.   An operational plan shall be provided for the
review and approval of the Development Services Director.  Plans may be
required to address additional specific needs as identified by the
Director.  The approved operational plan shall remain active throughout the
life of the facility.  At a minimum, the plan shall contain provisions
addressing the topical areas outlined below:



            (1)   Security and safety - addressing both on and
off-site needs, including provisions to address the separation of male/female
sleeping areas as well as any family areas within the facility;



            (2)   Loitering control - with specific measures
regarding off-site controls to minimize the congregation of clients in the
vicinity of the facility during hours that clients are not allowed on-site;



            (3)   Management of outdoor areas - including a
system for daily admittance and discharge procedures and monitoring of
waiting areas with a goal to minimize disruption to nearby land uses;



            (4)   Staff training - with objectives to provide
adequate knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent
shelter and income;



            (5)   Communication and outreach with objectives
to maintain good communication and response to operational issues which may
arise from the neighborhood, city staff, or the general public;



            (6)   Screening of clients for admittance
eligibility - with objectives to provide first service to Brea residents;



            (7)   Counseling programs to be provided with
referrals to outside assistance agencies, and provide an annual report on
this activity to the city; and



            (8)   Litter control - with an objective to
provide for the timely removal of litter attributable to clients within the
vicinity of the facility.



         m.   The facility may provide the following services in
a designated area separate from sleeping areas:



            (1)   A recreation area either inside or outside
the shelter;



            (2)   A counseling center for job placement,
educational, health care, legal, or mental health services;



            (3)   Laundry facilities to serve the number of
clients at the shelter;



            (4)   Kitchen for the preparation of meals;



            (5)   Dining hall;



            (6)   Client storage area (i.e. for the overnight
storage of bicycles and personal items); or



            (7)   Similar services geared to homeless clients.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title.



      1.   Any principal use permitted in the M-2 Zone as specified
in subparagraph 20.256.020.A. of this title and subject to all provisions
therein.



      2.   Any conditional use permitted in subparagraph
20.248.020.B.2. of this title, and subject to all the provisions therein.



      3.   Gasoline service stations, subject to the provisions of
subparagraph 20.228.020.B.3. of this title (C-N Zone).



      4.   Vehicle sales, new and used - (outside use permitted). 



      5.   Administrative and professional offices (any office in
which chattels or goods, ware or merchandise are not sold or manufactured). 



      6.   Health clubs, studios or spas. 



      7.   Astrology, fortune-telling, etc.



      8.   Off-site hazardous waste facility subject to Health and
Reactivity rating of three (3) or below in accordance with the NFPA 704
System, National Fire Protection Association or equivalent. 



      9.   Churches, religious institutions and similar places of
assembly. The city has identified the following development guidelines as
important for consideration within the review of any Conditional Use Permit
for a church or religious institution within the industrial zones:



         a.   Churches, religious institutions or similar places
of assembly should not locate within one thousand (1,000) feet, as measured
from closest property line, of a previously entitled church or religious
institution within the CM, MP, M1 or M2 zoning districts.



      10.   Emergency shelter - any emergency shelter defined as
requiring a conditional use permit within subparagraph 20.252.020.A.5.a.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 464, passed 4-27-70; Am. Ord. 689,
passed 1-15-80; Am. Ord. 708, passed 1-20-81; Am. Ord. 878, passed 12-5-89;
Am. Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92; Am. Ord. 1092, passed 5-16-06; Am. Ord. 1119,
passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 1128, passed 10-20-09; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 6-21-11)



§ 20.252.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The following uses are expressly prohibited in the M-1 Zone:



   Residential uses, except caretakers quarters.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.252.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the M-1 Zone.



   A.   Lot area.  Each lot shall have a minimum area of six thousand
(6,000) square feet.



   B.   Lot dimensions.



      1.   Width.  Each lot shall have a minimum width of sixty
(60) feet, except that were adjacent to a residential zone, school or park,
the width shall be not less than one hundred sixty (160) feet.



      2.   Depth.  Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one
hundred (100) feet, except where adjacent to a residential zone, school or
park, in which case the minimum depth shall be two hundred (200) feet.



   C.   Building height.



      1.   Buildings and structures erected in the M-1 Zone shall
have a height no greater than sixty (60) feet.  Heights above the maximum
may be permitted by conditional use permit, subject to the provisions of §
20.408.030 of this title.



      2.   Structures permitted above height limit.  Roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings and fire
or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, smoke stacks, flagpoles,
chimneys, wireless and television masts, water tanks, or similar structures
may be erected above the maximum height permitted in each zone.  No
structure shall be allowed for purposes of providing additional floor space.



   D.   Yards.



      1.   Where the M-1 Zone fronts, sides, or rears on any
arterial street, or a local street which is a boundary with a residential
zone, there shall be a yard abutting said arterial street or local street of
not less than fifty (50) feet.  The twenty (20) feet nearest the street
shall be landscaped and maintained.  The remainder may be used for parking.



      2.   Where the M-1 Zone fronts, sides or rears on a local
street which is not a boundary with a residential zone, there shall be a yard
of not less than ten (10) feet abutting said street.



      3.   No side or rear yards required except where adjoining a
residential zone, the side and rear yard(s) shall be a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet.  Said yards may be used for parking, loading, and accessways. 
A solid masonry wall not less than seven (7) feet in height shall be
installed along the property line abutting the residential zone.



      4.   In all front yards, the equivalent of one (1) tree per
thirty (30) lineal feet of interior property line shall be provided; in all
rear and side yards, visible from adjacent streets or residential
neighborhoods, one (1) tree for each thirty (30) lineal feet of combined rear
and side interior property lines shall be planted in either a lineal or
grouped manner.  In addition, a five (5) foot, net (clear of curb), interior
property line landscaped strip shall be provided.  This landscaping shall be
continuous along all interior property lines.  Landscaping shall be held
back from the property line or intersection with driveways or streets so as
not to hinder traffic visibility. 



      5.   All yards between the public street curbing and the
property line are to be landscaped and maintained with active ground cover,
such as green grass, dichondra, ivy, shrubs and/or trees.



      6.   All unpaved or undeveloped areas of a site for which a
development application has not been submitted, shall be planted with a
ground cover and/or shrub material as a condition of project approval.
Undeveloped areas which are proposed for future expansion shall be kept in a
weed free condition. 



   E.   Walls, fences, landscaping, and property maintenance.



      1.   Required walls.



         a.   Walls along common property lines shall be erected
as required in paragraph D. above, however, said walls shall be reduced to a
height of thirty (30) inches in the area defined as the front yard in the
abutting residential zone.



         b.   Required walls shall be constructed of masonry
material not less than six (6) inches in thickness.



      2.   Permitted fences and walls.  Fences and walls not to
exceed seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted within any side or rear
yard area or along any common property line provided, however, that the wall
or fence does not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches within the front yard
or side yard on the street side of a corner lot.



      3.   Height of walls and fences.  The height of walls and
fences shall be measured from highest ground level immediately adjacent to
the base of the wall.



      4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a fence
or wall height as required by any law or regulation of the state or agency
thereof.



      5.   Landscaping required. 



         a.   Areas utilized for parking or loading, will be
screened, modulated, or interrupted from view of access on adjacent streets,
freeways, and adjacent residential property.  This can be accomplished by
one of three (3) techniques:



            (1)   Lineal masses of shrubs;



            (2)   Lineal or group masses of major scale trees;
or



            (3)   Lineal or grouped masses of smaller scale
trees.



         b.   Dual texturing of building facades or a five (5)
foot strip of building parameter landscaping shall be required, with the
exception of rear or side walls abutting other existing buildings.



         c.   Parking lot trees.  Trees equal in number to one
(1) per each five (5) parking stalls either grouped or clustered shall be
installed in all parking areas.  Said trees shall be placed on the lot so as
not to interfere with interior industrial parking lot circulation.  Trees
shall be placed so as to give relief to the monotony of rows of parked
vehicles.



         d.   A detailed landscaped plan (including irrigation,
plant and material specifications) shall be submitted to the Development
Services Department for its approval prior to the issuance of building
permits.



      6.   Landscaping maintenance. 



         a.   Prior to the installation of the landscaping in
public right-of-way, the developer shall provide for continued maintenance by
an agreement with the city.



         b.   Property owners are responsible for the continual
maintenance of all landscape areas on-site, as well as contiguous planted
areas within the public right-of-way.  All landscaped areas shall be kept
free from weeds and debris, maintained in a healthy, growing condition and
shall receive regular pruning, fertilizing, mowing and trimming.  Any
diseased, dead, damaged or decaying plant materials shall be removed and
replaced within thirty (30) days following written notice from the
Development Services Director.



         c.   Irrigation systems shall be kept in working
condition.  Adjustments, replacements, repairs, and cleaning shall be a part
of regular maintenance.



         d.   Trees shall be staked and tied with lodge poles. 
Stakes and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct functions. 
Ties shall be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or girdling on trunks or
branches.



         e.   Street trees planted within public right-of-way
and/or trees planted adjacent to public sidewalk shall be provided with root
barriers subject to Development Services Director review and approval.



      7.   Property maintenance.  Property owners shall maintain
all structures, including buildings, paved areas, accessory buildings and
signs in the manner required to protect the health and safety of users,
occupants, and the general public.  The property shall be deemed substandard
when it displays evidences of a substantial number of dilapidated conditions
including, but not limited to the following:



         a.   Faulty, sagging or leaking roof;



         b.   Improper weatherization of building siding
materials such as chipped or worn paint, wood siding showing signs of dry
rot, cracked or chipped stucco and dented or rusted metal siding;



         c.   Broken or missing windows and sign panels;



         d.   Inadequate site drainage or standing water adjacent
to building foundations;



         e.   Broken or inoperable sanitary and plumbing
facilities;



         f.   Broken or missing foundation and attic vent screens
and window screens; and



         g.   Structural deficiencies.



   F.   Distance between buildings.  No requirements.



   G.   Coverage by structures.  Lot area coverage by buildings or
structures shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.



   H.   Off-street parking and loading.  The provisions of §
20.08.040 of this title shall apply.



   I.   Access.  All lots shall have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of
access on a dedicated and improved street.



   J.   Signs. 



      1.   Permitted signs.



         a.   Temporary signage per city standards.



         b.   Tenant signs must be approved prior to installation.



         c.   Except as provided herein, the provisions of
Chapter 20.28 of this title shall apply.



      2.   Colors.  Colors, materials, and finishes are to be
coordinated on all exterior elevations of the buildings and walls to achieve
total continuity of design.  Samples of exterior elevations (colors and
textures) shall be submitted for review prior to permit issuance.



      3.   Lighting.



         a.   Parking lot lighting fixtures are to have an
overall maximum height that is consistent with the height of the buildings
themselves.  Walkway lighting fixtures are to have an overall maximum height
of fourteen (14) feet.



         b.   Cut-off exterior light fixtures and their location
shall be submitted on a plan for review.



         c.   Security lighting fixtures are not to project above
the fascia or parapet of the building and are to be shielded or recessed in
the building walls to provide cut-off at the property line.



   K.   Outdoor storage, uses, and waste disposal.



      1.   Outdoor storage and activities associated with permitted
uses shall be entirely enclosed by building walls or by a solid masonry wall
not less than seven (7) feet in height located at the front setback line. 
On all other property lines said uses shall be enclosed by buildings, solid
masonry walls, vine covered chain-link fences, or uniformly compact evergreen
hedges, continuously maintained and not less than seven (7) feet in height. 
Items stored within one hundred (100) feet of a dedicated street or
residential zone shall not be stacked higher than six (6) feet.  Screen
landscaping, fences and walls to enclose storage areas between adjoining
industrial side and/or rear property lines may be deleted by mutual agreement
of the property owners involved.



      2.   The storage of combustible materials shall be not less
than twenty (20) feet from any interior lot line, and a roadway shall be
provided, graded, surfaced, and maintained from the street to the rear of the
property to permit free access of fire trucks at any time.



      3.   a.   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a
subject lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot
by natural causes or forces.  All waste materials shall be stored in an
enclosed area and shall be accessible to service vehicles.



         b.   Wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required
enclosures.



      4.   All exterior electrical cage enclosures and storage tanks
are to be screened from view from access or adjacent streets and residential
neighborhoods, by a fence, wall, or mature landscape materials. 



      5.   Trash storage method and location. 



         a.   Trash enclosure location shall be subject to the
approval of the Development Services Department.



         b.   Trash enclosure shall be of masonry construction or
approved alternate material.  Structural design and gates shall be in
accordance with city standards.



   L.   Metal buildings.  Buildings or structures having exterior
walls of sheet metal shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty (150)
feet from the property line along any freeway, major or secondary highway, or
closer than one hundred (100) feet from the property line along any other
dedicated street, except that said buildings or structures may be located
closer to the street if any of the following conditions prevail:



      1.   The sheet metal comprises twenty-five percent (25%) or
less of the exterior wall area of said building or structures; or



      2.   The sheet metal consists of panels with baked enamel or
similar finish; or



      3.   Said building or structure is concealed from view from
the public street by walls, fences, landscaping, or other buildings or
structures.



   M.   Mechanical equipment and duct work.



      1.   All roof mounted mechanical equipment and/or duct work,
which projects vertically more than one and one-half (1½) feet above the
roof or roof parapet and is visible from an adjoining street is to be
screened by an enclosure which is detailed consistently with the building.



      2.   All roof mounted mechanical equipment and/or ductwork,
which projects one and one-half (1½) feet or more above the roof or roof
parapet is to be painted in its entirety consistent with the color scheme of
the building in all cases.



      3.   No mechanical equipment except for emergency equipment is
to be exposed on the wall surface of a building.



      4.   Plans for cyclone blowers, bag houses, tanks, etc., shall
be reviewed at the time of preliminary plan check to determine design
integration with buildings and adjacent area.  Furthermore, they shall be
painted to match the surface to which attached.



      5.   Incinerator vents are to be located on the rear or
“hidden” side of the building whenever possible.



   N.   The provisions of this section shall apply to all proposed
development within the M-1 (Light Industrial) Zone except:  Where a parcel
or lot in the M-1 (Light Industrial) Zone is proposed for the development of
off-site hazardous waste facilities, a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet
from any sensitive population property lines is required, in addition to the
required development standards in the M-1 (Light Industrial) Zone. 



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 708, passed 1-20-81; Am. Ord. 873,
passed 9-5-89; Am. Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.252.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title (Plan Review) shall apply
to all proposed development within the M-1 (Light Industrial) Zone. 
Additionally, all property zoned M-1 and located within three hundred (300)
feet of an “R” (Residentially) zoned property shall not be developed
except upon the previous approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to §
20.408.030 of this title.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 587, passed 4-20-76; Am. Ord. 963,
passed 1-17-95)



§ 20.252.060  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All uses in the M-1 (Light Industrial) Zone shall comply with the
provisions of Chapter 20.20 of this title (Performance Standards).



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 772, passed 4-16-85)



CHAPTER 20.256:  M-2 GENERAL
INDUSTRIAL ZONE



Section



   20.256.010   Intent and purpose



   20.256.020   Uses permitted



   20.256.030   Uses prohibited



   20.256.040   Property development standards



   20.256.050   Plan review



   20.256.060   Performance standards



§ 20.256.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the M-2 Zone is to preserve the lands of the city
appropriate for heavy industrial uses, to protect these lands from intrusion
by dwellings and inharmonious commercial uses, to promote uniform and orderly
industrial development, to protect property values, to foster an efficient
and aesthetically pleasant industrial zone, to attract and encourage the
location of desirable industrial plants, to provide an industrial environment
which will be conducive to good employee relations and pride on the part of
all citizens of the community, and to provide proper safeguards and
appropriate transition for surrounding land uses.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.256.020  USES PERMITTED.



   No buildings or structures or land shall be used and no building or
structures shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:



   A.   Principal permitted uses.



      1.   Uses permitted in the M-1 Zone, § 20.252.020.A. of this
title.



      2.   Manufacturing.  Subject to the conditions of this zone,
manufacturing, assembling, repairing, testing, processing and warehousing of
products in an enclosed building may be conducted, other than those which may
be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
noise, vibration or other similar causes detrimental to the public health,
safety or general welfare, including but not limited to the following:



      Automobiles, trucks and trailers



      Battery rebuilding and manufacture



      Burial vaults and caskets



      Candles



      Canvas



      Carpets and rugs



      Cement products



      Chalk



      Clay pipe and clay products



      Composition wallboard



      Glass, but excluding blast furnaces



      Glazed tile



      Graphite and graphite products



      Hemp products



      Ink



      Jute products



      Metal foil



      Missiles and missile components, excluding explosive fuels



      Motors and generators



      Paraffin products



      Plastics



      Porcelain products



      Pulp goods



      Pumice



      Putty



      Railroad equipment



      Sand and lime products



      Sisal products



      Starch and dextrine



      Steel products



      Stone products



      Structural steel products



      Tile



      Wire and wire products



      3.   Machinery manufacture, including electrical,
agricultural, construction, mining and petroleum extraction, air conditioning
equipment, dishwashers, dryers, furnaces, heaters, stoves, and washing
machines.



      4.   Machine tool manufacture, including metal lathes, presses
and stamping machines, and woodworking machines.



      5.   Manufacturing of chemicals and chemical products, except
those requiring a conditional use permit.



      6.   Transit and transportation terminals, repair and storage
facilities.



      7.   Lumber processing and woodworking, including planing
mills, plywood, veneering, wood preserving, and laminating.



      8.   Contractors yards and shops, including building, masonry,
painting, concrete, electrical, plumbing, refrigeration, roofing, heating and
air conditioning.



      9.   Electrical distribution substations, electrical
transmission substations, gas metering and regulating stations, public
utility buildings and service and storage yards, and steam electric
generating stations including microwave facilities incorporated as part of a
public utility installation.



      10.   Retailing of trucks, campers, and other vehicles and
repair thereof.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.  The
following uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit
application in accordance with the provisions of § 20.408.030 of this title:



      1.   Manufacturing of:



         Acetylene



         Ammonia



         Aniline dyes



         Asphalt or asphalt products



         Bleaching powder



         Bronze, babbit metal and similar alloys



         Carbide



         Carbolic, hydrochloric, picric and sulfuric acid



         Caustic soda



         Cellulose and celluloid



         Cellophane



         Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris



         Charcoal, lampblack or fuel briquettes



         Chlorine



         Creosote



         Exterminating agents



         Fertilizer



         Film



         Gas



         Lacquer, shellac, turpentine, varnish or calcimine
(Kalsomine)



         Linoleum or oil cloth



         Matches



         Nitrating of cotton and other materials



         Phenol



         Potash



         Phroxylin



         Rubber (natural or synthetic)



         Soap, tallow, grease and lard



      2.   Storage of:



         Automobiles and other vehicles purchased for wrecking
operations



         House mover's equipment and buildings moved from other
locations



         Oil or gas within three hundred (300) feet of any
residential zone, school or park



         Oil or gas in amounts of two thousand five hundred (2,500)
barrels or more



         Sand, gravel, rock or decomposed granite in amounts of two
thousand (2,000) tons or more



         Used building materials or secondhand buildings



      3.   Salvage yards, wrecking and disposal activities of the
following kind (not including hazardous waste facilities): 



         Automobile wrecking and salvage



         Dumps, including garbage and trash disposal



         Industrial salvage materials, waste metal, rag, clothing,
glass, and other salvage operations 



         Sewage disposal plants



      4.   Breweries, distilleries and wineries.



      5.   Heavy metal works of the following kinds:



         Boiler works



         Drop forge industries



         Drop hammers



         Forges, foundries, and forging works



         Metal and metal ore reduction



         Rolling mills



      6.   Refining of petroleum and petroleum products.



      7.   Distilling of alcohol.



      8.   Asphalt, concrete and earth products activities of the
following kinds:



         Asphalt batching plants



         Concrete mixing and batching plants



         Rock crushing plants and aggregate dryers



         Sandblasting plants



      9.   Also the following:



         Butane service and filling stations



         Radio transmitter towers, higher than fifty (50) feet above
ground level



      10.   Outdoor manufacturing or processing.



      11.   All industrial uses not specifically listed as principal
permitted uses in paragraph A. of this section.



      12.   Gasoline service stations, subject to the provisions of
§ 20.228.020.B.3 of this title. (C-N Zone). 



      13.   Notwithstanding § 20.256.030 of this chapter, overnight
parking of campers and other pleasure vehicles for not to exceed fourteen
(14) nights, where the activity is conducted incidental to a business of
repairing such vehicles. 



      14.   Vehicle sales, new and used (outside use permitted). 



      15.   Alcoholic sales; on-sale only. 



      16.   Off-site hazardous waste facility subject to Health and
Reactivity rating above three (3) in accordance with the NFPA 704 System,
National Fire Protection Association or equivalent. 



      17.   Astrology, fortune-telling, etc.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 464, passed 4-27-70; Am. Ord. 484,
passed 5-24-71; Am. Ord. 689, passed 1-15-80; Am. Ord. 761, passed 9-18-84;
Am. Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92; Am. Ord. 965, passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. 1092,
passed 5-16-06; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 6-21-11)



§ 20.256.030  USES PROHIBITED.



   Residential uses, except caretakers' quarters.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.256.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The property development standards of the M-1 Zone shall apply to all
property in the M-2 Zone except:



   A.   Where an M-2 Zone abuts any other industrial or commercial
zoning district classification, a yard area of fifty (50) feet shall be
maintained along said abutting district.  This yard may be used for parking.



   B.   Where a parcel or lot in the M-2 Zone is proposed for the
development of a hazardous waste facility, a distance of one thousand (1,000)
from any sensitive population property lines is required, in addition to the
required development standards of the M-1 Zone.  The one thousand (1,000)
foot shall be measured from property lines of the subject property.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 924, passed 8-4-92)



§ 20.256.050  PLAN REVIEW.



   The provisions of § 20.408.040 of this title (Plan Review) shall apply
to all proposed developments within the M-2 (General Industrial) Zone. 
Additionally, all property zoned M-2 and located within three hundred (300)
feet of any “R” (Residentially) zoned property shall not be developed
except upon the previous approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to §
20.408.030 of this title.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 772, passed 4-16-85; Am. Ord. 963,
passed 1-17-95)



§ 20.256.060  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All uses in the M-2 (General Industrial) Zone shall comply with the
provisions of Chapter 20.20 of this title (Performance Standards).



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 772, passed 4-16-85)



CHAPTER 20.258: MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS



Section



   20.258.010   Mixed-use zoning districts



   20.258.020   General development standards for the mixed-use zoning
districts



   20.258.030   Specific development standards for all mixed-use
projects



§ 20.258.010  MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS.



   A.   Purpose and intent of Mixed-Use zoning districts.



      1.   Mixed-Use I.



         a.   This zoning district provides areas for intense,
mixed-use urban environments that offer opportunities for people to live,
work, shop, and recreate without having to use their vehicles. This
designation encourages vertical and horizontal integration of compatible
residential and nonresidential uses, whereby the uses share the same
structure or parcel. The Mixed-Use I designation applies to Downtown Brea,
including the Birch Street Corridor, as well as other sites located
throughout the community with ready access to major roadways and public
transit. Land uses specifically prohibited within the Mixed-Use I designation
include the manufacturing and processing of goods and materials, and any
warehousing. Public and private walkways and related facilities may be
established within the Mixed-Use I designation.



         b.   The residential density range is 12.1 to 50
dwelling units per acre. The maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR) is 3.00.
Residential densities at the higher end of the range will only be allowed for
developments that clearly incorporate a mix of uses.



      2.   Mixed-Use II.



         a.   This zoning district provides opportunities for the
coordinated development of urban villages that offer a diverse range of
complementary land uses in close proximity to one another. Either vertical or
horizontal integration of uses is allowed, with an emphasis on tying together
the uses with appropriate pedestrian linkages. Residential densities at the
higher end of the scale will be allowed for developments that clearly
integrate uses.



         b.   The Mixed-Use II designation applies to larger
properties that would benefit from a coordinated, integrated approach to
development. Development densities and intensities at the upper end of the
stated range will only be allowed for those projects that include public
and/or private educational facilities, as well as functional and attractive
public open space amenities. Land uses specifically prohibited within the
Mixed-Use II designation include the manufacturing and processing of goods
and materials, and any warehousing. Public and private walkways and related
facilities may be established within the Mixed-Use II designation.



         c.   The residential density range is 6.1 to 40 dwelling
units per acre. The maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR) is 2.00.
Residential densities at the higher end of the range will only be allowed for
developments that clearly incorporate a mix of uses.



      3. Mixed-Use III.



         a.   This zoning district provides opportunities for the
revitalization of deteriorated commercial corridors and centers located on
arterials by allowing the development of neighborhood-serving commercial uses
and vary intensity offices paired with residential uses. Either vertical or
horizontal integration of uses is allowed, with an emphasis on tying together
the uses through appropriate pedestrian linkages, parking, and public open
space (e.g., linkage parks or small plazas). Because of the linear nature of
this district, building forms would be less intense than those allowed in
either Mixed-Use I or Mixed-Use II and site design will provide a transition
from the arterial street frontage to residential properties located behind
the Mixed-Use III property. In essence, the Mixed-Use III development will
serve as a buffer between the street and the residential development.



         b.   The Mixed-Use III designation applies to properties
that front Brea Boulevard and a portion of Imperial Highway. Land uses
specifically prohibited within the Mixed-Use III designation include
regional-serving retail uses, general industrial uses, and any warehousing.
Additionally, nonresidential uses and access serving nonresidential
developments (except for live/work developments) shall not be allowed on
Walnut Avenue.



         c.   The residential density range is 6.1 to 18 dwelling
units per acre. The maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR) is 1.00.
Residential densities at the higher end of the range will only be allowed for
developments that clearly incorporate a mix of uses.



   B.   Allowable land uses. Table 2-2 indicates the uses allowed
within the MU-I, MU-II, and the MU-III zoning districts, and the land use
permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Division 5
(Planning Permit Procedures).



   C.   Prohibited land uses. Any table cell with a "--" means that the
listed land use is prohibited in that specific Mixed-Use zoning district.



   D.   Land uses not listed. For land uses not listed in Table 2-2,
the provisions of § 20.408.010 (Administrative Interpretation) shall apply.



   E.   Plan or precise development review required.  Depending on the
size of the construction



activity (see Table 2-1), all construction activities (e.g., additions,
alterations, construction, reconstruction, or remodeling) may require review
and approval in compliance with §§  20.260.050 ( Special Provisions) and
20.408.040 (Plan Review).



   F.   Applicable sections. Where the last column in the tables ("See
Section") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced
section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this
zoning code may also apply.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



 


TABLE 2-1
REVIEW AUTHORITY CHART




TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY

 

Role of Review Authority (1)




CITY PLANNER (Plan Check)

 

DIRECTOR (Plan Review)

 

PLANNING COMMISSION (Precise Development Review)





Facade improvements, only when not visible from a public right-of-way
 

Decision

 


 




Nonresidential construction, up to a maximum of 25% of the existing gross
floor area
 

Decision

 


 




Residential construction, up to a maximum of 25% of the existing gross floor
area, but no additional dwelling units
 

Decision

 


 




Tenant improvements
 

Decision

 


 




Facade improvements, only when visible from a public right-of-way
 


 

Decision

 




Nonresidential construction, up to a maximum of 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area
 


 

Decision

 




Residential construction, up to a maximum of four dwelling units
 


 

Decision

 




Nonresidential construction, 10,000 square feet or more of gross floor area
 


 


 

Decision



Residential construction, five or more dwelling units
 


 


 

Decision



NOTE:
(1)   The review authority identified in the table above may defer action
and refer the request to the next higher review authority for the final
decision.




 



 


TABLE 2-2
ALLOWABLE USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS





Key to Table:

P      Permitted Use

C      Conditional Use - Conditional Use Permit required (§ 20.408.030)

"--"      Use not allowed


LAND USE
 
PERMIT REQUIREMENT



MU-I

 

MU-II

 

MU-III

 

See Section



COMMUNICATION, TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITY FACILITIES (1)


Alternative fuels and recharging facilities as an accessory use
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Motor vehicle parking lot/structure facilities
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Public utility services offices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Major wireless communications facilities
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




EDUCATION, PUBLIC ASSEMBLY, AND RELIGIOUS FACILITIES (1)


Clubs or lodges
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Commercial trade schools
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Educational institutions, private
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Meeting halls, places of worship
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Studios: art, dance, martial arts, music, photography, etc.
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES (1)


Health/fitness centers
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Indoor amusement/arcade, entertainment/recreation centers
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Nightclubs with or without food service, bar
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Theaters, auditoriums, indoors
 

C

 

C

 

--

 




Theaters, movie
 

C

 

C

 

--

 




Theaters, outdoors
 

C

 

C

 

--

 




NOTE:
(1)   Nonresidential developments (e.g. education, public assembly, and
religious facilities, entertainment and recreational facilities,
public/semi-public facilities, retail trade and service facilities) and
access serving nonresidential developments (except for live/work facilities)
shall not be allowed on Walnut Avenue.




 



 


TABLE 2-2
ALLOWABLE USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS



Key to Table:

P      Permitted Use

C      Conditional Use - Conditional Use Permit required (§ 20.408.030)

"--"      Use not allowed


LAND USE
 
PERMIT REQUIREMENT



MU-I

 

MU-II

 

MU-III

 

See Section



PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC FACILITIES (1)




Community/recreational centers
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Government services (city, county, state or federal)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Libraries
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Museums
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Post offices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




RESIDENTIAL (Dwelling units not allowed as a stand-alone use on Brea
Boulevard or Imperial Highway)


Accessory uses and structures
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

20.08.035.F and 20.xx.xxx



Assisted living facilities
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Boarding houses
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Caretaker/employee housing
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Home occupations
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Live/work facilities
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Mixed-use developments
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

20.158.010.E



Multi-family dwelling units
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Residential care facilities
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Single-family dwelling units (attached)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Single-family dwelling units (detached)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Townhouses (e.g. rowhouses)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Two-family dwelling units
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




NOTE:
(1)   Nonresidential developments (e.g. education, public assembly, and
religious facilities, entertainment and recreational facilities,
public/semi-public facilities, retail trade and service facilities) and
access serving nonresidential developments (except for live/work facilities)
shall not be allowed on Walnut Avenue.




 



 


TABLE 2-2
ALLOWABLE USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS





Key to Table:

P      Permitted Use

C      Conditional Use - Conditional Use Permit required (§ 20.408.030)

"--"      Use not allowed


LAND USE
 
PERMIT REQUIREMENT



MU-I

 

MU-II

 

MU-III

 

See Section



RETAIL TRADE (1)


Accessory retail uses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Department stores
 

P

 

P

 

--

 




Furniture/furnishings, rentals, repair, sales and service stores
 

P

 

P

 

--

 




Garden centers/nursery (indoors)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Garden centers (outdoors)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Liquor stores (off-site consumption only)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Mini-markets
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Motor vehicle parts and supplies, no repair or outdoor storage
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Outdoor retail sales and activities (as a primary use) (Carts/kiosks)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

20.72.040.C



Retail stores, general merchandise, up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Retail stores, general merchandise, 5,000 square feet or more, up to a
maximum of 10,000 square feet or gross floor area
 

P

 

P

 

C

 




Retail stores, general merchandise, over 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area
 

P

 

P

 

--

 




Shopping centers
 

P

 

P

 

--

 




Temporary uses/activities
 

TUP

 

TUP

 

TUP

 




Warehouse retail stores
 

--

 

P

 

--

 




NOTE:
(1)   Nonresidential developments (e.g. education, public assembly, and
religious facilities, entertainment and recreational facilities,
public/semi-public facilities, retail trade and service facilities) and
access serving nonresidential developments (except for live/work facilities)
shall not be allowed on Walnut Avenue.




 



 


TABLE 2-2
ALLOWABLE USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS





Key to Table:

P      Permitted Use

C      Conditional Use - Conditional Use Permit required (§ 20.408.030)

"--"      Use not allowed


LAND USE
 
PERMIT REQUIREMENT



MU-I

 

MU-II

 

MU-III

 

See Section



SERVICES (1)


Acupuncture clinics
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Automated teller machines (ATMs)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Banks and financial services
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Barber, beauty, nail shops, massage
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Bars/liquor establishments (on-site consumption only)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Business support services
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Catering services
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Check cashing services
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Child day care facilities
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Community care facilities
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Convalescent/rest homes and hospitals
 

C

 

C

 

--

 




Cyber cafes
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Dry cleaning service, drop-off only
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Equipment rental establishments (indoor only)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Hotels or motels
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Laundromats, self-service
 

P

 

P

 

C

 




Locksmith shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Medial/dental offices or clinics
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Medical services, laboratories
 

--

 

P

 

P

 




NOTE:
(1)   Nonresidential developments (e.g. education, public assembly, and
religious facilities, entertainment and recreational facilities,
public/semi-public facilities, retail trade and service facilities) and
access serving nonresidential developments (except for live/work facilities)
shall not be allowed on Walnut Avenue.




 



 


TABLE 2-2
ALLOWABLE USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS





Key to Table:

P      Permitted Use

C      Conditional Use - Conditional Use Permit required (§ 20.408.030)

"--"      Use not allowed


LAND USE
 
PERMIT REQUIREMENT



MU-I

 

MU-II

 

MU-III

 

See Section



SERVICES (1)  (Cont'd)


Motor vehicle leasing/rental (office only; no vehicles on-site)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Offices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Personal services, general (does not include uses defined under personal
services, limited)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Photocopy/desktop facilities
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Photography studios/supply shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Printing and publishing (under 5,000 square feet)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Repair/maintenance, consumer products
 

--

 

P

 

P

 




Restaurants, fast food, with or without outdoor seating.  No drive- thru
facilities allowed.
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Restaurants, sit-down
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Restaurants, specialty foods
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Restaurants with alcohol sales
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

20.408.030



Restaurants with drive-thru facilities
 

--

 

C

 

C

 




Reverse vending machine(s) recycling facilities
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Ticket agencies
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Travel agencies
 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Veterinarian clinic/services and small animal hospitals (overnight stays
allowed)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 




NOTE:
(1)   Nonresidential developments (e.g. education, public assembly, and
religious facilities, entertainment and recreational facilities,
public/semi-public facilities, retail trade and service facilities) and
access serving nonresidential developments (except for live/work facilities)
shall not be allowed on Walnut Avenue.




 



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



§ 20.258.020  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE MIXED-USE ZONING
DISTRICTS.



   New land uses and structures, and alterations to existing uses or
structures, shall be designed, constructed and/or established in compliance
with the following:



   A.   Compliance with Tables 2-3 through 2-8 required. Requirements
in Tables 2-3 through 2-8 below.



   B.   General development standards. General development standards
(e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, signs, etc.) in Division 3 (Site
Planning and General Development and Operational Standards).



   C.   Design guidelines. Applicable design guidelines in Chapter
20.xx (Design Guidelines).



   D.    Plan reviews. Design review process in  § 20.408.040.



   E.   Minimum parcel sizes and dimensions. In Tables 2-3 through 2-8,
below, the standards for minimum project size, parcel width, and parcel depth
are intended to regulate sites for development purposes only and are not
intended to establish minimum dimensions for ownership or leasehold (e.g.,
condominium) purposes.



   F. Live/work development projects. Live/work development projects shall
be treated as nonresidential projects and regulated by Tables 2-3 through
2-5, below.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



 


TABLE 2-3
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE
I ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-I

 

NOTES





Minimum project size (1)
 

7,000 square feet

 
(1)   The standards for minimum project size, parcel width and parcel
depth are intended to regulate sites for development purposes only and are
not intended to establish minimum dimensions for ownership or leasehold (e.g.
condominium) purposes.


Minimum parcel width (1)
 

50 feet



Minimum parcel depth (1)
 

120 feet



Minimum/maximum allowable density range for residential uses
 

12.1 to 50 du/acre



Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential uses
 

3.00




Minimum setbacks



Front and street side along Ash Street, Birch Street, Brea Boulevard and
Imperial Highway
 

None permitted (A), except for allowable plazas and outdoor dining areas/uses



Front
 

None




Side (interior, each)



Single-story
 

None (B)



Second-story and above, if residential
 

10 feet (B)



Side, street
 

None



Side, adjoining, residential uses
 

10 feet (C)



Rear, if nonresidential adjoining nonresidential
 

None (D)



Rear, if residential or if nonresidential adjoining residential uses
 

10 feet (D)



Parking area setbacks (front and street side). (No parking adjacent to Brea
Boulevard or Imperial Highway allowed, except in the upper floors of a
parking structure.)
 

5 feet



Minimum distance between structures located on the same parcel
 

None



Maximum structure height
 

100 feet



Minimum common residential open space for multi-family dwellings. (The
minimum dimension shall be 15 feet.)
 

75 square feet/ dwelling unit



Minimum private residential open space for multi-family dwellings.(The
minimum dimension shall be 5 feet.)
 

50 square feet/ dwelling unit



NOTE:  The letters (A), (B), (C) and (D) refer to the graphics following
this Table.




 



 


TABLE 2-3
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE
I ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-I





Accessory structures
 

Section 20.08.035.F and Section 20.xx.xxx



Landscaping
 

Section 20.236.040.M



Lighting
 

Section 20.08.040.C.5 and Section 20.220.040.L



Parking and loading
 

Section 20.08.040



Signs
 

Section 20.28



Walls and fences
 

Section 20.236.040.E and Section 20.220.040.F





 



GRAPHICS FOR TABLE 2-3
MIXED USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MU-I ZONING DISTRICT







 



 


TABLE 2-4
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE
II ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-II

 

NOTES





Minimum project size (1)
 

10,000 square feet

 
(1)   The standards for minimum project size, parcel width and parcel
depth are intended to regulate sites for development purposes only and are
not intended to establish minimum dimensions for ownership or leasehold (e.g.
condominium) purposes.


Minimum parcel width (1)
 

100 feet



Minimum parcel depth (1)
 

200 feet



Minimum/maximum allowable density range for residential uses
 

6.1 to 40 du/acre



Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential uses
 

2.00




Minimum setbacks



Front
 

None




Side (interior, each)



Single-story
 

None (E)



Second-story and above, if residential
 

10 feet (E)



Side, street
 

None



Side, adjoining, residential uses
 

10 feet (F)



Rear, if nonresidential adjoining nonresidential
 

None (G)



Rear, if residential or if nonresidential adjoining residential uses
 

10 feet (G)



Parking area setbacks (front and street side)
 

15 feet



Minimum distance between structures located on the same parcel
 

None



Maximum structure height
 

60 feet



Minimum common residential open space for multi-family dwellings. (The
minimum dimension shall be 15 feet.)
 

75 square feet/ dwelling unit



Minimum private residential open space for multi-family dwellings.(The
minimum dimension shall be 5 feet.)
 

50 square feet/ dwelling unit



NOTE:  The letters (E), (F), and (G) refer to the graphics following this
Table.




 



 


TABLE 2-4
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE
II ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-II





Accessory structures
 

Section 20.08.035.F and Section 20.xx.xxx



Landscaping
 

Section 20.236.040.M



Lighting
 

Section 20.08.040.C.5 and Section 20.220.040.L



Parking and loading
 

Section 20.08.040



Signs
 

Section 20.28



Walls and fences
 

Section 20.236.040.E and Section 20.220.040.F





 



GRAPHICS FOR TABLE 2-4
MIXED-USE PROJECTS IN MU-II ZONING DISTRICT







 



 


TABLE 2-5
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE
III ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-III

 

NOTES





Minimum project size (1)
 

7,000 square feet

 
(1)   The standards for minimum project size, parcel width and parcel
depth are intended to regulate sites for development purposes only and are
not intended to establish minimum dimensions for ownership or leasehold (e.g.
condominium) purposes.


Minimum parcel width (1)
 

50 feet



Minimum parcel depth (1)
 

120 feet



Minimum/maximum allowable density range for residential uses
 

6.1 to 18 du/acre



Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential uses
 

1.00



Minimum setbacks


Front and street side along Brea Boulevard and Imperial Highway



Parcels of less than one acre
 

None permitted (H), except for allowable plazas and outdoor dining areas/uses



Parcels of one acre or greater
 




At least 50% of the parcel frontage
 

None permitted (I)



Up to 50% of the parcel frontage. (No parking within setback allowed.)
 

May maintain an average setback of 10 feet (I)



Front, other than Brea Boulevard or Imperial Highway
 

None




Side (interior, each)



Single-story
 

None (J)



Second-story and above, if residential
 

10 feet (J)



Side, street, other than Brea Boulevard or Imperial Highway
 

None



Side, adjoining, residential uses
 

5 feet, average (K)



Rear, if nonresidential adjoining nonresidential
 

None (L)



Rear, if residential or if nonresidential adjoining residential uses
 

10 feet (L)



Parking area setbacks (front and street side). (No parking adjacent to Brea
Boulevard or Imperial Highway allowed, except in the upper floors of a
parking structure.)
 

5 feet



NOTE:  The letters (H), (I), (J), (K) and (L) refer to the graphics
following this Table.




 



 


TABLE 2-5
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE
III ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-III

 

NOTES





Minimum distance between structures located on the same parcel
 

None

 


Maximum structure height
 
35 feet


Minimum common residential open space for multi-family dwellings.(The minimum
dimension shall be 15 feet.)
 
75 square feet/ dwelling unit


Minimum private residential open space for multi-family dwellings. (The
minimum dimension shall be 5 feet.)
 
50 square feet/ dwelling unit


Maximum parcel coverage
 
65%


Accessory structures
 

Section 20.08.035.F and Section 20.xx.xxx



Landscaping
 

Section 20.236.040.M



Lighting
 

Section 20.08.040.C.5 and Section 20.220.040.L



Parking and Loading
 

Section 20.08.040



Signs
 

Section 20.28



Walls and fences
 

Section 20.236.040.E and Section 20.220.040.F





 



GRAPHICS FOR TABLE 2-5
MIXED-USE PROJECTS IN MU-III ZONING DISTRICT







 



 


TABLE 2-6
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR "STAND ALONE" RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE I
ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-I

 

NOTES





Minimum project size (1)
 

2,500 square feet

 
(1)   The standards for minimum project size, parcel width and parcel
depth are intended to regulate sites for development purposes only and are
not intended to establish minimum dimensions for ownership or leasehold (e.g.
condominium) purposes.

 

(2)   For structures located on Ash Street, Birch Street, or Brea
Boulevard, north of Imperial Highway, there is no minimum setback
requirement. All other setbacks shall be measured from the structure face to
the nearest property line.

 

(3)   Low level patio walls may encroach into the required front or street
side setback up to a maximum of 5 feet.

 

(4)   In projects with subterranean parking, structure heights shall be
measured from the top of the parking deck. For structures located on Ash
Street, Birch Street, or Brea Boulevard, the maximum structure height shall
be 55 feet.


Minimum parcel width (1)
 

None



Minimum parcel depth (1)
 

None



Minimum/maximum allowable density range for residential uses
 

12.1 to 50 du/acre



Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential uses
 

3.00




Minimum setbacks (2) front and street side along Ash Street, Birch Street,
Brea Boulevard and Imperial Highway



Single-story
 

5 feet (M)



Second-story and above
 

10 feet (M)



Front (3)
 

15 feet (N)



Side (interior, each)
 

5 feet (O)



Side, street (3)
 

15 feet (O)



Side, adjoining, residential uses
 

10 feet (O)



Rear
 

5 feet  (P)



Rear, adjoining nonresidential  uses
 

10 feet (P)



Parking area setbacks (front and street side). (No parking adjacent to Brea
Boulevard or Imperial Highway allowed, except in the upper floors of a
parking structure.)
 




5 feet



Minimum distance between structures located on the same parcel
 

None



Maximum structure height (4)
 

100 feet



Minimum common open space for multi-family dwellings.(The minimum dimension
shall be 15 feet.)
 

100 square feet/ dwelling unit



Minimum private open space for multi-family dwellings. (The minimum dimension
shall be 8 feet.)
 

75 square feet/ dwelling unit



NOTE:  The letters (M), (N), (O), and (P) refer to the graphics following
this Table.




 



 


TABLE 2-6
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR "STAND ALONE" RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE I
ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-I





Accessory structures
 

Section 20.08.035.F and Section 20.xx.xxx



Landscaping
 

Section 20.236.040.M



Lighting
 

Section 20.08.040.C.5 and Section 20.220.040.L



Parking and loading
 

Section 20.08.040



Signs
 

Section 20.28



Walls and fences
 

Section 20.236.040.E and Section 20.220.040.F





 



GRAPHICS FOR TABLE 2-6
"STAND ALONE" RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MU-I ZONING DISTRICT







 



 


TABLE 2-7
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR "STAND ALONE" RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE II
ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-II

 

NOTES





Minimum project size (1)
 

2,500 square feet

 
(1)   The standards for minimum project size, parcel width and parcel
depth are intended to regulate sites for development purposes only and are
not intended to establish minimum dimensions for ownership or leasehold (e.g.
condominium) purposes.

 

(2)   Low level patio walls may encroach into the required front or street
side setback up to a maximum of 5 feet.

 

(3)   In projects with subterranean parking, structure heights shall be
measured from the top of the parking deck.


Minimum parcel width (1)
 

None



Minimum parcel depth (1)
 

None



Minimum/maximum allowable density range for residential uses
 

6.1 to 40 du/acre



Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential uses
 

2.00




Minimum setbacks



Front (2)
 

15 feet (Q)



Side (interior, each)
 

5 feet (R)



Side, street (2)
 

15 feet (R)



Side, adjoining, nonresidential uses
 

10 feet (R)



Rear
 

15 feet  (S)



Rear, adjoining nonresidential  uses
 

20 feet (S)



Parking area setbacks (front and street side)
 

15 feet



Minimum distance between structures located on the same parcel
 

None



Maximum structure height (3)
 

60 feet



Minimum common open space for multi-family units.(The minimum dimension shall
be 15 feet.)
 

100 square feet/ dwelling unit



Minimum private open space for multi-family units. (The minimum dimension
shall be 8 feet.)
 

75 square feet/ dwelling unit



Accessory structures
 
Section 20.08.035.F and Section 20.xx.xxx


Landscaping
 
Section 20.236.040.M


Lighting
 
Section 20.08.040.C.5 and Section 20.220.040.L


Parking and loading
 
Section 20.08.040


Signs
 
Section 20.28


Walls and fences
 
Section 20.236.040.E and Section 20.220.040.F


NOTE:  The letters (Q), (R), and (S) refer to the graphics following this
Table.




 



GRAPHICS FOR TABLE 2-7
"STAND ALONE" RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MU-II ZONING DISTRICT







 



 


TABLE 2-8
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR "STAND ALONE" RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE III
ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-III

 

NOTES





Minimum project size (1)
 

7,000 square feet

 
(1)   The standards for minimum project size, parcel width and parcel
depth are intended to regulate sites for development purposes only and are
not intended to establish minimum dimensions for ownership or leasehold (e.g.
condominium) purposes.

 

(2)   Low level patio walls may encroach into the required front or street
side setback up to a maximum of 5 feet.

 

(3)   In projects with subterranean parking, structure heights shall be
measured from the top of the parking deck.


Minimum parcel width (1)
 

50 feet



Minimum parcel depth (1)
 

120 feet



Minimum/maximum allowable density range for residential uses
 

6.1 to 14 du/acre (See Section 20.258.030.A.4)



Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential uses
 

1.00



Minimum setbacks. Front and street side along Brea Boulevard and Imperial
Highway
 

Stand alone residential not allowed on Brea Boulevard or Imperial Highway



Front, other than Brea Boulevard or Imperial Highway (2)
 

15 feet (T)



Side (interior, each)
 

5 feet (U)



Side, street other than Brea Boulevard or Imperial Highway (2)
 

15 feet (U)



Side, adjoining, nonresidential uses
 

10 feet (U)



Rear
 

15 feet  (V)



Rear, adjoining nonresidential  uses
 

20 feet (V)



Parking area setbacks (front and street side). No parking adjacent to Brea
Boulevard or Imperial Highway allowed, except in the upper floors of a
parking structure.)
 




5 feet



Minimum distance between structures located on the same parcel
 

None



Maximum structure height (3)
 

35 feet



Minimum common open space for multi-family dwellings.(The minimum dimension
shall be 15 feet.)
 

100 square feet/ dwelling unit



Minimum private open space for multi-family dwellings. (The minimum dimension
shall be 8 feet.)
 

75 square feet/ dwelling unit



Maximum parcel coverage (not including parking decks)
 
65%


NOTE:  The letters (T), (U), and (V) refer to the graphics following this
Table.




 



 


TABLE 2-8
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR "STAND ALONE" RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MIXED-USE III
ZONING DISTRICT



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

MU-III





Accessory structures
 

Section 20.08.035.F and Section 20.xx.xxx



Landscaping
 

Section 20.236.040.M



Lighting
 

Section 20.08.040.C.5 and Section 20.220.040.L



Parking and loading
 

Section 20.08.040



Signs
 

Section 20.28



Walls and fences
 

Section 20.236.040.E and Section 20.220.040.F





 



GRAPHICS FOR TABLE 2-8
"STAND ALONE" RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS IN MU-III ZONING DISTRICT







 



§ 20.258.030  SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ALL MIXED-USE PROJECTS.



   This section provides standards for the development of mixed-use
projects. The primary intent of these development standards is to balance the
needs of nonresidential uses for access, visibility, parking, loading,
safety, and possibly extended hours of operation with the needs of
residential uses for privacy, security, and relative quiet.



   A.   Integration of uses.



      1.   Integration defined. Potential ways to integrate the uses
allowed in MU-I (Mixed Use I), MU-II (Mixed-Use II), and MU-III (Mixed-Use
III) zoning districts include:



         a.   Vertical integration. A mix of nonresidential uses
(i.e., commercial, retail, and/or office) located on the ground floor with
residential dwelling units located above.



         b.   Horizontal integration. A mix of nonresidential
uses located on the primary street frontage of a parcel and residential uses
located at the rear of a parcel.



         c.   Combined approach. A combination of vertical and
horizontal integration of nonresidential and residential uses.



      2.   MU-I zoning districts. In MU-I (Mixed-Use I) zoning
districts, nonresidential and residential uses shall be vertically integrated
whenever possible; however, stand-alone residential projects and stand-alone
nonresidential projects are allowed when planned and designed as an
integrated element of a larger mixed-use development area.



      3.   MU-II zoning districts. In MU-II (Mixed-Use II) zoning
districts, both vertical and/or horizontal integration of nonresidential and
residential uses shall be allowed; however, stand-alone residential projects
and stand-alone nonresidential projects are allowed when planned and designed
as an integrated element of a larger mixed-use development area.



      4.   MU-Ill zoning districts. In MU-III (Mixed-Use III) zoning
districts, both vertical and/or horizontal integration of nonresidential and
residential uses shall be allowed subject to the following:



         a.   Parcels of one (1) acre or greater. Parcels of one
(1) acre or greater in total net area shall provide a vertical and/or
horizontal mix of nonresidential and residential uses.



         b.   Parcels of less than one (1) acre. Parcels of less
than one (1) acre in total net area may either:



            (1)   Provide a mix of nonresidential and
residential uses; or



            (2)   Incorporate stand-alone residential projects
at a maximum density of fourteen (14) du/acre or stand-alone nonresidential
projects. For parcels fronting Brea Boulevard or Imperial Highway, no
stand-alone residential projects shall be allowed. Nonresidential projects
and access serving nonresidential projects (except for live/work facilities)
shall not be allowed on Walnut Avenue.



   B.   Parcel Consolidation Incentive Program. In order to encourage
the assemblage of smaller existing parcels into larger parcels that can be
more efficiently developed into a mixed-use project, the following incentives
are offered:



      1.   Allowable incentives for parcel consolidation:



         a.   Reduction in required parking for a mixed-use
project.



         b.   Increase in maximum total sign area, up to a
maximum of twenty percent (20%).



         c.   Increase in maximum parcel coverage, up to a
maximum of ten percent (10%).



         d.   Reduction in common and/or private open space
requirements, up to a maximum of ten percent (10%).



         e.   Priority (e.g., fast-track) permit processing.



         f.   City participation in provision of infrastructure
(e.g., installation of curb, gutter, and sidewalk, installation of
streetscape, undergrounding of utilities, upgrading of utilities, etc.)



      2.   Parcel consolidation thresholds:



         a.   Consolidation of existing small parcels into a
development project site of one (1) acre or greater up to two (2) acres: Any
two (2) of the allowable incentives identified above, except for items e. and
f.



         b.   Consolidation of existing small parcels into a
development project site of two (2) acres or greater: Any four (4) of the
allowable incentives identified above.



   C.   Development standards generally. Mixed-use projects shall
comply with the development standards in this paragraph in addition to the
standards in paragraphs D through O, below.



      1.   Uses located in a single structure. For a mixed-use
project where nonresidential and residential uses are located in a single
structure, the density, floor area ratio (FAR), height of structures, parcel
depth, parcel size, parcel width, and setbacks identified in Tables 2-3
through 2-8 shall apply.



      2.   Uses located in separate structures.  For a mixed-use
project where nonresidential uses and residential uses are located in
separate structure(s), the following shall apply:



         a.   Nonresidential development.



            (1)   Tables 2-3, 2-4, and 2-5 (development
standards for mixed use and



nonresidential projects in the Mixed-Use I, Mixed Use II, and Mixed Use III
zoning districts, respectively) shall apply.



            (2)   Sections on specific nonresidential uses, if
any, in Article xx (Standards for Specific Land Uses) may apply depending
upon the type of nonresidential development being proposed.



         b.   Multi-family residential development.



            (1)   Tables 2-6, 2-7, and 2-8 (development
standards for "stand-alone" residential projects in the Mixed-Use I, Mixed
Use II, and Mixed Use Ill zoning districts, respectively) shall apply.



            (2)   Section 20.xx.xxx (Standards for Specific
Land Uses - Multi-Family Residential Development) shall apply.



   D.   Design standards.



      1.   Generally. A mixed-use development project shall be
designed and constructed to:



         a.   Be pedestrian in its focus.



         b.   Allow for vehicles to park once.



         c.   Be compatible with and complement adjacent land
uses.



         d.   Maintain the scale and character of development
along Birch Street, Brea Boulevard, and Imperial Highway, and provide a
transition to the adjacent residential uses in the surrounding area



      2.   Consistent use of architectural details and materials.
Architectural style and use of quality materials shall be consistent
throughout an entire mixed-use project. However, differences in architectural
details and/or materials may occur to differentiate between the
nonresidential and residential portions of the project. Dwelling units shall
exhibit a residential character. Loading areas and recycling and refuse
storage facilities shall be compatible in architectural design and details
with the overall project.



      3.   Features.



         a.   Street level features. Long expanses of blank walls
or an unbroken series of garage doors shall be prohibited.



         b.   Pedestrian-oriented features. At least seventy-five
percent (75%) of the building frontage facing a public street or pedestrian
way shall be devoted to pedestrian-oriented features (e.g., pedestrian
entrances; landscaping; transparent display windows; windows affording views
into retail, office, or lobby spaces, etc). The review authority may reduce
this percentage on a case-by-case basis.



         c.   Upper level features. Upper floor balconies, bays,
and windows that overlook the street shall be provided whenever opportunities
exist for such features.



         d.   Rooflines and setbacks. Projects shall provide a
variety of roof designs as determined to be suitable by the Director.



         e.   Storefronts. The design of ground floor storefronts
shall be consistent with the design guidelines for development in §
20.xx.xxx (General Commercial Design Guidelines).



         f.   Residential dwelling units. The design of a
residential portion of a mixed-use project shall be consistent with the
design guidelines for multi-family residential development in § 20.xx.xxx
(Multi-Family Residential Design Guidelines).



         g.   Live/work units. The design of a live/work unit as
a portion of a mixed-use project shall be consistent with the design
guidelines for live/work units in § 20.xx.xxx (Live/Work Design Guidelines).



         h.   Entrances. When nonresidential and residential uses
are located in the same structure, separate pedestrian entrances shall be
provided for each use. The entrances for nonresidential uses shall be
designed to visually distinct from the entrances for residential uses.



         i.   Visual relationship between multiple structures. 
Multiple structures on a single site shall be designed to create a strong
visual relationship between and among the structures. Architectural treatment
of structures shall be consistent on all sides.



         j.   Preservation of neighborhood character. The design
of new infill development shall respect, complement, and be compatible with
the scale, style, theme, and design of established structures and
neighborhoods.



   E.   Landscaping standards.



      1.   Consistent with landscaping design guidelines. The
landscaping of a mixed-use project shall be consistent with the design
guidelines for landscaping in § 20.xx.xxx (General Commercial Design
Guidelines) and in § 20.xx.xxx (Multi-Family Residential Design Guidelines).



      2.   Open space.  Common open space areas above the ground
level shall be landscaped using containerized plant materials that are
irrigated by an automatic irrigation system and adequately drained.



      3.   Street trees. Street trees shall be required in
compliance with the city's Master Street Tree Plan.



   F.   Lighting standards. Lighting for nonresidential uses shall be
appropriately designed, located, and shielded to ensure that they do not
negatively impact the residential uses in compliance with § 20.08.040.C.5
(Light and Glare).



   G.   Open space standards. The common and private open spaces
required for residential dwelling units shall be designed to limit intrusion
by nonresidents. In the case of an infill development project, the Review
Authority may approve a reduction in the required open space (common and/or
private) for the residential component of mixed-use development projects when
it finds that all reasonable attempts to fulfill the requirements have been
exhausted and the open space is not able to be accommodated due to the urban
infill characteristic of the development site.



   H.   Operational standards.



      1.   Hours of operation. Outdoor nonresidential uses in
mixed-use projects shall be prohibited from operating between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. A conditional use permit granted in compliance with
§ 20.408.030 (Conditional Use Permit) may modify these hours.



      2.   Joint tenants and owners association.



         a.   A joint tenants and owners association shall be
formed to ensure the well being of each tenant and owner in a mixed-use
project.



         b.   The association bylaws, including voting rights,
shall be subject to review by the City Attorney and approval by the Director
The association's bylaws shall include the following:



            (1)   Assignment of parking spaces per each use.



            (2)   Identification of maintenance
responsibilities for landscaping, parking facilities, and recycling and
refuse storage facilities.



            (3)   Noise notification procedures.



            (4)   Relationship between uses regarding
association representation.



            (5)   Voting procedures.



            (6)   Procedures for solving problems that may
arise between the different types of uses or residents.



      3.   Loading and unloading activities. Where applicable, the
covenants, conditions, and restrictions of a mixed-use project shall indicate
the times when the loading and unloading of goods may occur on the street,
provided that in no event shall loading or unloading take place after 10:00
p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week.



      4.   Noise notification.



         a.   Residents, whether owners or tenants, of a
mixed-use development project shall be notified in writing before taking up
residence that they will be living in an urban type of environment and that
the noise levels may be higher than a typical residential area.



         b.   The covenants, conditions, and restrictions of a
mixed-use project shall require that the residents acknowledge their receipt
of the written noise notification. Their signatures shall confirm receipt and
understanding of this information.



      5.   Nuisance mitigation. The location and design of recycling
and refuse storage facilities shall mitigate nuisances from odors when
residential uses might be impacted.



      6.   Sound mitigation. Residential dwelling units shall be
designed to be sound attenuated against present and future project noise. New
projects or new nonresidential uses in existing projects shall provide an
acoustical analysis report, by an acoustical engineer, describing the
acoustical design features of the structure required to satisfy the exterior
and interior noise standards.



   I.   Parking facilities standards.



      1.   Number of parking spaces. The total number of parking
spaces shall comply with the requirements In § 20.08.040 (Off-Street Parking
and Loading). Guest parking shall be provided for the residential dwelling
units. Applicants for a mixed-use project shall prepare and submit a parking
study (including any request for a parking reduction) for review and decision
by the applicable review authority and a parking management plan for review
and decision by the Director.



      2.   Separate or shared parking facilities. Parking facilities
may be separate or shared for nonresidential uses and residential uses. The
parking layout of a mixed-use project shall be consistent with the design
guidelines for parking in § 20.xx.xxx (General Commercial Design Guidelines)
and in  § 20.xx.xxx (Multi-Family Residential Design Guidelines).



      3.   Loading areas. Loading areas for nonresidential uses
shall be located as far as possible from residential units and shall be
completely screened from view from the residential portion of the project and
streets in compliance with subsections 20.236.040. E (Walls and Fences) and
20.220.040. F (Fences, Walls, and Hedges) and subparagraph K. (Screening and
buffering standards), below. Loading areas shall be compatible in
architectural design and details with the overall project. The location and
design of loading areas shall mitigate nuisances from odors when residential
uses might be impacted.



      4.   Site access driveways. Separate site access driveways
shall be provided, whenever possible, for nonresidential and residential
uses. Site access driveways shall incorporate distinctive architectural
elements, landscape features, and signs to help differentiate access to
nonresidential parking areas from access to residential parking areas.



      5.   Enclosed parking.  If enclosed parking is provided for
the entire mixed-use complex, separate



areas/levels shall be provided for nonresidential and residential uses with
separate building entrances, whenever possible, subject to confirmation and
approval by the applicable review authority.



      6.   Ingress and egress. Vehicular circulation shall be
designed to direct traffic away from residential streets to the greatest
extent feasible.



   J.   Recycling and refuse storage facilities standards. Recycling
and refuse storage facilities for nonresidential uses shall be located as far
as possible from residential units and shall be completely screened from view
from the residential portion of the project and streets in compliance with
§§ 20.236.040.E (Walls and Fences) and 20.220.040.F (Fences, Walls, and
Hedges) and subparagraph K (Screening and buffering standards) below.
Recycling and refuse storage facilities for nonresidential uses should be
compatible in architectural design and details with the overall project. The
location and design of trash enclosures shall mitigate nuisances from odors
when residential uses might be impacted.



   K.   Screening and buffering standards.



      1.   Loading areas and recycling and refuse storage
facilities. Loading areas and recycling and refuse storage .facilities for
nonresidential uses shall be completely screened from view from adjacent
residential portions of the project or other adjacent residential uses.



      2.   Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be
completely screened from public views from the ground elevation.



      3.   Noise-generating equipment. Noise-generating equipment
(e.g., refrigeration units, air conditioning, exhaust fans, etc.) shall
require special consideration in their location and screening in order to
avoid creating a nuisance.



   L.   Security standards. Structures shall be designed to minimize
the personal security risks of uses and to minimize the opportunities for
vandalism and theft.



   M.   Sign standards. The design of signs shall comply with Chapter
20.28 (Signs).



   N.   Site organization standards.



      1.   Limitations on location of residential uses in the
Mixed-Use III zone. In horizontal mixed-use projects along Brea Boulevard and
Imperial Highway, residential uses shall not occupy ground floor space within
the first fifty (50) feet of a parcel measured from the front property line.
In the Mixed-Use III zone, within vertical mixed-use projects along Brea
Boulevard or Imperial Highway, residential uses shall not occupy any ground
floor space, along the major street frontage, except for entry lobbies.
Residential uses may occupy street frontages along secondary/side streets as
determined by the Director.



      2.   Location of nonresidential uses along street frontages.



         a.   Nonresidential uses shall be located along street
frontages and shall have a minimum depth of fifty (50) feet. The Director may
reduce the depth requirements for nonresidential uses located on a secondary
street.



         b.   On corner parcels, the nonresidential space shall
turn (wrap around) the corner for a distance of at least thirty (30) feet
along secondary/side streets.



         c.   A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the
street frontage along major or primary streets shall be occupied by
nonresidential uses. The remaining twenty-five percent (25%) may be occupied
by lobby entrances to residential uses and pedestrian amenities (e.g., plaza,
courtyard) The Director may reduce/adjust the percentage frontage
requirements.



      3.   Entrances. Primary building entrances shall be oriented
to the major street on which the structure has frontage, street corner,
courtyard, plaza, park, or other structures on the site but not to interior
blocks or parking lots/structures. A structure may have other entrances as
long as direct, barrier-free pedestrian access is provided to all entrances.



      4.   Sharing of common open space. Mixed-use structures shall
be arranged to create opportunities for common open space for the residential
uses. In general, common open space areas for residential uses shall be
separated from nonresidential uses on the site. However, the sharing of
common open space may be allowed by the applicable review authority when it
is clear that the open space will provide direct benefit to residents of the
project and subject to the following limitations.



         a.   Up to thirty percent (30%) of the required common
open space for residential uses in a horizontal mixed-use project may be
provided within the nonresidential component of the project.



         b.   Up to sixty percent (60%) of the required common
open space for residential uses in a vertical mixed-use project may be
provided within the nonresidential component of the project.



      5.   Pedestrian environment. Site planning shall integrate the
street pedestrian environment with the nonresidential uses through the use of
courtyards, plazas, street furniture, and walkways. Public and private
walkways, passages, paseos, and related facilities shall be provided,
whenever possible. Pedestrian access to mixed-use structures shall be from
the sidewalk. Enhanced pedestrian amenities (i.e., courtyard, plaza, paseo)
shall be required for mixed-use projects located along Brea Boulevard and
Imperial Highway in the MU-III (Mixed-Use III) zoning district.



   O.   Historic structures. The standards in this section may not
apply where they conflict with the design or character of the architecture of
existing structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
Buildings, or Structures; the California State Inventory of Historical Sites
and Buildings; the Orange County Historic Register; or the Brea Historic
Resources Register. Refer to Chapter 20.60. (Historic Preservation) for
design guidelines for renovating or rehabilitating historic structures.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



CHAPTER 20.259:  PARKS/RECREATION/OPEN SPACE



Section



   20.259.010   Purpose and intent



   20.259.020   Principal uses permitted



   20.259.030   Uses subject to conditional use permit approval



   20.259.040   Development standards



§ 20.259.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The Parks/Recreation/Open Space District (PRO) is established to
preserve the city's natural resources, protect environmental issues, and
provide open space areas for active and passive recreational uses.  The
specific intent of the PRO zoning district is to implement the Natural Open
Space and Parks/Recreation/Open Space land use categories of the Land Use
Element and the Community Resources Element in the city's General Plan.  To
distinguish and protect large natural open areas from more active
recreational land uses, the PRO zoning district recognizes two land use
categories within the district:



   A.   PRO-Natural Open Space (PRO-NOS).  Uses in this area do not
typically include facilities for "active recreation" such as baseball fields,
and tennis courts but provide serene environments with amenities such as
meadows, ponds, large open spaces and trails.  This category shall be used
to implement the Natural Open Space land use category from the General Plan.



   B.   PRO-Parks/Recreation (PRO-P/R).  Uses in this area include a
variety of facilities for recreation and amenities such as playgrounds,
community buildings/centers, swimming pools, and sports fields.  This
category shall be used to implement the Parks/Recreation/Open Space land use
category from the General Plan.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



§ 20.259.020PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   A.   Uses permitted in the PRO-NOS category of the PRO district
shall include, but not be limited to the following:



      1.   Parks chiefly comprised of natural open space.



      2.   Water recharge, percolation, and watershed areas.



      3.   Wildlife preserves and sanctuaries.



      4.   Accessory uses and structures including hiking trails,
visitor centers, camp grounds, maintenance buildings, ranger stations,
restroom facilities, etc.  Such uses are customarily associated with and
subordinate to a permitted principal use on the same building site.



   B.   Uses permitted in the PRO district shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:



      1.   Public parks, including neighborhood parks, community
parks, and specialty parks (i.e. sports park, skateboard park).



      2.   Publicly owned golf courses.



      3.   Accessory uses and structures including hiking trails,
visitor/community centers, maintenance buildings, ranger stations, restroom
facilities, etc.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



§ 20.259.030  USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPROVAL.



   Private recreational uses including, but not limited to, commercial
stables, zoos, arboretums, race tracks, and related accessory uses (i.e. food
service buildings, concessions.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



§ 20.259.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Development standards for the PRO district shall be determined on a
case specific basis and subject to the review and approval of the City
Planner.  All proposed development shall be subject to plan review approval
as determined necessary by the City Planner.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



CHAPTER 20.260:  PD PRECISE
DEVELOPMENT ZONE



Section



   20.260.010   Intent and purpose



   20.260.020   Uses permitted



   20.260.030   Uses prohibited



   20.260.040   Property development standards



   20.260.050   Special provisions



§ 20.260.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The P-D (Precise Development) Zone may be applied as an additional zone
classification to land zoned under any other zone classification or this
title.  Areas zoned P-D shall be subject to compliance with an approved
precise plan of development including any conditions established thereon by
the Commission.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.260.020  USES PERMITTED.



   The provisions of the zone to which this supplemental zone is added
shall apply.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.260.030  USES PROHIBITED.



   The provisions of the zone to which this supplemental zone is added
shall apply.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.260.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The provisions of the zone to which this supplemental zone is added
shall apply. In addition, said development shall conform to any conditions
established on the approved precise plan of development.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.260.050  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   A.   Procedure.  Development of land in a precise development zone
for any specific use shall be subject to the issuance of a certificate of
use.  The issuance of such a certificate for any use or uses shall not
suffice to authorize the development or utilization of the land in question
for any other use or uses.  All procedures regarding a certificate of use of
land in a precise development zone, or the revocation or modification
thereof, shall be governed by provisions establishing procedures related to
conditional use permits as amended from time to time.  The application for a
certificate of use of land in a precise development zone shall include:



      1.   A boundary survey map of the property.  (A tentative
subdivision map may be substituted for this requirement if the applicant
proposes to subdivide the property.)



      2.   Existing topography of the development area shall be
shown with contours at not more than two (2) foot intervals.



      3.   The gross land area of the development, the present
zoning classification thereof, and the zoning classification and existing
land use on all adjacent properties, including the location of structures and
other improvements thereon.



      4.   A general development plan with at least the following
details shown to scale and dimensioned:



         a.   Location and use or uses proposed for each existing
and each proposed structure in the development area, the number of stories,
gross building area, and approximate location of entrances.



         b.   All existing and proposed storage, curb cuts,
driving lanes, parking areas and loading areas.



         c.   All pedestrian walks and open areas for the use of
occupants of the proposed development and the public.



         d.   Types of surfacing proposed for all walks and
driveways.



         e.   A detailed plan for the landscaping of the
development, including the location and heights of all proposed walls, fences
and screen plating, and a statement setting forth the method by which such
landscaping and fencing shall be preserved and maintained.



         f.   A grading plan for the entire development.



         g.   All existing or proposed physical features such as
hydrants, utility facilities, flood lights, drainage facilities and
recreation facilities, and a statement setting forth the method by where
these features shall be preserved and maintained.



         h.   Any additional drawings or information as may be
required by the Commission.



      5.   Plans and elevations of one (1) or more structures to
indicate architectural type and materials of construction.



   B.   Planning Commission authority. 



      1.   The Planning Commission shall have the authority, as an
administrative act, subject to the provisions of this section, to require
conditions of development in addition to those required by the zone where, it
is determined that such conditions are necessary to further the objectives of
the General Plan and are in harmony with the intent, purpose and spirit of
this ordinance and/or where such additional requirements are deemed essential
to protect the public safety and general welfare of the community.



      2.   All special conditions established by the Planning
Commission in accordance with this section may be appealed to City Council.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68; Am. Ord. 581, passed 11-18-75)



CHAPTER 20.261: PUBLIC FACILITIES



Section



   20.261.010   Purpose and intent



   20.261.020   Permitted uses



   20.261.030   Uses subject to conditional use permit approval



   20.261.040   Development standards



§ 20.261.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The Public Facilities (PF) District is established to allocate land for
the establishment of public institutions, infrastructure, and utilities to
serve the general public.  Such public land uses include schools, fire and
police stations, community centers, and sewer/water facilities.  The
specific intent of the Public Facilities District is to implement the Public
Facilities and Cemetery Land Use Designation in the Land Use Element of the
General Plan.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



§ 20.261.020  PERMITTED USES.



   Uses permitted in the PF District shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:



   A.   Governmental uses including:



      1.   Local, state and federal offices.



      2.   Public buildings and associated grounds used for
governmental and related purpose and activities.



   B.   Publicly owned and operated utilities.



   C.   Public educational institutions.



   D.   Special governmental facilities, including, but not limited to:



      1.   Transit agencies and sanitary districts.



      2.   Landfill.



   E.   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to any of the permitted
uses in this zone.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



§ 20.261.030  USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPROVAL.



   A.   Cemetery (permitted only on properties within the "Cemetery"
General Plan Land Use Designation) and related structures/uses.



   B.   Privately owned and operated utilities.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



§ 20.261.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Development standards for the PF Zone shall be determined on a case
specific basis and subject to the review and approval of the City Planner.
All proposed development shall be subject to plan review approval as
determined necessary by the City Planner.



(Ord. 1089, passed 3-7-06)



CHAPTER 20.262:  WD WALL DESIGN OVERLAY ZONE



Section



   20.262.010   Intent and purpose



   20.262.020   Uses permitted



   20.262.030   Uses prohibited



   20.262.040   Wall design standards



   20.262.050   Special provisions



§ 20.262.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The WD (Wall Design) Overlay Zone may be applied as an additional zone
classification to land zoned under any other zone classification of this
title. Areas zoned WD shall be subject to compliance with the design
standards and a city-approved plan for wall construction. The intent of the
Wall Design Overlay Zone is to provide for pleasing visual aesthetics and
perimeter wall design uniformity along the city's arterial highways, as shown
on the Master Plan of Roadways in the city's General Plan.



(Ord. 1104, passed 6-19-07)



§ 20.262.020  USES PERMITTED.



   The provisions of the underlying zone to which this supplemental zone
is added shall apply.



(Ord. 1104, passed 6-19-07)



§ 20.262.030  USES PROHIBITED.



   The provisions of the underlying zone to which this supplemental zone
is added shall apply.



(Ord. 1104, passed 6-19-07)



§ 20.262.040  WALL DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The following design standards shall apply to the construction of a
perimeter wall in the WD Wall Design Overlay Zone:



   A.   The wall shall have a minimum setback of six (6) inches from
the public sidewalk along the street. The final wall setback for any specific
lot shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Planner.



   B.   The wall height shall range from a minimum height of six (6)
feet to a maximum height of eight (8) feet, as measured from the highest
adjacent grade. The final wall height for any specific lot shall be
determined through the plan check process, shall be coordinated with adjacent
properties, and shall be subject to review and approval of the City Planner.



   C.   The wall shall be constructed of eight (8)- inch by six
(6)-inch by sixteen (16)-inch slumpstone block, tan in color (Please see
Exhibit 1 in the Appendix following this chapter).



   D.   There shall be one pilaster treatment with design
specifications included in the wall design for each property (Please see
Exhibit 2 in the Appendix following this chapter). The placement of said
pilaster treatment shall be coordinated to complement adjacent properties,
and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Planner.



   E.   The wall shall include a slumpstone wall cap treatment with
design specifications (Please see Exhibit 3 in the Appendix following this
chapter).



(Ord. 1104, passed 6-19-07)



§ 20.262.050  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   A.   Applicability.  The repair and maintenance of existing
perimeter wood fencing shall be allowed. Said repair/maintenance activities
shall be limited to a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the lineal yard
dimension of the fencing along the arterial highway frontage within a
consecutive twelve (12)-month period. Replacement of existing wood perimeter
fencing exceeding this limitation shall comply with the design criteria in §
20.262.040.



   B.   Procedure.  Construction of a perimeter wall in a WD Wall
Design Overlay Zone shall require the issuance of a building permit, subject
to the review and approval of the City Planner, the City Engineer, and the
Building and Safety Manager or their designees. The application for a
perimeter wall construction permit in the WD Wall Design Overlay Zone shall
include:



      1.   A scaled plot plan of the subject property illustrating
proposed location of perimeter wall at rear or side of property along the
public street.



      2.   Elevation drawing of the proposed wall as seen from the
public street. The elevation sketch must include label for wall height,
slumpstone block material, cap treatment, and pilaster treatment.



      3.   Cross-section of the proposed wall, showing wall height,
grade of sidewalk on street side of the wall, grade of private property
inside wall, labeling of the wall setback from property line/back of
sidewalk, and the wall cap treatment. A plan view detail of the wall and
pilaster treatment shall also be provided.



      4.   Sufficient notes on the application materials to denote
the slumpstone block wall material, color, and size of slumpstone block
materials for the wall, pilaster treatment and cap treatment. Said materials,
designs and color shall be consistent with the provisions of § 20.262.040.



      5.   Such structural information for the proposed wall as
deemed necessary by the Building and Safety Manager.



(Ord. 1104, passed 6-19-07)



APPENDIX:  EXHIBITS 1 THROUGH 3



EXHIBIT 1







 



EXHIBIT 2







 



EXHIBIT 3







 



CHAPTER 20.263:  E EQUESTRIAN OVERLAY ZONE




Section



   20.263.010   Intent and purpose



   20.263.020   Uses permitted



   20.263.030   Uses prohibited



   20.263.040   General development standards



   20.263.050   Special provisions



   Appendix:   Olinda Village Neighborhood Map



§ 20.263.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The Equestrian Overlay Zone (E) may be applied as an additional zone
classification to land zoned Single-Family Residential (R-1) in Olinda
Village (see map in the Appendix: to this chapter).  In addition to the
development standards in this chapter, areas zoned E shall be subject to
compliance with the base zone development standards and issuance of a
city-approved building permit, as applicable, for any proposed structures
associated with equestrian use.  The intent of the Equestrian Overlay Zone
is to address the unique requirements associated with the keeping of horses
in rural areas where the keeping of horses has traditionally been allowed,
for private, non-commercial, use on the Single-Family Residential (R-1)
properties of Olinda Village meeting the requirements of this chapter, and in
a manner conducive to the public health, safety, and general welfare.



(Ord. 1173, passed 3-18-14)



§ 20.263.020  USES PERMITTED.



   The provisions of the underlying zone to which this supplemental zone
is added shall apply.



(Ord. 1173, passed 3-18-14)



§ 20.263.030  USES PROHIBITED.



   The provisions of the underlying zone to which this supplemental zone
is added shall apply.



(Ord. 1173, passed 3-18-14)



§ 20.263.040  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to the keeping of
horses in the Equestrian Overlay Zone:



   A.   Lot area and width.



      1.   Each lot shall have a minimum area of one (1) acre
(43,560 square feet).



      2.   Each lot shall have a minimum street frontage of thirty
(30) feet.



   B.   Lot size and horse allocation.



      1.   Minimum lot area required is one (1) acre (43,560 square
feet) with a maximum of four (4) horses for private use permitted so long as
they do not constitute a nuisance and are provided with adequate shelter,
food, care, and sanitary facilities as required by this chapter.



      2.   One (1) additional horse for every 15,000 square feet
shall be permitted so long as they do not constitute a nuisance and are
adequately provided with shelter, food, care, and sanitary facilities.  When
computing the additional horses permitted above one (1) acre (43,560 square
feet), the horse allocation may be rounded up to the next whole number if the
calculation results in a fractional number.



      3.   Equine born at permitted facilities shall not be counted
in the allotted horse allocation until it exceeds one (1) year of age.



   C.   Setbacks.



      1.   Structures used for the housing of horses shall be:



         a.   One hundred (100) feet minimum from any adjacent
building used for human habitation not on the subject site.



         b.   Fifty (50) feet minimum from any building utilized
for human habitation on the same property.



         c.   Twenty-five (25) feet minimum from any property
line.



      2.   Pastures and exercise areas for horses shall be:



         a.   Seventy-five (75) feet minimum from any adjacent
building used for human habitation not on the subject site.



         b.   Thirty-five (35) feet minimum from any building
utilized for human habitation on the same property.



         c.   Twenty-five (25) feet minimum from any property
line.



   D.   Walls, fences, gates.  A fence, wall or similar enclosure of a
minimum height of six (6) feet above ground shall enclose an area utilized
for the maintenance of the horse(s) and shall be constructed as to prevent
their escape.  Gates providing access to the area of horse keeping shall be
kept closed and secure when said area is unattended.



   E.   Other criteria.



      1.   The equine use shall be for private, non-commercial, use
of the property owner.



      2.   No horse-related structures or facilities shall be
allowed in front yard areas.



      3.   The property owner shall provide a separate trash
receptacle(s) for the proper storage of horse waste on-site and a plan
conveying a regular schedule for the removal of said waste from the property
in compliance with local and county health and safety codes.



      4.   Compliance with the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 597
(California’s animal abuse law) for the protection and prevention of
cruelty to any horse shall be maintained at all times.



      5.   The provisions of this chapter shall govern over any
inconsistent provisions contained in Title 6 of this code.



   F.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or code,
every person temporarily or permanently owning, sheltering, keeping, housing,
possessing, maintaining, caring for, or legally responsible to care for, any
horse within the Equestrian Overlay Zone, shall at all times comply with the
most current edition of the “Minimum Standards of Horse Care in the State
of California,” published by the Center of Equine Health, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis.  In addition to any
and all other penalties and remedies for violation of this chapter or code,
any such violation shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a conditional
use permit or any other approval applied for or issued pursuant to this
chapter.  A copy of the foregoing “Minimum Standards of Horse Care” is
available for review at the City of Brea Planning Division.



(Ord. 1173, passed 3-18-14)



§ 20.263.050  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   A.   Procedure; minor applications.  Minor applications are
applications to construct a structure not otherwise prohibited by any
provision of this code, on a lot at least one (1) acre and up to five (5)
acres in area, submitted after April 19, 2014, the effective date of this
chapter, and where such structure is.  The property owner shall submit an
application for building permit review and approval evidencing compliance
with § 20.263.040.  The building permit shall be reviewed and approved by
the Community Development Department and a permit obtained prior to issuance
of final granting of the use at the new location. 



   B.   Procedure; major applications.  Major applications are
proposals to construct an equestrian facility not otherwise prohibited by any
provision of this code, on a site more than five (5) acres in area, submitted
after the effective date of this chapter.  These applications shall be
subject to conditional use permit approval.  All procedures regarding
conditional use permit approval of equestrian facilities in the Equestrian
Overlay Zone, and/or the revocation or modification thereof, shall be
governed by procedures and requirements related to conditional use permits
set forth in § 20.408.030, as amended from time to time.  In addition to
the application requirements in § 20.408.030, the application for a
conditional use permit in the Equestrian Overlay Zone shall include:



      1.   A boundary survey map of the property.  (A tentative
subdivision map may be substituted for this requirement if the applicant
proposes to subdivide the property.)



      2.   Existing topography of the development area shall be
shown with contours at not more than two (2) foot intervals.



      3.   The gross land area of the development and the zoning
classification and existing land use on all adjacent properties, including
the location of structures and other improvements thereon.



      4.   A general development plan in compliance with §
20.263.040 (General Development Standards) and the following details shown to
scale and dimensioned:



         a.   Location and use or uses proposed for each existing
and each proposed structure in the development area, the number of stories,
gross building area, and approximate location of entrances.



         b.   Location and use for any proposed structures
related to the keeping of horses or horse activities.



         c.   All existing and proposed storage, curb cuts,
driving lanes, parking areas, and loading areas.



         d.   All pedestrian walks, open areas, any horse arena
and trails for the use of occupants of the proposed development or the public.



         e.   Types of surfacing proposed for all walks,
driveways, any horse arena and trails.



         f.   A detailed plan for the landscaping of the
development, including the location and heights of all proposed walls, fences
and screen planting, and a statement setting forth the method by which such
landscaping and fencing shall be preserved and maintained in compliance with
Ordinance No. 1134.



         g.   A grading plan for the entire development.



         h.   All existing or proposed physical features such as
hydrants, utility facilities, flood lights, drainage facilities and
recreation facilities, and a statement setting forth the method by where
these features shall be preserved and maintained.



         i.   Any additional drawings or information as may be
required by the Planning Commission.



      5.   Plans and elevations of all structures indicating
proposed architectural type and materials of construction.



      6.   Adequate information necessary for the city and applicant
to comply with all requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) and the guidelines thereunder.



   C.   Planning Commission authority.



      1.   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to
review major applications, as an administrative act, subject to the
provisions of this Section, to require conditions of development in addition
to those required by the zone where it is determined that such conditions are
necessary to maintain consistency with, and/or further the objectives of the
General Plan; are necessary to maintain harmony with the intent, purpose and
spirit of this chapter; and/or where such additional requirements are deemed
essential to protect the public safety and general welfare of the community.



      2.   Any condition of approval established by the Planning
Commission in accordance with this section may be appealed to City Council.



(Ord. 1173, passed 3-18-14)



APPENDIX:  OLINDA VILLAGE NEIGHBORHOOD MAP







CHAPTER 20.264:  O OIL PRODUCTION ZONE



Section



   20.264.010   Intent and purpose



   20.264.020   Uses permitted



   20.264.030   Uses expressly prohibited



   20.264.040   Property development standards



§ 20.264.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The O (Oil Production) Zone is established to provide for the drilling
and production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances in any zone to
which the “O” designation is attached.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.264.020  USES PERMITTED.



   The provisions of the zone to which the supplemental O Zone is added
shall apply, and the drilling for, removal and storage of oil and
hydrocarbons shall be permitted.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.264.030  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   The provisions of the zone to which this supplemental zone is added
shall apply.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



§ 20.264.040  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The provisions of the zone to which this supplemental zone is added
shall apply.  Drilling for, removal and storage of oil and hydrocarbons
shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 8.24 of the city code.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-14-68)



CHAPTER 20.268:  TEMPORARY TRAILER AND TRAILERS USED AS CONSTRUCTION FIELD
OFFICES



Section



   20.268.010   Definitions



   20.268.020   When permitted



   20.268.030   Planning Commission action



§ 20.268.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS. As used herein, the term shall be applied to
trailers used as construction field offices only.



   TEMPORARY TRAILERS.  As used herein, the term shall be applied to all
trailers used in accordance with this chapter other than construction
trailers used as field offices in connection with and during the occurrence
of the construction of buildings or structures.



(Ord. 662, passed 9-5-78)



§ 20.268.020  WHEN PERMITTED.



   A.   Temporary trailers may be permitted in accordance with the
procedures set forth in paragraph C. of this section in all industrial zones
when the use of said temporary trailers is incidental to the primary uses
permitted therein.  Construction trailers may be used in any zone as field
offices in connection with and during the occurrence of the construction of
buildings or structures.



   B.   Temporary trailers as provided for herein may be permitted for
a period not exceeding two (2) years and shall be removed on or before a date
specified in the permit or when abatement of the use of the property upon
which said trailer is located occurs, whichever is sooner.



   C.   The use of a temporary trailer may only be permitted in
accordance with the following procedures:



      1.   Any person applying for the use of a temporary trailer or
trailers shall file an application describing the use and proposed location
thereof, with the Development Services Department of the city.  The
applicant shall be required to pay appropriate fees as determined by City
Council resolution for processing of said application. 



      2.   At the meeting during which the Planning Commission is to
act upon the application, the Planning Commission shall hear and consider the
recommendation of the Director of Development Services, or the city official
acting in that capacity, as to whether the use of the temporary trailer
should be permitted, and relevant statements of interested members of the
public in that regard.  Following such consideration, the Planning
Commission shall permit or deny the use of the temporary trailer by
resolution.  If permitted, the resolution shall constitute the permit
referred to in this chapter.



(Ord. 662, passed 9-5-78)



§ 20.268.030  PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.



   A.   The Planning Commission shall deny an application for the use
of a temporary trailer if it finds that:



      1.   The use of the temporary trailer is not in harmony with
any of the various elements or objectives of the General Plan; or



      2.   The use of the temporary trailer will be detrimental to
existing uses or to uses specifically permitted in the specific area in which
the temporary trailer is proposed to be located; or



      3.   The use of the temporary trailer will be detrimental to
property or the use of property located in the city, particularly property
located within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the
property where the temporary trailer is proposed to be located.



   B.   In permitting the use of a temporary trailer, the Planning
Commission may impose reasonable conditions thereon to protect the public
peace, health, safety, and general welfare, and to ensure that the temporary
trailer will not bring about any condition or conditions enumerated in
paragraph A. of this section as a ground for denying an application for the
use of a temporary trailer.



   C.   The Planning Commission may revoke by resolution its permission
for the use of a temporary trailer at any time after ten (10) calendar days
written notice of the date and time when, and the location where, the
Planning Commission is to consider such revocation, has been mailed to the
person who previously has been granted permission to utilize the temporary
trailer.  The grounds for such revocation include, but are not limited to,
the fact that a condition or conditions enumerated in paragraph A. of this
section as a ground for denying an application for the use of a temporary
trailer has or have resulted from the use of the temporary trailer or
trailers under consideration for revocation.



   D.   Any Planning Commission action taken pursuant to this chapter
may be appealed by any interested person within ten (10) days from the date
upon which such action was taken.  Such appeal shall be in writing, shall be
filed with the City Clerk and shall state the ground or grounds asserted
therefor.  Any Planning Commission resolution adopted pursuant to this
chapter shall become effective upon the expiration of such appeal period. 
The City Council may affirm, reverse or modify any such Planning Commission
action by resolution.



(Ord. 662, passed 9-5-78)



CHAPTER 20.272:  PC PLANNED COMMUNITY



Section



   20.272.010   Intent and purpose



   20.272.020   Applicability



   20.272.030   Planned community master plans



§ 20.272.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   A.   The purpose of this zone is to encourage, preserve, and improve
the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by encouraging
innovative development that allows a diversification of uses, use
relationships, building heights, densities, and open spaces in planned
community developments while ensuring consistency with the city's General
Plan.



   B.   Development of properties in the Planned Community Zone will
occur in accordance with the requirements and provisions of a detailed,
site-specific Planned Community Master Plan specifically created and adopted
for such properties to promote innovative development projects that
anticipate the future needs of the city's residents, businesses, and
visitors, while respecting existing uses. The Planned Community Zone shall be
reserved for the development of innovative projects in areas of the city that
present unique planning challenges due to considerations such as geography,
topography, and changing patterns of development not otherwise addressed by
the city's existing zoning rules.



(Ord. 1206, passed 11-6-18)



§ 20.272.020  APPLICABILITY.



   A.   This chapter shall apply to all properties designated as
Planned Community on the city's Zoning Map.



   B.   An amendment to the Zoning Map to change the boundaries of the
Planned Community zone may only be initiated by the City Council; provided
that any property owner or his or her designated agent, may petition the City
Council to initiate such an amendment. In all other regards, amendments to
the Zoning Map affecting the boundaries of the Planned Community Zone shall
comply with the provisions of Chapter 20.404 and this Chapter 20.272 except
as they might otherwise conflict with the provisions of this chapter, in
which case this chapter shall control.



(Ord. 1206, passed 11-6-18)



§ 20.272.030  PLANNED COMMUNITY MASTER PLANS.



   A.   Master Plan required. All properties within the Planned
Community Zone must have an approved Planned Community Master Plan pursuant
to this Chapter. Any application to amend the Zoning Map to incorporate a
property into the Planned Community Zone must be accompanied by a complete
application for approval of a Planned Community Master Plan that includes
that property. No such Zoning Map amendment shall become effective unless and
until the City Council approves a Planned Community Master Plan that includes
that property and such approval is final.



   B.   Uses allowed. No building, structure, land in the Planned
Community Zone shall be used, erected, structurally altered, or enlarged
except in conformance with a Planned Community Master Plan approved pursuant
to this chapter.



   C.   Required elements. Every Planned Community Master Plan shall
include a general statement of goals and objectives and detailed elements
that explain how such goals and objectives will be met. The following
elements shall be required for every Planned Community Master Plan:



      1.   Land use element. The land use element shall consist of
text, maps figures, setting forth the distribution, general location, and
extent of the areas of land devoted to each category of land use proposed as
part of the Planned Community Master Plan. It may therefore include, but not
necessarily be limited to designations for various housing types, retail
shopping facilities, office facilities, service facilities, public and
semipublic facilities, conservation or open space areas, and mixed uses, as
well as development and construction timelines for any of these.



      2.   Circulation element. The circulation element shall
consist of text, maps, and figures, setting forth the general locations,
dimensions, operational standards, and specifications of all streets,
walkways, trails, transportation alternatives, and all transportation-related
infrastructure proposed as part of the Planned Community Master Plan. This
element shall include but not necessarily be limited to design criteria for
engineering review and the traffic carrying capacities of all arterial
streets and highways.



      3.   Population element. The population element shall contain
text, maps, and figures that explain the distribution of dwelling unit and
anticipated population density for both the entire Planned Community Master
Plan and each subarea, if any.



      4.   Public services and facilities element. The public
services and facilities element shall contain text, maps, and figures setting
forth the general locations and specifications of any and all existing and
proposed trail and public facilities for the Planned Community Master Plan
area.



   D.   Additional elements. Every Planned Community Master Plan shall
also include such additional elements as the city deems necessary for
development of the Planned Community Master Plan or evaluation of its
impacts. Examples of such additional elements that may be required include,
but are not necessarily limited to, a sustainability element, an urban design
element, or a cultural arts element. The city may also require the
recordation of all subdivision tracts or parcels, a schedule of construction,
a phasing plan, and incorporation of the application requirements contained
in Section 20.272.030.F, as the city deems appropriate.



   E.   Required plans, figures, and data. Each Planned Community
Master Plan shall include plans, figures, and data in sufficient number and
detail to allow for effective evaluation and implementation. Such plans,
figures, and data shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:



      1.   Detailed site plans.



      2.   Legal descriptions or boundary surveys of the property or
properties.



      3.   Site utilization maps drawn to scale and showing the
location of the proposed site and its relationship to surrounding existing
uses.



      4.   Grading plans, including lot dimensions and pad size of
all lots and their relationships, the nature and extent of all cut and fill,
the location, grades, widths, and related details for all utilities, streets,
walkways, driveways, and related facilities.



      5.   Location, design, and related details for all parking
areas, vehicle storage, and any proposed alternative transportation
infrastructure.



      6.   Landscape and hardscape plans.



      7.   Architectural plans and details, including height, number
of stories, materials, colors, and finishes.



      8.   Renderings and view illustrations, as deemed necessary.



      9.   Conceptual color and materials boards, including
specifications, quality, and durability of materials.



      10.   Drainage plans.



      11.   Fencing and wall plans.



      12.   Public and private amenities plans



      13.   Subdivision plans, as necessary to clarify any proposed
subdivision.



   F.   Development and design standards. Each Planned Community Master
Plan shall include detailed development and design standards in accordance
with this paragraph.



      1.   Existing standards. Proposed land uses that will be
developed in accordance with existing ordinances of the city, those zones or
development standards that are to be employed in implementing each type,
phase or area of residential and/or commercial development shall be so
designated  and  shall  be  developed  according  to  the 
development and design standards and review procedures that are applicable to
that designation.



      2.   Alternative standards. The City Council may approve
alternative development and design standards in a Planned Community Master
Plan for development at densities and levels of intensity not otherwise
provided for in Title 20 but designed specifically for a particular type,
phase, or area of the Planned Community Master Plan; provided that nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to require the city to approve any
alternative development or design standards. Proposed land uses that will be
developed with such alternative development and design standards shall be so
designated in the Planned Community Master Plan and shall be developed
according to the applicable development and design standards and review
procedures set forth in the Planned Community Master Plan.



      3.   Except as otherwise provided in the design and
development standards in the Planned Community Master Plan, all other
provisions of the zoning code shall apply in the Planned Community Zone.
Furthermore, all development in the Planned Community Zone is subject to the
requirements of this Code pertaining to art in public places and subdivisions
notwithstanding any provision in an adopted Planned Community Master Plan.



   G.   Procedures.



      1.   Application. The owners of the subject property or their
authorized agents may apply for approval of a Planned Community Master Plan.
All properties included in the application must be under single ownership or
controlled by a single entity from the time of application and until the
effective date of the ordinance approving the Zoning Map amendment associated
with the Planned Community Master Plan. All applications shall be made on a
form prescribed by the director that requires, but shall not necessarily be
limited to the following:



         a.   Five print copies and one electronic copy of the
draft Planned Community Master Plan, including but not necessarily limited to
all required contents.



         b.   A market or economic analysis of all proposed uses,
including analysis of alternative uses and alternative locations.



         c.   A detailed list and explanation of the community
benefits that the Planned Community Master Plan would provide; including when
appropriate a list of such community benefits that will be provided pursuant
to a development agreement.



         d.   A plan for engaging in public outreach with a
cross-section of residents, businesses, and other community stakeholders.



         e.   A filing fee in accordance with a schedule adopted
by City Council resolution, which fee shall be sufficient to cover the city's
costs and expenses in processing the application.



         f.   Any information the city deems necessary to the
city's preparation of any additional study or studies it deems necessary for
consideration of the Planned Community Master Plan; e.g. economic impact
analysis, parking impact analysis, etc.



      2.   Public outreach required. The applicant shall engage in
public outreach regarding the proposed Planned Community Master Plan in
accordance with the plan submitted to the city and shall provide a summary
report of the results of such outreach for the consideration of the Planning
Commission and City Council.



      3.   Development agreement required. An application for a
Planned Community Master Plan must include an application for a development
agreement applicable to the entirety of the plan area, and no approval of a
Planned Community Master Plan shall be final unless and until the City
Council has approved the development agreement and such approval is final.
The purpose of this requirement is to provide the community and applicants
the assurance that development of the Planned Community Master Plan, and its
associated community benefits, may be realized notwithstanding any
development standards to the contrary that the City may adopt after approval
of the Planned Community Master Plan.



      4.   Planning Commission review and recommendation. The
Planning Commission shall consider each application for a Planned Community
Master Plan at a public hearing, which it may hold concurrently with any
hearings on any related applications such as a related Zoning Map amendment.
Following the hearing, the Commission shall recommend to the Council approval
or disapproval of the application.



      5.   City Council decision. The City Council shall have sole
authority to approve a Planned Community Master Plan. The City Council shall
consider each application and the recommendation of the Planning Commission
at a public hearing, which it may hold concurrently with any hearings on any
related applications. Following the hearing, the City Council shall approve
or disapprove the application by reference to the findings required for
approval. The City Council shall only approve the application by ordinance.



      6.   Findings required for approval. The City Council shall
only approve a Planned Community Plan shall only approved if it makes the
following findings:



         a.   The Planned Community Master Plan is consistent
with the General Plan, inclusive of any amendments proposed and approved as
part of the application for the Planned Community Master Plan.



         b.   The Planned Community Master Plan is consistent
with the Brea Envisions Community Strategic Plan.



         c.   The Planned Community Master Plan would provide for
an innovative development in an area of the city that presents unique
planning challenges due to considerations such as geography, topography, and
changing patterns of development not otherwise addressed by the city's
existing zoning rules.



         d.   The properties included in the Planned Community
Master Plan are suitable for the uses specified therein, in terms of access,
size, their relationship to adjacent properties and similar or related uses,
and other considerations deemed relevant by the City Council.



         e.   The Planned Community Master Plan is in the best
interest of the city as a whole.



      7.   Amendment. A Planned Community Master Plan may be amended
subject to the same procedures and requirements applicable to its adoption.



   H.   Interpretation. Each adopted Planned Community Master Plan
shall be construed in the manner most consistent with the General Plan, this
Chapter, and the purposes for and findings upon which the Planned Community
Master Plan was adopted. Any uncertainty or ambiguity in the requirements or
application of any adopted Planned Community Master Plan may be resolved
pursuant to the administrative interpretation process found in Section
20.408.010.



(Ord. 1206, passed 11-6-18)



CHAPTER 20.276:  FLOOD PLAIN
OVERLAY DISTRICT



Section



   20.276.010   Statutory authorization



   20.276.020   Findings of fact



   20.276.030   Purpose and intent



   20.276.040   Basis for establishing the Flood Hazard Overlay (F)
Zoning District



   20.276.050   Property development standards



§ 20.276.010  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   Cal. Gov’t Code § 65800  authorizes  cities to adopt land use
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry.



(Ord. 1133, passed 12-1-09)



§ 20.276.020  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



   B.   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately
elevated, flood-proofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect
of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood
heights and velocities also contribute to flood losses.



(Ord. 1133, passed 12-1-09)



§ 20.276.030  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The Flood Hazard Overlay (F) Zoning District is established to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by creating legally
enforceable regulations to be applied uniformly throughout the community to
all publicly and privately owned land within flood-prone areas.  These
regulations are designed to:



   A.   Protect human life and health;



   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;



   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
blighted areas caused by flood damage;



   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
an area of special flood hazard; and



   H.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.



(Ord. 1133, passed 12-1-09)



§ 20.276.040  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY (F) ZONING
DISTRICT.



   The Flood Hazard Overlay (F) Zoning District designation applies to
special flood hazard areas, identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) in the ‘Flood Insurance Study’ (FIS) for Orange County and
incorporated areas, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM’s)
and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM’s), dated December 3, 2009,
subsequent amendments  and/or revisions,  and  the  same  are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter.  The FIS and
attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter, and
may be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow implementation of
this chapter.  The study, FIRM’s and FBFM’s are on file at the City
Clerk’s Office in the Civic and Cultural Center, located at 1 Civic Center,
Brea, CA 92821.



(Ord. 1133, passed 12-1-09)



§ 20.276.050  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   No structure or land within the Flood Hazard Overlay (F) Zoning
District shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or
altered without full compliance with the requirements of Division II 
Floodplain Management of Title 18 of the Brea City Code.



(Ord. 1133, passed 12-1-09)  Penalty, see § 1.04



CHAPTER 20.280:  SGS SPECIAL GEOLOGIC STUDIES ZONE



Section



   20.280.010   Intent and purpose



   20.280.020   Application



   20.280.030   Uses permitted



   20.280.040   Time of filing of application for project



   20.280.050   Special Geologic Studies Zone Analysis Procedure



   20.280.060   Fees



§ 20.280.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Special Geological Studies Zone is to protect life
and property in the city from hazards of geologic faulting and set
requirements for the evaluation of such areas prior to approval of any
development permit or tentative map on the property.



(Ord. 723, passed 2-2-82)



§ 20.280.020  APPLICATION.



   In any base district where the district symbol is followed by, as a
part of such symbol, parenthetically enclosed letters “SGS,” thus (SGS),
the additional requirements contained in this chapter shall apply. The
district symbol shall constitute the “Base District” and the (SGS) shall
constitute the “Overlay District.”  The provisions of the (SGS) Zone
shall not supersede any other zoning requirements, including, but not limited
to, any other overlay zoning requirement.



(Ord. 723, passed 2-2-82)



§ 20.280.030  USES PERMITTED.



   All uses permitted in the base district, including those subject to
conditional use permit, are permitted subject to certification that a Special
Geologic Studies Zone Analysis has been submitted and considered in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 20.280.050 of this chapter.



(Ord. 723, passed 2-2-82)



§ 20.280.040  TIME OF FILING OF APPLICATION FOR PROJECT.



   No project application to which § 20.280.030 of this chapter applies
shall be deemed complete and/or filed nor be accepted for filing until all
Special Geologic Studies Zone Analyses and documentation required hereunder,
including any final analysis, is completed for presentation to the initially
responsible city agency where:



   A.   The enabling legislation requires the city to act on the
project within a specified period of time of one hundred eighty (180) days or
less; and



   B.   The enabling legislation provides that the project will become
approved by operation of law if the city fails to act within the specified
time limit.



(Ord. 723, passed 2-2-82)



§ 20.280.050  SPECIAL GEOLOGIC STUDIES ZONE ANALYSIS PROCEDURE.



   A.   Draft Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis.



      1.   Prior to the commencement of a proposed discretionary
project, which is located either wholly or partially within any area zoned
(SGS) requiring the approval of any development permit or tentative map, the
proponent of the project shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a draft
Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis and submit the draft analysis to the
Development Services Director.  The Development Services Director, or his or
her designee, shall determine the number of copies of the draft Analysis
required to be submitted.  Before completing the draft Special Geologic
Study Zone Analysis, the preparer shall consult directly with any person whom
or organization which the preparer believes will be concerned with the
geologic hazards in the project area and with other public agencies involved
in carrying out or approving the project.



      2.   The draft Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis shall
contain the following information, in form as approved by the Development
Services Director, pertaining to the entirety of the proposed project:



         a.   The Analysis shall be a combined in-depth geologic
and soils investigation prepared by a registered geologist, certified by the
State of California as an engineering geologist and by a licensed civil
engineer qualified in soil mechanics.



         b.   Required geologic and soils investigations shall
include the following:



            (1)   Text.



               (a)   Purpose and scope of investigation.



               (b)   Geologic setting.



               (c)   Site description and conditions. 
Include information on geologic units, graded and filled areas, vegetation,
existing structures, etc., that may affect the choice of investigative
methods and the interpretation of data.



               (d)   Methods of investigation.



                  (i)   Review of published and
unpublished literature and records concerning geologic units, faults, ground
water barriers, etc.



                  (ii)   Interpretation of aerial
photographs and other remotely sensed images to detect fault related
topography, vegetation and soil contrasts, and other lineaments and possible
fault origin.



                  (iii)   Surface observations,
including mapping of geologic units and structures, topographic features,
springs, deformation of man-made structures, etc., both on and beyond the
site.



                  (iv)   Subsurface investigations.



                     (A)   Trenching and other
extensive excavations to permit detailed and direct observation of
continuously exposed geologic units and features which must be carefully
logged.



                     (B)   Borings and test pits to
permit collection of data on geologic units and ground water at specific
locations.  Data points must be sufficient in number and adequately spaced
to permit valid correlations and interpretation.



                  (v)   Geophysical investigations.



                     (A)   Seismic re-fraction.



                     (B)   Magnetic in-tensity.



                     (C)   Other (e.g., electrical
resistivity, seismic reflection, gravity).



                  (vi)   Other methods should be
included when special conditions permit, or requirements for critical
structures demand, a more intensive investigation.



                     (A)   Aerial reconnaissance
overflights.



                     (B)   Geodetic and strain
measurements, microseismicity monitoring, or other monitoring techniques.



                     (C)   Radiometric analysis,
stratigraphic correlation, soil profile development, paleomagnetism, or other
age dating techniques to identify the age of faulted or unfaulted units or
surfaces.



               (e)   Conclusions.



                  (i)   Location and existence (or
absence) of hazardous faults on or adjacent to the site.



                  (ii)   Type of faults and nature of
anticipated offset: direction of relative displacement and maximum
displacement that is possible.



                  (iii)   Probability of or relative
potential for future surface displacement.  The likelihood of future ground
rupture can seldom be stated mathematically, but may be stated in
semiquantitative terms such as low, moderate, or high.



                  (iv)   Degree of confidence in and
limitations of data and conclusions.



               (f)   Recommendations.



                  (i)   Setback distances from hazardous
faults, if appropriate.  State and local law may dictate minimum standards.



                  (ii)   Risk evaluations relative to
the proposed development - professional opinions are acceptable.



            (2)   References.



               (a)   Literature and records cited and
reviewed.



               (b)   Aerial photographs or images
interpreted - list type, scale, source, index numbers, etc.



               (c)   Other sources of information including
well records, personal communications, and other data sources.



            (3)   Illustrations - these are essential to the
understanding of the report and to reduce the length of text.



               (a)   Location map - identify site locality,
significant faults, geographic features, seismic epicenters, and other
pertinent data; 1:24,000 scale is recommended.



               (b)   Site development map - show site
boundaries, existing and proposed structure, graded areas, streets,
exploratory trenches, borings, geophysical traverses, and other data;
recommended scale is one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, or larger.



               (c)   Geologic map - shows distribution of
geologic units (if more than one (1)), faults and other structures,
geomorphic features, aerial photo lineaments, and springs; on topographic map
1:24,000 scale or larger; can be combined with (3)(a) or (3)(b) above.



               (d)   Geologic cross-sections, if needed to
provide three-dimensional picture.



               (e)   Logs of exploratory trenches and
borings - show details of observed features and conditions; should not be
generalized or diagrammatic.



               (f)   Geophysical data and geologic
interpretations.



            (4)   Statement of other public agencies having
approval authority over the project.



            (5)   Statement of other persons and organizations
consulted concerning the geologic effects of the project.



            (6)   Appendix including supporting data not
included above (e.g., Waterwall date).



            (7)   Signature and registration number of the
investigating geologist/civil engineer [preparer(s)].



   B.   Forthwith upon completion of the draft Analysis, the
Development Services Director, or his or her designee, shall:



      1.   Cause an independent evaluation and analysis of the draft
Analysis to be conducted.  Such independent evaluation and analysis may be
referred by the Director, or his or her designee, to a registered geologist
certified by the State of California as an engineering geologist and/or a
licensed civil engineer qualified in soil mechanics retained by the city for
purposes of conducting such independent evaluation and analysis;



      2.   Consult with and seek to obtain comments from any public
agency which has jurisdiction by law with respect to the project;



      3.   Consult with and seek to obtain comments from any person
or organization identified in the draft Analysis as being concerned with the
geologic hazards in the project area; and



   C.   If the proponent of the project or the Development Services
Director, or his or her designee, determines that a public hearing would
facilitate the purposes and goals set forth in this chapter, conduct such a
hearing.  If a hearing is to be conducted, all persons, organizations and
public agencies identified in the draft Analysis shall be notified of such
hearing.



   D.   Final Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis.



      1.   Immediately subsequent to the completion of the
activities set forth in paragraphs A., B. and C. of this section, the
Development Services Director, or his or her designee, shall prepare a final
Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis with respect to the project in question.



      2.   The contents of the final Special Geological Study Zone
Analysis shall consist of the following:



         a.   The draft Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis or a
revision of the draft;



         b.   Comments and recommendations received with respect
to the draft Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis, either verbatim or in
summary form;



         c.   A list of persons, organizations and public
agencies commenting on the draft Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis;



         d.   The response of the preparer and/or the city to
significant geologic hazards identified in the review and consultation
process.



         e.   Comments, recommendations, responses and other
material may be attached to the draft Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis
and need not take the form of a complete revision of the entirety of said
draft.  The responses to significant geologic hazards identified shall
describe the disposition of such issues (e.g., revisions to the proposed
project to mitigate the anticipated geologic impact).



         f.   In the event that significant geologic hazards are
identified or objections made, and mitigation or other measures to reduce the
impact of such significant hazards are rejected, such rejections must be
addressed in detail giving reasons why such specific measures were not
accepted and factors of overriding importance warranting an override of the
suggested mitigation measures.



   E.   The final Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis shall then be
presented to that agency of the city which first must consider the project. 
Such presentation shall not occur until at least thirty (30) days subsequent
to the mailing of any notice specified in paragraph C. of this section. 
Such agency of the city shall certify that the final Special Geologic Study
Zone Analysis, including any modifications, additions or deletions to the
Analysis presented to the agency which the agency deems appropriate, has been
completed in compliance with this chapter and that it has reviewed and
considered the information contained in the Special Geologic Study Zone
Analysis.  Such certification shall be resolution or minute motion and shall
occur prior to the rendering of any decision approving a project.  Such
certification, as well as any subsequent certification by the City Council,
shall be completed within one (1) year from the date the application for the
project is accepted as complete.  All time limits described herein may be
extended once for a maximum of ninety (90) days if compelling circumstances
justify such extension, and the applicant agrees thereto.  If the City
Council makes the final decision on a project subsequent to consideration
thereof by another city agency, for example, the Planning Commission, the
City Council shall certify as stated above in this paragraph E. of this
section.



   F.   In the event that a city agency is required to give notice of a
public hearing which is to be conducted prior to that agency considering the
project in question, and the Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis process is
applicable to said project, said notice shall include the notice specified in
paragraph C. of this section and the hearing in question shall include a
hearing on the subject of the Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis.



   G.   When a Special Geologic Study Zone Analysis identifies one (1)
or more significant geologic hazards in the project area, the project may be
approved only by a written resolution which finds that:



      1.   Changes or alterations have been required in, or
incorporated into, the project which mitigate or avoid the significant
geologic hazards identified in the final Analysis; and/or



      2.   Such changes or alterations are within the responsibility
or jurisdiction of another public agency and such changes have been or can
and should be adopted by that agency; and/or



      3.   Specific economic, social, or other considerations make
infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the
final Analysis.



(Ord. 723, passed 2-2-82)



§ 20.280.060  FEES.



   The proponent of any project for which a Special Geologic Study Zone
Analysis is to be prepared shall be required to pay a fee to defray the
city's cost of evaluating and analyzing any draft Special Geologic Study Zone
Analysis and the preparation of any final Special Geologic Study Zone
Analysis.  The fees required to defray the city's costs shall be established
by a resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 723, passed 2-2-82)



CHAPTER 20.284:  LARGE FAMILY
DAY-CARE HOMES



Section



   20.284.010   Intent and purpose



   20.284.020   Permit required



   20.284.030   Application



   20.284.040   Development standards



   20.284.050   Administrative action



   20.284.060   Declaration of nuisance; remedies



§ 20.284.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations and standards
which pertain to the review, establishment, and operation of large family
day- care homes conducted within single family residences within the city.
For the purposes of this chapter, LARGE FAMILY DAY- CARE HOME shall mean a
single family home which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision
to nine (9) to fourteen (14) children(including children who reside at the
home), in the applicant’s own home, for periods of less than twenty-four
(24) hours per day.



(Ord. 853, passed 9-6-88; Am. Ord. 1184, passed 9-20-16)



§ 20.284.020  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in, conduct or
carry-on, in or upon any single family residence within the city, any large
family day-care home without first having been granted a valid permit
pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 853, passed 9-6-88)



§ 20.284.030  APPLICATION.



   An application for a large family day-care home permit, on forms
available from the Planning Division, shall be submitted to the City
Planner.  The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and
shall contain, at minimum, that information as required by the City
Planner.  The application shall be submitted together with the appropriate
fee therefore, as set by resolution of the City Council, to cover the
administrative costs of processing the application.



(Ord. 853, passed 9-6-88)



§ 20.284.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   A.   A large family day-care home shall be conducted only within a
single family residence meeting all applicable single family residence
standards of the zoning code.



   B.   The applicant shall have obtained, or has applied to obtain,
any and all necessary state licenses and permits to operate a large family
day-care home.  No permit as provided herein shall be effective until such
time as the applicant presents satisfactory evidence to the City Planner that
the applicant has complied with all such necessary state licenses and permits.



   C.   No large family day-care homes shall be located within three
hundred (300) feet, as measured from the exterior boundaries of the property,
from any other existing large family day-care home.



   D.   Every large family day-care home shall have a minimum street
parking capable of accommodating one (1) vehicle on the curb immediately
adjacent to the residence (minimum nineteen (19) feet curb length) and at
least two (2) on-site parking spaces (excluding any garage).  No large
family day-care home shall be permitted adjacent to arterial streets unless a
minimum of three (3) on-site parking spaces are provided (excluding any
garage).



   E.   Every large family day-care home shall be operated in such a
manner so as not to violate any of the mandatory provisions of Chapter 8.20
of the city code pertaining to noise control.



   F.   Any expansion, modification, or alteration of a single family
residence made necessary by the operation of a large family day-care home as
provided herein shall be reviewed and approved pursuant to customary zoning
code standards for residential zones prior to the approval of a permit as
provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 853, passed 9-6-88)



§ 20.284.050  ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION.



   Upon receipt of a complete application for a large family day-care
home, the City Planner (or his or her designee) shall review, approve or deny
the application pursuant to the procedures as follows:



   The City Planner shall approve an application for a large family
day-care home provided that the application complies with all of the
development standards as set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 853, passed 9-6-88; Am. Ord. 902, passed 4-2-91)



§ 20.284.060  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; REMEDIES.



   Any large family day-care home operated, conducted, or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance.  The city may, in addition to and in lieu of
prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action at law or in
equity in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction against
the permit holder to ensure compliance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter.  All remedies prescribed herein shall be cumulative and the use of
any one (1) or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other
remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
853, passed 9-6-88; Am. Ord. 902, passed 4-2-91)



DIVISION III — ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES



CHAPTER 20.400:  ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES — GENERAL



Section



   20.400.010   Administration



   20.400.020   Building permit issuance



   20.400.030   Types of procedures



   20.400.040   Applications



   20.400.050   Initiation by city



   20.400.060   Interchangeability



   20.400.070   Fees



   20.400.080   Environmental review



   20.400.090   Investigation



§ 20.400.010  ADMINISTRATION.



   In accordance with the provisions of the State Planning and Zoning Law,
Cal. Gov't Code Division 1 of Title 7, the City Planning Commission shall
administer regulations of this title and amendments thereto; hear and act
upon all matters involving variances and conditional use permits; revoke
conditional use permits; hear and act upon suspensions or modifications of
planned right-of-ways; and perform such other duties as are requested or
delegated by the City Council.



§ 20.400.020  BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   A.   General provisions.



      1.   It shall be unlawful for any property owner, or
authorized agent thereof, to commence any work pertaining to the erection,
construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion or alteration of any
building, or any addition to any building, until a building permit has first
been secured from the Division of Building and Safety for said work.



      2.   Each application for a building permit shall be made on a
printed form to be obtained at the Division of Building and Safety and shall
be accompanied by accurate information and dimensions of all yards and open
spaces, and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of
these regulations.  Where complete and accurate information is not readily
available from existing records, the Division of Building and Safety may
require the applicant to furnish a survey of the lot or parcel prepared by a
licensed surveyor.  The original of such application shall be kept in the
office of the Division of Building and Safety.



      3.   No building permit shall be issued for the erection or
use of any structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is
not in accordance with the provisions of this title and in conformity with
the approved site plan, conditional use permit or other entitlement, where
required by this title.  Any permit issued contrary to the provisions of
this title or not in conformity with an approved site plan, conditional use
permit or other entitlement for use shall be void and of no effect.



      4.   No building permit shall be issued where the structure(s)
to be erected will have the effect of depriving other persons of the use of
their property or will have the effect of invalidating the general plan.



      5.   No building permit shall be issued for a residential
building or structure on a lot which does not have a minimum frontage of
thirty (30) feet and access to a dedicated street or way acceptable to the
Planning Commission.



   B.   Flood hazard areas.  The Director hereby is authorized, and
shall have the duty, to refuse to issue a building permit or permits to any
applicant whose lot or parcel is subject to the requirements of Division II
of Title 18 of this code, except upon compliance with the requirements of
said Division II of Title 18.



   C.   Certificate of occupancy.  No building shall be occupied or
used unless a certificate of occupancy and a license for such use, where
required, is first obtained from the department or person vested with the
duty or authority to issue same.  Such certificate shall be issued only
after any construction, enlargement, or alteration has been completed in
conformity with the provisions of any regulating ordinance, with any approved
site plan and required conditions, and when the proposed use conforms to this
title and required conditions.



§ 20.400.030  TYPES OF PROCEDURES.



   The procedures to be utilized in administration of and modification to
this title include the following:



   A.   Legislative procedures.



      1.   Text amendment.  An ordinance or amendment changing the
wording of this title.



      2.   Change of zone.  An ordinance or amendment changing a
zone boundary as shown on the Zoning Map.



   B.   Administrative procedures.



      1.   Administrative interpretation.  A means of resolving
uncertainties or ambiguities in the meaning of any provision of this title. 
An interpretation is uniformly applicable to all subsequent situations in
which the same set of circumstances is present.  In addition, the
interpretation procedure may be used to make minor adjustments of zone
boundaries to conform to lot lines or to resolve uncertainty as to the
precise location of a zone boundary.



      2.   Administrative remedy.  A simplified procedure for
considering minor deviations from zoning regulations, within established
parameters, designed to expedite requests therefor without requiring Planning
Commission review.



      3.   Conditional use permit.  A discretionary action
concerning a specified land use and, pursuant to criteria set forth in this
title, to determine whether such use may be permitted at a given location and
to determine the conditions or limitations on development in each case.



      4.   Plan review.  The review and conditional approval of
development plans for specified categories of development or when required as
a condition of approval under some other procedure, in order to ensure the
intent of this title is met with regard to site arrangement, functional
effectiveness, landscape design, architectural quality, and other pertinent
attributes.



      5.   Certificate of compatibility.  A procedure to consider
the compatibility of residential structures and mobile and/or manufactured
housing to coordinate planning, architecture, aesthetics and economic
cohesiveness within residentially zoned areas of the city.



   C.   Quasi-judicial procedures.



      1.   Variance.  A determination under criteria established in
state law and this title, allowing deviation from the strict application of
regulations of this title, in cases where the effect of the strict
application of the regulations would deprive a particular property of
privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical
zoning classification.



      2.   Revocation.  Procedure for revoking any specific
development approval when violation of zoning requirements, conditions or
other laws are found to have occurred.



§ 20.400.040  APPLICATIONS.



   A.   Form and information required.  All applications to initiate a
procedure governed by this title shall be made pursuant to the Uniform
Application Procedure established by the Director and the nature of the
information to be submitted therewith shall be as prescribed by the Director
for each type of application.



   B.   Applicant.  Application to initiate any procedure set forth in
this title shall be made by the owner(s) or duly authorized agent(s) thereof,
of the property or by an applicant which is, or will be, the plaintiff in an
action in eminent domain to acquire the property.  Proof of ownership or
other requisite status hereunder shall be supplied concurrently with the
application submittal.  Applications shall be duly executed and verified
under penalty of perjury of the laws of the State of California.



   C.   Acceptance.



      1.   The Director shall be responsible for the acceptance of
all such applications.  No application shall be accepted until:



         a.   All required information is submitted, including
any environmental review documentation, when required (See: § 20.400.080);



         b.   At least one (1) year has passed since final action
on any previously denied application for substantially the same matter,
except as otherwise provided by this title; and



         c.   The required application fee has been paid.



      2.   As soon as possible, but in no case later than thirty
(30) days after receipt of an application, the Director shall determine, in
writing, if such application is complete, and immediately transmit such
determination to the applicant.  If an application is determined not to be
complete, the Director's determination shall specify the deficiencies and the
manner in which the application can be made complete.



(See: Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65943 and 65944.)



      3.   Upon determination that an application is complete and
meets the requirements for acceptance, or expiration of the thirty (30) day
period if no determination regarding completeness is made, the application
shall be deemed accepted.



(See: Cal. Gov't Code § 65943.)



§ 20.400.050  INITIATION BY CITY.



   When prescribed by provisions of this title for specific procedures,
proceedings may be initiated by minute order or resolution of the City
Council or Planning Commission, or by written order of the Director, or other
public official so authorized.



§ 20.400.060  INTERCHANGEABILITY.



   An application or other initiation of proceedings under any procedure
set forth in this title may be considered as an initiation of proceedings
under any other procedure set forth in this title; provided that, for each
action taken, the procedural steps required for that action have been
accomplished and the applicable fees paid.



§ 20.400.070  FEES.



   A.   A schedule of fees shall be adopted (and revised from time to
time as deemed necessary) by resolution of the City Council.



   B.   When a proceeding is initiated by application, or otherwise as
authorized in this title, a fee shall be paid to the city by the applicant or
appellant in the amount set forth in the currently adopted schedule of fees.



   C.   No fee shall be required when a proceeding is initiated or
appealed by action of an officer or official body of the city.



   D.   No fee shall be refunded except upon order of the City Council
for good cause shown.



§ 20.400.080  ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.



   A.   For purposes of applying procedural time limits under this
title, a procedure will not be considered to have been initiated until one
(1) of the following has occurred pursuant to the California Environmental
Quality Act:



      1.   Notice of completion of a draft environmental impact
report has been filed;



      2.   Notice of a negative declaration has been made; or



      3.   The Director determines that the proposed zoning matter
is exempt from, or does not constitute a project under, the California
Environmental Quality Act.



   B.   If, after having determined otherwise, it is determined that
either a negative declaration or an environmental impact report is required,
or that a supplement to a draft environmental impact report is required, the
running of time limits applicable to the zoning procedure shall be suspended
until the applicable environmental review step has been accomplished.



   C.   Any hearing on an environmental impact report shall be held
before or concurrently with the last hearing to be held on a zoning matter to
which it relates.



   D.   Certification of final environmental impact report or adoption
of a negative declaration, when required, shall be made prior to a final
decision on a zoning matter.



§ 20.400.090  INVESTIGATION.



   Except as otherwise directed by the City Manager, for each matter
initiated under a procedure established by this title, the Director shall
cause an investigation to be made and a report prepared providing factual
information and recommendations as appropriate for action in accordance with
the provisions of this title.



(See: Cal. Gov't Code § 65804(d).)



CHAPTER 20.404:  LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES



Section



   20.404.010   Zoning ordinance text amendment



   20.404.020   Change of zone



§ 20.404.010  ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENT.



   A.   Purpose.  Any amendment to the text of this title which
imposes any regulation not theretofore imposed, removes or modifies any
regulation theretofore imposed or adds any use to any zone not theretofore
listed shall be made according to the following procedure.



   B.   Procedure.



      1.   Initiation.  Proceedings may be initiated by motion of
the Planning Commission or by motion of the City Council.  Proceedings
initiated by the City Council shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.



      2.   Notice of commission hearing.  Notice of the time and
place of the Planning Commission hearing shall be given as required by law.
(See:  Chapter 20.416)



      3.   Commission hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold
a public hearing upon the amendment and thereupon, within forty (40) days
after the conclusion of said hearing, shall make a determination and report
thereof to the City Council.



      4.   Council action.  The City Council, after receipt of the
report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, shall give notice and
hold  public hearings on the proposed change(s).  Upon completion of the
public hearing(s) the City Council may either approve, modify or reject the
recommended action.  If modified, the City Council shall refer the matter
back to the Planning Commission for a report.  Said report shall be filed
with the City Council within forty (40) days after the referral.



§ 20.404.020  CHANGE OF ZONE.



   An amendment to the Zoning Map changing a property from one zone to
another shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   A.   Criteria for granting a change of zone.  The Planning
Commission, in recommending and the City Council in approving a proposed
change of zone, shall consider the following:



      1.   That the proposed zone change is in conformity with the
General Plan as amended.  Where conflicts exist between the zone change and
the General Plan, and it is determined that the proposed change of zone is in
the interest of the city, the General Plan may be amended concurrently with
the zone change.



      2.   That the subject property is suitable for the uses
permitted in the proposed zone, in terms of access, size of parcel,
relationship to similar or related uses and other considerations deemed
relevant by the Planning Commission and City Council.



      3.   That the proposed change of zone is not detrimental to
the use of land in any adjacent zone.



   B.   Procedure.



      1.   Initiation.  Such change may be initiated by the City
Council, Planning Commission, owner, or duly authorized agent thereof, of any
land or by an applicant who is, or will be, the plaintiff in an action in
eminent domain to acquire the property.  An application for change of zone
shall be filed in accordance with § 20.400.040.



      2.   Filing fee.  The applicant shall be required to pay
appropriate fees as determined by City Council resolution to cover costs and
expenses involved in processing an application for change of zone.



      3.   Filing prior to hearing.  Any and all applications to be
filed under and pursuant to the provisions of this section must be filed with
the Planning Commission not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date set
for the hearing of said application.



      4.   Notice of hearing.  Forthwith upon the filing of a
completed application for a change of zone, the Secretary to the Planning
Commission shall set a public hearing before the Planning Commission on the
subject of the Planning Commission's prospective recommendation to the City
Council on the proposed change of zone.  Notice shall be given as required
by law. (See: Chapter 20.416)



      5.   Commission hearing.  The Planning Commission shall
conduct a public hearing upon the matters referred to in such an
application.  Within forty (40) days after conclusion of said hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make a determination and report thereon to the City
Council.



      6.   Commission findings and decisions.  If, from the facts
presented to the Planning Commission in the application, at the public
hearing, or by investigation, the Planning Commission, by a majority vote of
a quorum then present, finds that public necessity, convenience, general
welfare, or good zoning practice, require the proposed change of zone
involved or any portion thereof, the Planning Commission shall recommend such
proposed change to the City Council; otherwise the application shall be
disapproved.  The Planning Commission shall make its findings and
recommendation in writing within forty (40) days from the date of completion
of the hearing and shall forthwith transmit a copy thereof to the
applicant.  If the Planning Commission recommends approval of the proposed
change or any portion thereof, it shall transmit the application together
with its report and recommendation relative thereto, to the City Council for
its action.  If the Planning Commission fails to make a determination within
the time limit herein specified, it shall lose jurisdiction and applicant may
appeal to the City Council as hereinafter provided.



      7.   Council action.  Upon receipt of the application
together with the Planning Commission's report and recommendations relative
thereto, the City Council shall hold a public hearing noticed as required by
law.  After City Council has conducted said hearing, it shall either:



         a.   Confirm the recommendations of the Planning
Commission and effect such change by ordinance; or



         b.   If the City Council does not agree with all or any
part of the Planning Commission's recommendations, City Council shall refer
the matter back to the Planning Commission for a report of the parts in
question.  Upon receiving the report of the Planning Commission, or after
forty (40) days after the date of the referral, the City Council may, by
ordinance, effect any change even though the Planning Commission does not
concur.



      8.   Denial and appeal.  If, after the original hearing, the
Planning Commission denies the application or does not make a determination
within the time limit specified, the applicant may, within ten (10) days from
the date on which the notification of denial was mailed to said applicant or
upon termination of the time limit, appeal to the City Council by written
notice of appeal filed with the City Clerk.



      9.   Alternate action.  Where there is an application for a
zone change and the Planning Commission and/or City Council find that the
public interest would best be protected by, as an alternate, granting a
conditional use permit to allow a more limited but appropriate group of uses
than permitted in the requested zone, such permit may be recommended by the
Planning Commission and granted by the City Council, provided there is a
finding that the site is appropriate for one or more, but not all of the uses
listed in the zone applied for, and where the Planning Commission or City
Council determine that a time limit or other conditions are essential to
protect the public health, safety, general welfare and the policies set forth
in the general plan.



CHAPTER 20.408:  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES



Section



   20.408.010   Administrative interpretation



   20.408.020   Administrative remedy



   20.408.030   Conditional use permit



   20.408.040   Plan review



   20.408.050   Certificate of compatibility



§ 20.408.010 ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATION.



   A.   The purpose of this section is to provide a means for resolving
uncertainty or ambiguity as to the meaning or intent of any provision of this
title, including:



      1.   Further definition and enumeration of the uses permitted
in the various zones;



      2.   Determination of parking space requirements for uses not
specifically listed in the vehicular provisions of this title;



      3.   Determination of the precise location of zone boundaries,
or minor adjustment thereof to conform to lot lines.



   B.   Except in the case of zone boundary determinations, each
interpretation made under this section is generally applicable to all future
situations of the same type and with similar circumstances, and is not
limited or directed to specific properties or circumstances thereon.



   C.   Initiation.  The preparation of an interpretation may be
initiated by order of the City Council or the Planning Commission, by the
Director, or by application pursuant to § 20.400.040.  An interpretation
shall not be initiated when a zoning ordinance text amendment or change of
zone involving the same issue has been initiated and is still under
consideration.



   D.   Basis for Interpretation.  An interpretation shall be based
upon an examination of the intent of this title considering all the relevant
provisions thereof, and shall be consistent with such intent.  Careful
consideration shall be given to the similarities and differences among the
uses permitted, development standards, and other regulations applicable to
the various zones.



   E.   Preparation.  Within forty (40) days after the initiation of
an interpretation request, the Director shall prepare a written
interpretation and transmit it to the City Council and Planning Commission.



   F.   Notice.  Upon transmittal of an interpretation to the City
Council and Planning Commission, public notice that such interpretation has
been prepared shall be given in the same manner as for a zoning ordinance
text amendment (See: § 20.416.020), or in the case of a zone boundary
determination, notice shall be made in the same manner as for a change of
zone (See: § 20.416.010).  The notice shall explain that the interpretation
may become effective without a hearing unless a written request for a hearing
is received.



   G.   Commission hearing and action.



      1.   If a written request for a hearing is received from any
interested party within ten (10) days after notice is made, the Planning
Commission shall conduct such hearing.  If no such request is made, the
Commission may consider the matter without hearing, and the matter may be
placed on the Commission agenda as a consent calendar item.



      2.   The Planning Commission may adopt, modify, or disapprove
an interpretation as submitted by the Director, or may refer the matter back
to the Director for further study.  The Planning Commission shall act within
forty (40) days after transmittal of an interpretation from the Director,
except that a referral back to the Director is considered as an initiation of
an other interpretation.



      3.   Planning Commission action on an interpretation is final
unless appealed pursuant to Chapter 20.424.  Failure to act shall be deemed
an approval thereof.



   H.   If the Planning Commission action on an interpretation is
appealed, the City Council shall hear and decide the matter with notice given
in the same manner as the initial notice under paragraph F. of this section.



§ 20.408.020  ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY.



   A.   Purpose.  Administrative remedy is hereby established to
expedite and relieve the Commission and Council of minor modifications from
the requirements of this title, within the limits established by this section.



   B.   Authority of the development services director.



      1.   Minor modification.  In the public interest, the
Director, without a public hearing, may consider and approve, conditionally
approve, or deny modifications from the provisions of this title, limited to
the following circumstances:



         a.   Where dimensional problems of an existing parcel
require reduction of lot area or dimensions by not more than five percent
(5%) of that required by the zone provided that such reductions are requested
on not more than one (1) lot within any one (1) subdivision or tract.



         b.   Where dimensional problems of an existing parcel
require reduction of yards and/or distance between buildings by not more than
ten percent (10%) of the requirements of the zone provided that such
reductions are not requested for more than one (1) lot within any one (1)
subdivision or tract.



         c.   Reduction of number of required parking spaces by
not more than ten percent (10%) and/or modification of parking (dimension)
standards by not more than five percent (5%).



         d.   Modification of wall and fence heights, not to
exceed twelve (12) inches.



         e.   Modification of projections/encroachment into
required yard areas by not more than twelve (12) inches, provided that such
does not violate fire, housing or building codes.



         f.   Modification of maximum permitted lot coverage not
to exceed ten percent (10%) of the maximum lot area coverage permitted in the
zone.



         g.   Modification of maximum height regulation by not
more than ten percent (10%) of the requirements of the zone.



         h.   Modification of the size, height, and area of signs
by not more than five percent (5%).



      2.   Such additional matters as may be delegated to the
Director by the Council, provided that the limits and scope of the Director's
authority shall be set forth by the delegating body.



   C.   Procedure.  The following procedure shall apply to
administrative remedy applications:



      1.   Application for administrative remedy shall be made
pursuant to § 20.400.040.



      2.   The Director, within thirty (30) days after filing of the
application, shall either:



         a.   Approve the application;



         b.   Approve the application with conditions; or



         c.   Disapprove the application.



   The Director shall set forth the findings upon which the decision is
based.



      3.   A copy of the proceedings and findings of the Development
Services Director shall be submitted, in writing, to the Commission as a
matter of record.



      4.   The decision of the Director shall be final and shall
become effective ten (10) days after issuance of the decision by the
Director, subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 20.424.



§ 20.408.030  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   A.   Intent and purpose.  The conditional use permit is intended
for those land uses which require special consideration in a particular zone
or in the city as a whole.  The following factors shall be considered in
determining the appropriateness of a location with respect to adjacent
uses:  The extent of traffic generation, noise, vibration, smoke or other
problems incidental to the operation; special locational and space
requirements; the effect that such uses may have on property values, health,
safety and welfare; and any other characteristic which may affect the
compatibility of the use with the neighborhood or the community.  In
granting the permit, certain safeguards to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare may be required as conditions of approval.  Uses existing on
the effective date of this title which are listed as permitted subject to
conditional use permit may continue without securing such a permit; however,
any extension or expansion of such use shall comply with provisions of this
section.



   B.   Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit.



      1.   Uses listed in each zone requiring a conditional use
permit may be permitted in said zone subject to the provisions of this
section.



      2.   The following uses may be permitted in any zone except
where expressly prohibited, when such uses are deemed by the Planning
Commission to be essential or desirable for the public welfare and
convenience and in conformity with the General Plan and its objectives.



   Borrow pit



   Cellular telephone poles or facilities



   Cemetery, columbarium, crematory, mausoleum



   Golf course



   Heliport



   Hospitals, sanitariums



   Planned Unit Development in residential zones, subject to the
provisions of Chapter 20.16



   Public utility structures and installations not listed in any zone



   Radio and television transmitters



   Temporary establishments or enterprises involving: circus, open air
theater (excluding drive-in theater), tent revival and race track



      3.   Other special or unusual uses for which no provision is
made in this title or which provide for an unusual combination of uses not
otherwise provided for nor otherwise prohibited in this title.



   C.   Initiation andhearing.



      1.   Application.  Application for a conditional use permit
shall be made pursuant to § 20.400.040.  The application shall include a
site plan and elevations of the proposed development.  Appropriate fees
shall be paid as determined by City Council resolution.



      2.   Staff investigation.  The Planning Division shall make
an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information
necessary for the action consistent with the intent of this title and the
General Plan, and shall report the findings to the Commission.



      3.   Notice of hearing.  Notice of public hearing shall be
made pursuant to Chapter 20.416.



   D.   Commission findings and conditions.  The Commission, in
approving a conditional use permit, shall find as follows:



      1.   That the use(s) applied for at the location set forth in
the application is properly one(s) for which a Conditional Use Permit is
authorized by this title.



      2.   That said use(s) with any conditions to be imposed is
necessary or desirable for the development of the community, in harmony with
the various elements or objectives of the General Plan, and not detrimental
to existing uses or to uses specifically permitted in the zone in which the
proposed use(s) is to be located.



      3.   That the site is adequate in size and shape to
accommodate the proposed development and all of the yards, setbacks, walls or
fences, landscaping, and other features required to bring about conformity
with other elements in the neighborhood.



      4.   That the proposed site relates to streets and highways
which are properly designed and improved to carry the type and quantity of
traffic generated or to be generated by the proposed development.



      5.   That with the conditions stated in the permit, the uses
will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:



         a.   Special setbacks, yards, open spaces and buffers;



         b.   Fences and walls;



         c.   Lighting;



         d.   Surfacing of off-street parking and loading areas;



         e.   Requiring street dedications and street
improvements, including service roads and alleys when necessary and practical;



         f.   Regulations of points of vehicular ingress and
egress;



         g.   Regulation of signs;



         h.   Regulation of time for certain activities;



         i.   Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof;



         j.   Requiring maintenance of grounds;



         k.   Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, dust;



         l.   Time period within which the proposed use shall be
developed;



         m.   A bond for removal of such use within a specified
period of time; and



         n.   Such other conditions as are necessary to protect
existing or potential users in the area.



   E.   Commission action. 



      1.   The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the application and shall announce and record its
decision within twenty-one (21) days following the conclusion of the public
hearing.  The decision shall set forth the findings by formal resolution of
the Commission and shall be filed with the City Council.  A copy of the
resolution shall be mailed to the applicant.



      2.   The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final
and shall become effective ten (10) days after the adoption of the resolution
by the Commission, subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 20.424.



   F.   Time limit.



      1.   Each permit hereafter granted shall automatically expire
and be of no further force or effect if not exercised within two (2) years of
its effective date, unless the permit specifies a longer period; provided
that the Planning Commission, subject to appeal to the Council in the same
manner and time as with the permit itself, may extend any such permit for
successive periods not to exceed six (6) months each, upon showing of good
cause therefor, if written application for such extension is filed prior to
the expiration thereof.



      2.   “Exercise” of a permit shall mean substantial
construction work pursuant to a building permit, and shall not include
preparation of plans, engineering work or grading.  In case of any dispute
thereon, applicant or its successor in interest may request in writing that
the Planning Commission conduct a hearing of which the requesting party shall
be given ten (10) days advance written notice by first class mail directed to
the address of the requesting party given in such written request for
hearing.  The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the
Council pursuant to Chapter 20.424.



      3.   Each permit issued hereunder shall have appended thereto
a copy of this paragraph F. and Chapter 20.412, and shall contain
substantially the following provision:  “Any permit is subject to
expiration and revocation as provided in Chapter 20.412, and said provisions
are specifically made a part hereof without negating the applicability of any
other provision of this title or of any other ordinance.”



      4.   Upon expiration of the period of time set forth in
paragraph F.2. above, if, in the opinion of the Secretary to the Commission,
any permit has been revoked or has expired, written notice thereof may be
directed to the holder of the permit according to city records at its last
address of record.  The same shall be sent by first class mail, postage
prepaid.  Unless a hearing is requested by any interested person as provided
for in paragraph F.2. above, with such request being received by the city
within thirty (30) days of date of mailing of said letter, nonexercise of
said permit shall be conclusively presumed.  Any notices to be given under
this paragraph F. shall be deemed given upon deposit in the United States
mail, whether actually received or not.



   G.   Revisions to site plan approved as part of conditional use
permit.



      1.   Minor revision to a site plan approved as part of a
conditional use permit may be made after review and approval by the Director
pursuant to the Plan Review Procedure, § 20.408.040.  Minor revisions are
hereby defined as revisions which in no way change the requirements set forth
by the Commission or Council or violate the intent of any of the standards or
conditions of the permit or of the zone.



      2.   Revisions other than minor revisions, as defined above,
shall be made pursuant to the conditional use permit procedure set forth in
this section.



      3.   All copies of the approved revised site plan shall be
dated and signed by the Director and made a part of the record of the subject
conditional use permit.  One (1) copy of said approved revised site plan
shall be mailed to the applicant.



   H.   Reapplication.  No person shall reapply for a similar
conditional use permit on the same land, building, or structure within a
period of one (1) year from the date of the final decision on such previous
application unless such decision is a denial without prejudice.



(Am. Ord. 1066, passed 4-20-04)



§ 20.408.040  PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of the plan review procedure is to
enable responsible city departments to review development proposals for
conformity with applicable provisions of this code and all requirements of
law.



   B.   Procedure.



      1.   Application for plan review shall be submitted in
accordance with § 20.400.040, together with the requisite fee therefor.



         a.   Application for plan review shall include
submission of the following, where appropriate:



            (1)   Subdivision Map



            (2)   Landscape Plan



            (3)   Floor Plan



            (4)   Grading Plan



            (5)   Site Utilization Map



            (6)   Detailed Site Plan



            (7)   Building Elevations



            (8)   Phasing Plan



         b.   The items as listed above are considered a
minimum.  Applicants may be required to submit additional information as
necessary to complete the review process.



      2.   The plans shall be reviewed by the Director for
conformity with provisions of this title. The plans may be approved and
signed by the Director which stipulate that the development as shown (with
any changes noted by the Director) conforms with the development regulations
of the zone.



      3.   For any project not requiring Planning Commission review,
the Director shall provide the applicant a written decision approving,
denying or conditionally approving a proposed project within thirty (30) days
following submission of a complete application pursuant to Chapter 20.400. 
The Director's decision shall contain the appropriate findings and reasons
for decision.  The Director shall maintain a copy of the decision on file in
the Development Services Department.  The Director's decision shall be final
and shall become effective ten (10) days following the date of decision
subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 20.424.



      4.   All development projects subject to Planning Commission
review and approval, shall be placed on the Planning Commission agenda for
consideration.  The Planning Commission shall consider and act upon each
discretionary application according to the provisions of this title.  The
Planning Commission's decision shall be noted on the plans and recorded in
the Planning Commission minutes.



      5.   No building permit shall be issued until all required
plans have been approved in accordance with this section and no certificate
of occupancy shall be issued unless the development complies with the
approved plan review application and all conditions attached thereto.



      6.   The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final
and shall become effective ten (10) days after the adoption of a resolution
of approval or denial by the Planning Commission, subject to the filing of a
timely appeal pursuant to Chapter 20.424.



   C.   Contents of plans required.  All plans required to be
submitted to the Development Services Department shall indicate clearly, and
with full dimensions, the information required by the application. The
applicant shall provide any additional information as required by the
Director to establish that the project satisfies the following aesthetic
requirements:



      1.   Landscaping - Refer to the following sections:



      Residential



      R-H      § 20.204.040.K.



      Commercial



      C-P      § 20.224.040.E.4.



      C-N      § 20.228.040.E.4.



      C-C      § 20.232.030.D.2. and



            § 20.232.030.E.4.



      C-G      § 20.236.040.M.1. through M.4.



      C-M      § 20.240.060.D.4.



      C-RC      § 20.244.040.E.4.



      Industrial



      M-P      § 20.248.040.E.



      M-1      § 20.252.040.D.4. through D.6. and §
20.252.040.E.5.



      M-2      § 20.256.040.



      2.   Architectural standards.



         a.   Screening of mechanical equipment and storage areas:



      Residential



      R-H      § 20.204.040.G.2.d.



      R-1      § 20.208.040.E.1.b., E.2.c. and E.3.b.



      R-1(5000)   § 20.212.040.E.2.a. and E.3.b.



      R-2      § 20.216.040.E.2.a. and E.3.b.



      R-3      § 20.220.040.D.2.g. and D.3.e.



      Commercial



      C-P      § 20.224.050.A.



      C-N      § 20.228.050.A.



      C-C      § 20.232.040.A.



      C-G      § 20.236.040.K.1. through K.4., L., and M.3.b.
and c.



      C-M      § 20.240.060.J.1. through J.4., K. and L.3.



      Industrial



      M-P      § 20.248.040.K. and L.3.



      M-1      § 20.252.040.K.1. through K.5. and M.1. through
M.5.



      M-2      § 20.256.040.



         b.   Lighting requirements:



      Residential



      R1-H      § 20.200.040.J.



      R-H      § 20.204.040.L.



      R-1      § 20.208.040.N.



      Commercial



      C-G      § 20.236.040.Q.



      M-1      § 20.252.040.J.3.a., b. and c.



      M-2      § 20.256.040



         c.   Required building materials:



      Commercial



      C-P      § 20.224.040.E.1.b. and c.



      C-N      § 20.228.040.E.1.b. and c.



      C-C      § 20.232.030.E.1.b. and c.



      C-G      § 20.236.040.E.1.b.



      C-M      § 20.240.060.D.1.b. and c.



      Industrial



      M-1      § 20.252.040.E.1.b. and J.2.a.



         d.   Sign requirements:



      Location and height of signs   § 20.28.190.



      Sign maintenance   § 20.28.210.



      Sign illumination   § 20.28.230.



      Parking of advertising vehicles   § 20.28.260.



      3.   Neighborhood preservation.



      Residential



      R-H         § 20.204.040.G.2.d.



      R-1         § 20.208.040.E.1.b.



      R-1(5000)      § 20.212.040.E.1.b.



      R-2         § 20.216.040.E.1.b.



      R-3         § 20.220.040.D.1.b.



      Commercial



      C-P         § 20.224.040.E.5.



      C-N         § 20.228.040.E.5.



      C-C         § 20.232.030.E.5.



      C-G         § 20.236.040.M.6.a. and P.1. and 2.



      C-M         § 20.240.060.D.4.



      Industrial



      M-P         § 20.248.040.D.1., 2. and E.



      M-1         § 20.252.040.D.1. and E.6.a. through e.



      M-2         § 20.256.040.



      4.   Art in public places program requirements.



         a.   Except as otherwise provided in this title, all
development projects are subject to the requirements contained in the most
recently adopted or amended version of the Art in Public Places Manual.



         b.   All developers of commercial projects, industrial
projects, including attached and detached additions to existing commercial
and industrial buildings, and residential projects of five (5) dwelling units
or more with a total building valuation are required to select, purchase and
install permanent outdoor sculpture accessible by the general public.  The
required minimum art allocation shall be as established in the Art in Public
Places Manual. For any custom home development, the art requirement will be
based on an estimate of the homes' market value, based on lot size and
existing market.  If development of a project is to proceed in phases, the
phasing plan shall include information reflecting compliance with the Art in
Public Places requirements and shall be subject to review and approval, all
as specified in the Art in Public Places Manual.  Additional requirements of
the city's Art in Public Places Program are set forth in the Art in Public
Places Manual. 



         c.   All property owners are responsible for maintaining
the art work in clean, undamaged condition for the lifetime of the art
work.  The obligation to maintain the art work shall be evidenced by written
instrument recorded with the County Recorder setting forth such obligation. 
A copy of the instrument shall be submitted to the city immediately following
recordation.



(Am. Ord. 1050, passed 6-19-01)



§ 20.408.050  CERTIFICATE OF COMPATIBILITY.



   A.   Intent and purpose.  The certificate of compatibility is
applicable to all areas that permit single family dwellings within the
city.  The certificate of compatibility considers the compatibility of
residential structures and mobile or manufactured homes to coordinate land
planning, architecture, aesthetics and economic cohesiveness within
residentially zoned properties in the city.  A certificate of compatibility
shall be obtained prior to submittal of an application for a building permit
for any single family dwelling.



   B.   Director's authority.  In issuing a certificate of
compatibility, the Director shall have the authority, as an administrative
act, subject to the provisions of this section, to require conditions of
development in addition to those required by this title where it is
determined that such conditions are necessary to further the objectives of
the general plan and are in harmony with the intent, purpose and spirit of
this title and/or where such additional requirements are deemed essential to
protect the public safety and general welfare of the community.



   C.   Procedure.



      1.   Application for a certificate of compatibility shall be
made pursuant to § 20.400.040, together with the requisite fee therefor, and
shall be accompanied by the following materials:



         a.   A detailed plot plan showing:



            (1)   Dimensions and orientation of the parcel (to
scale).



            (2)   Location of buildings, structures and mobile
homes, both existing and proposed.



            (3)   Location of eave overhang and architectural
features.



         b.   All building and mobile home elevations.



         c.   Indication of the types and colors of all exterior
construction materials.



         d.   Location of all walls and fences, their height and
materials of construction.



         e.   Any other architectural and engineering data as may
be required to permit necessary findings that the provisions of this title
are complied with.



      2.   Staff investigation.  The Planning Division shall make
an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information
necessary for the action consistent with the intent of this title and the
General Plan, and shall report the findings to the Director.



      3.   Notice of hearings.  Notice of public hearing shall be
given pursuant to § 20.416.020.E.1. and shall otherwise comply with Chapter
20.416 as to form and content.



   D.   Director findings.  The Director, in approving a certificate
of compatibility, shall find as follows:



      1.   That the proposed structure, mobile or manufactured home
is properly designed and complies with the requirements of the zone in which
it is proposed.



      2.   That the proposed structure, mobile or manufactured home,
with any conditions to be imposed, is in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the general plan and is not economically or aesthetically
detrimental to existing or previously approved uses, structures or mobile
homes within the surrounding area.



      3.   That the proposed structure, mobile or manufactured home
is aesthetically compatible with the other uses, structures, and mobile homes
in the surrounding area.



   E.   Director's action and appeal procedures.



      1.   The Development Services Director may approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove the application and shall announce and
record the decision within twenty-one (21) days following the conclusion of
the public hearing.  The decision shall set forth the findings, in writing,
and shall be filed with the Planning Commission.  A copy of the decision
shall be mailed to the applicant.



      2.   The decision of the Director shall be final and shall
become effective ten (10) days after issuance of the decision by the
Director, subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 20.424.



   F.   Time limit.



      1.   Each certificate hereafter granted shall automatically
expire and be of no further force or effect if not exercised within two (2)
years of its effective date, unless the certificate specifies a longer
period; provided that the Director, subject to appeal in the same manner and
time as with the certificate itself, may extend any such certificate for
successive periods not to exceed six (6) months each, upon showing of good
cause therefor, if written application for such extension is filed prior to
the expiration thereof.



      2.   “Exercise” of a certificate shall mean substantial
construction work pursuant to a building permit, and shall not include
preparation of plans, engineering work or grading.  In case of any dispute
thereon, applicant or its successor in interest may request in writing that
the Director conduct a hearing of which the requesting party shall be given
ten (10) days advance written notice by first class mail directed to the
address of the requesting party given in such written request for hearing. 
The decision of the Director may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 20.424.



      3.   Each certificate shall have appended thereto a copy of
this paragraph F. and Chapter 20.412, and shall contain substantially the
following provision:  “This certificate is subject to expiration and
revocation as provided in Chapter 20.412, and said provisions are
specifically made a part hereof without negating the applicability of any
other provision of said Title 20 or of any other ordinance.”



      4.   Upon expiration of the period of time set forth in
paragraph F.2. above, if, in the opinion of the Director, any certificate has
been revoked or has expired, written notice thereof may be directed to the
holder thereof according to city records at its last address of record.  The
same shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.  Unless a hearing
is requested by any interested person as provided for in paragraph F.2.
above, with such request being received by the city within thirty (30) days
of date of mailing of said letter, nonexercise  of said certificate shall be
conclusively presumed.  Any notices to be given under this paragraph F.
shall be deemed given upon deposit in the United States mail, whether
actually received or not.



   G.   Revisions to site plan approved as part of certificate of
compatibility.



      1.   Minor revision to a site plan approved as part of a
certificate of compatibility may be made after review and approval by the
Director pursuant to the plan review procedure, § 20.408.040.  Minor
revisions are hereby defined as revisions which in no way change the
requirements set forth by the Director or violate the intent of any of the
standards or conditions of the certificate or of the zone.



      2.   Revisions other than minor revisions, as defined above,
shall be made pursuant to the certificate of compatibility procedure set
forth in this section.



      3.   All copies of the approved revised site plan shall be
dated and signed by the Director and made a part of the record of the subject
certificate of compatibility.  One (1) copy of said approved revised site
plan shall be mailed to the applicant.



CHAPTER 20.412:  QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURES



Section



   20.412.010   Variance



   20.412.020   Revocation of permit, approval or variance



§ 20.412.010  VARIANCE.



   A.   Intent and purpose. 



      1.   A variance from the terms of this title shall be granted
only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property,
including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict
application of the requirements of this title deprives such property of
privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical
zoning classifications.



      2.   Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions
as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a
grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other
properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.



   B.   Commission hearing procedure.



      1.   Application.  Application for a variance shall be filed
pursuant to § 20.400.040 together with the appropriate fee as determined by
City Council resolution.



      2.   Staff investigation.  The Planning Division shall make
an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information
necessary for the action consistent with the intent of this Chapter and the
general plan, and shall report the findings to the Commission.



      3.   Notice of hearings.  Notice of public hearing shall
contain the time and place of the hearing and the location and proposed use
or uses of the subject property.  Notice shall be made pursuant to Chapter
20.416.



   C.   Commission action.



      1.   The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the application and shall announce and record its
decision within twenty-one (21) days following the conclusion of the public
hearing.  The decision shall set forth the findings by formal resolution of
the Commission and shall be filed with the City Council.  A copy of the
resolution shall be mailed to the applicant.



      2.   The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final
and shall become effective ten (10) days after the adoption of the resolution
by the Commission, subject to the filing of a timely appeal pursuant to
Chapter 20.424.



§ 20.412.020  REVOCATION OF PERMIT, APPROVAL OR VARIANCE.



   A.   Any permit, approval or variance granted pursuant to this
title, or granted under any of the prior zoning ordinances in the city and is
still in effect, including any which may have been granted automatically for
a nonconforming prior use, shall be revoked upon a finding that one (1) or
more of the following conditions exist:



      1.   That the use is detrimental to the public health or
safety or is a nuisance;



      2.   That the permit, approval or variance was obtained by
fraud;



      3.   That the use for which the permit, approval or variance
was granted has ceased, or has been suspended for one (1) year or more;



      4.   That the applicant has not complied with one or more of
the conditions of approval or the permit, approval or variance.



   B.   Any such finding shall be by the Planning Commission after
public hearing of which the initial applicant (or any successor of record
whose address has been furnished) shall be given ten (10) days advance
written notice by first class mail directed to applicant's address of record
(or such successor's address so furnished), as per the files of the Planning
Commission.  Said finding of the Commission and its determination pursuant
thereto shall be subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 20.424.  Action of
the Planning Commission, or the Council, shall be by resolution, shall
contain specific findings and specific action relative to revocation.



   C.   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth above, the Commission,
or the Council, as the case may be, with respect to any ground of revocation
coming with paragraphs A.3. or A.4., above, may grant a period of time within
which the use may be reactivated, or within which noncompliance with
conditions may be remedied.  In such event, the resolution shall be
considered interlocutory, and the hearing shall be continued automatically,
without further notice, to the first regular meeting of the body adopting the
resolution following such extended date or dates set for full compliance. 
Thereupon by further resolution, the body theretofore otherwise finally
acting shall take final action with respect thereto.  No further appeal from
any action of the Planning Commission shall be permitted, and such action of
the Planning Commission or Council shall be final and conclusive.



CHAPTER 20.416:  HEARINGS



Section



   20.416.010   Setting of hearings



   20.416.020   Notice of hearings



   20.416.030   Conduct of hearings



§ 20.416.010  SETTING OF HEARINGS.



   A.   Planning Commission hearings.



      1.   Except for matters considered by or appealed from the
Director, when a public hearing is required on a zoning matter, the first
such hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission.



      2.   Except as otherwise provided herein, when a public
hearing is to be held by the Planning Commission, the Director shall set the
time and place for such hearing.  The time of such hearing shall be at least
ten (10) days and not more than forty (40) days after the acceptance of an
application or the receipt of written notice or other instruction from the
Planning Commission or City Council initiating the matter.



   B.   Council hearings.



      1.   When a public hearing is required on a zoning matter
following any decision or recommendation by the Planning Commission, such
hearing shall be held by the City Council.



      2.   Upon acceptance of an appeal, or receipt of a written
report from the Planning Commission required to be heard by the City Council,
the City Clerk shall set the time and place for such hearing.  The time of
such hearing shall be at least ten (10) days and not more than forty (40)
days after the end of the period for filing an appeal or after receipt of the
report.



§ 20.416.020  NOTICE OF HEARINGS.



   A.   Time.  Notice of each public hearing shall be given at least
ten (10) calendar days before the date set for such hearing.  (See: Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 65090 and 65091.)



   B.   Content.  Each notice of public hearing shall include the
following information:  (See: Cal. Gov't Code § 65094.)



      1.   Time and place of the hearing;



      2.   Who will conduct the hearing;



      3.   A general explanation of the matter to be considered,
including the type and magnitude of any proposed changes in development or
development regulations;



      4.   Identification of the property and the area affected;



      5.   Where further information can be obtained;



      6.   A statement of the right to appear and be heard.



   C.   Publication of notice.  When newspaper publication of a notice
of public hearing is required, such notice shall be published at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation which is published and circulated in
the city, or in the area affected if the matter is a prezoning of a proposed
annexation to the city.  (See:  Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65090 and 65091.)



   D.   Posting of notice.  Posting of notices of public hearing in
the vicinity of property affected may be directed by the City Council or the
Planning Commission, but shall not be required when notice is given by other
means pursuant to this chapter and state law.



   E.   Notice to owners of property within five  hundred (500) feet.



      1.   Where a public hearing is required by this code, written
notification of such hearing shall be provided to owners of property located
within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property, and such notice shall
be made by delivery by city employees or by first class mail to all persons,
including businesses, corporations, or other public and private entities,
shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property which is
located within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property.  (See: Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 65091(a)(3).)



      2.   If the matter to be considered is a legislative matter as
identified in § 20.404.010, and the number of owners to whom notice would be
sent pursuant to paragraph E.1 of this section is greater than one thousand
(1,000), notice may be given, in lieu of the method described in paragraph
E.1. of this section, by placing a display advertisement of at least
one-eighth (€) page in a newspaper of general circulation in the area
affected.



   F.   Notice to owners of adjacent property. When notice of a public
hearing is required to be given to owners of adjacent property, such notice
shall be made by delivery by city employees or by first class mail to all
persons, including businesses, corporations, or other public and private
entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property
which is adjacent to the property or zone boundary directly involved in the
matter under consideration.



   G.   Notice to persons requesting notice.  For all public hearings
or zoning matters, in addition to other notices, notice shall be given by
first class mail to any person who has filed a written request therefor with
the Commission.  Such a request shall be effective for the balance of the
calendar year in which the request is submitted.  A reasonable fee for this
service may be established by the City Council for the purpose of recovering
the cost thereof.  (See:  Cal. Gov't Code § 65092.)



   H.   Responsibility for giving notice.  The officers responsible
for giving required notices of public hearings shall be as follows:



      1.   Notices of Director meetings and hearings shall be given
by the Director.



      2.   Notices of Planning Commission hearings shall be given by
the Commission secretary.



      3.   Notices of City Council hearings shall be given by the
City Clerk.



(Am. Ord. 1073, passed 8-3-04)



§ 20.416.030  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   A.   Rules.



      1.   The City Council, Planning Commission, and Director shall
adopt and publish rules for the conduct of their respective hearings or
meetings on zoning matters.  (See:  Cal. Gov't Code § 65804(a).)



      2.   When a city staff report exists concerning a zoning
matter, such report shall, if possible, be made available to the public prior
to any subsequent public hearing on the matter and shall be presented and
made a part of the public record at the beginning of any such hearing. 
(See: Cal. Gov't Code § 65804(c), (d).)



   B.   Continuance.  Any hearing on a zoning matter may be continued
from time to time and place to place, provided the time and place to which
continued is announced prior to adjournment of the meeting from which
continued.  (See: Cal. Gov't Code § 65095.)



   C.   Record of hearing.  When a zoning matter is contested and a
prior written request is made to the body conducting a hearing on the matter,
a record of the hearing shall be made, and copies made available to any
interested party at cost.  A deposit may be required with such request. 
(See: Cal. Gov't Code § 65804(b).)



CHAPTER 20.420:  DECISIONS



Section



   20.420.010   Findings



   20.420.020   Form of decision



   20.420.030   Vote required



   20.420.040   Time limits



   20.420.050   Notice of decision



§ 20.420.010  FINDINGS.



   A.   For each discretionary decision under a procedure prescribed by
this title, whether made by the City Council, Planning Commission or
Director, written findings shall be adopted pertinent to the applicable
criteria of state law and this title based upon the investigation, hearings,
and record of the case.



   B.   When decisions under more than one (1) type of zoning procedure
are being made concurrently with respect to the same subject property or
subject matter, the findings and decision for each such procedure shall be
separately identified.



§ 20.420.020  FORM OF DECISION.



   Except as otherwise required:



   A.   Decisions of the City Council and Planning Commission shall be
made by resolution;



   B.   Decisions of the Director shall be in writing and signed by
that official or an authorized deputy.



§ 20.420.030  VOTE REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise required by law, actions on zoning matters by the
City Council or Planning Commission shall require the concurring vote of a
majority of the members present, with a quorum present.



§ 20.420.040  TIME LIMITS.



   A.   On a zoning matter to be decided by the Director, such decision
shall be made within forty (40) days after acceptance of the application or
other initiation of the matter.  An extension of this time limit may be made
only with the consent of the applicant or body initiating the matter.



   B.   On a zoning matter initiated by application, the Planning
Commission shall make its recommendation or decision within forty (40) days
after opening its first hearing on the matter or, if no hearing is held,
within forty (40) days after acceptance of the application.  The Planning
Commission may extend the time limit prescribed for its action only with the
consent of the applicant and only to the extent such extension is not in
conflict with other laws.



   C.   On a zoning matter initiated by the Planning Commission, the
Commission shall act within one hundred eighty (180) days of such initiation,
or such other period as may be requested by the City Council.



   D.   On a zoning matter initiated by the City Council and referred
to the Planning Commission, and on any matter referred back to the Commission
by the City Council after previous consideration by the Commission, the
Commission shall act within forty (40) days after referral, or such longer
period as may be set by the City Council.  (See: Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65853
and 65857.)



   E.   For any zoning matter initiated by the City Council, the
Council shall act within one hundred eighty (180) days of such initiation
unless extended by the Council for good cause.  For any other zoning matter
presented to the City Council, the Council shall act within forty (40) days
after opening its first hearing on the matter; or, if no hearing is held on
the matter, within forty (40) days after the Council receives the matter; or,
if referred back to the Planning Commission, within forty (40) days after
receipt of the Commission's report or within forty (40) days after expiration
of the Commission's time limit for such report.  The Council may extend the
period for its action for good cause shown.



§ 20.420.050  NOTICE OF DECISION.



   A.   For each decision on a zoning matter, within five (5) days
after such decision is made, notice of the decision shall be sent by first
class mail or delivered by a city employee to the applicant or other person
initially requesting consideration of the matter and to any other person who
has filed a written request for such notice with the officer responsible for
giving such notice.



   B.   Responsibility for giving notice of decisions shall be as
follows:



      1.   The Director shall given notice of his or her decisions.



      2.   The Planning Commission secretary shall give notice of
Planning Commission decisions.



      3.   The City Clerk shall give notice of City Council
decisions.



   C.   Upon the final approval of a zone change, conditional use
permit, or variance, the responsible officer as identified above shall,
within thirty (30) days, and on behalf of the City Council, notify the County
Assessor of the action.  (See: Cal. Gov't Code § 65863.5)



CHAPTER 20.424:  APPEALS



Section



   20.424.010   Appellate authority



   20.424.020   Appellants



   20.424.030   Time for filing of appeal



   20.424.040   Effect of timely appeal



   20.424.050   Form of appeal



   20.424.060   Filing of appeal



   20.424.070   Transmittal of record upon appeal



   20.424.080   Consideration of appeal



   20.424.090   Appellate decision



   20.424.100   Irregularities in proceedings



§ 20.424.010  APPELLATE AUTHORITY.



   A.   Except as otherwise specified, all decisions of the Director
made under provisions of this title are appealable to the Planning Commission.



   B.   Except as otherwise specified, all decisions of the Planning
Commission under provisions of this title are appealable to the City Council.



§ 20.424.020  APPELLANTS.



   Any interested party is eligible to file an appeal on any zoning matter
which is subject to appeal.



(See: Cal. Gov't Code § 65856)



§ 20.424.030  TIME FOR FILING OF APPEAL.



   An appeal must be filed within ten (10) days after the date of action
by the Planning Commission or within ten (10) days after the date of decision
by the Director.



§ 20.424.040  EFFECT OF TIMELY APPEAL.



   The filing of a timely appeal shall suspend the decision of the
Director or the Planning Commission, as the case may be, until the final
determination thereof or dismissal of the appeal by the appellant.



§ 20.424.050  FORM OF APPEAL.



   All appeals shall be in writing and, except for an appeal initiated by
a City Council member, shall include:



   A.   Identification of the matter being appealed, including case
number, property location, deciding officer or body, and decision date;



   B.   The specific aspect of the decision being appealed; and



   C.   The fee for an appeal, as established by resolution of the City
Council.



§ 20.424.060  FILING OF APPEAL.



   A.   All appeals on zoning matters shall be filed with the City
Clerk together with any required appeal fee as set forth in the current
schedule of fees adopted pursuant to § 20.400.070. The City Clerk shall
cause the date and time of receipt of each appeal to be endorsed thereon.



   B.   If the information included with an appeal is found by the City
Clerk to be deficient, the City Clerk shall notify the appellant by U.S.
certified mail as to the particulars of the deficiencies.  If such
deficiencies are not corrected within ten (10) days of such notice, the
appeal shall be deemed withdrawn.



§ 20.424.070  TRANSMITTAL OF RECORD UPON APPEAL.



   Upon acceptance of an appeal, the City Clerk shall notify the Director,
and the Director shall transmit to the appellate body a summary of factual
data and a record of the action taken on the matter being appealed.  Such
information shall be before the appellate body prior to its consideration of
the appeal.



§ 20.424.080  CONSIDERATION OF APPEAL.



   Each appeal shall be considered de novo.  Insofar as practicable, and
unless otherwise provided in this title, the appellate body shall follow the
same procedures and apply the same criteria as prescribed for the original
proceeding on a matter.  When a hearing is required or held, notice shall be
given in the same manner as prescribed for hearing in the original
proceeding; or, if no previous hearing was required, in such manner as deemed
appropriate by the appellate body.



§ 20.424.090  APPELLATE DECISION.



   An appellate body may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision appealed
from.  The appellate decision shall be supported by written findings and,
unless appealed as authorized hereunder, shall be final and conclusive.



§ 20.424.100  IRREGULARITIES IN PROCEEDINGS.



   Any irregularity in any procedure set forth in this title shall not
invalidate the proceeding if there is compliance with the minimum
requirements of state law.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, failure to timely
file an appeal or to pay the requisite fee therefor shall render the appeal
null and void.


